THE SINOPEDIA SERIES

Th e Sinopedia Series
China’s 
Environment

Th e Sinopedia Series
Editorial Board
Chief Advisor: Wang Chen
Chief Conceptualiser: Wang Zhongwei
Executive Producer: Guo Changjian
Publisher: Li Xiangping
Chief Editor: Wu Wei

Th e Sinopedia Series
China’s 
Environment
LIU JUNHUI 
WANG JIA
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States

© 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the 
copyright herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored or used 
in any form or by any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, 
including but not limited to photocopying, recording, scanning, 
digitalizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, or 
information storage and retrieval systems, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.
China’s Environment
Liu Junhui and Wang Jia
Publishing Director:
Paul Tan
Editorial Manager:
Yang Liping
Associate Development Editor:
Tanmayee Bhatwadekar 
Associate Development Editor:
Joe Ng 
Senior Product Director:
Janet Lim
Product Managers:
Kevin Joo 
Lee Hong Tan
Assistant Publishing Manager:
Pauline Lim
Production Executive:
Cindy Chai   
Translator:
Qin Dan
Copy Editor:
Neil Sebastian D’Souza
Cover Designer: 
Ong Lay Keng
Compositor: 
Integra Software Services, 
Pvt. Ltd.
Printed in Singapore
1 2 3 4 5 12 11 10
For permission to use material from this 
text or product, submit all requests online at 
www.cengageasia.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be emailed to
asia.permissionrequest@cengage.com
ISBN-13: 978-981-4319-75-1
ISBN-10: 981-4319-75-9
Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd
5 Shenton Way #01-01
UIC Building
Singapore 068808
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning 
solutions with oﬃ  ce locations around the globe, including 
Singapore, the United Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. 
Locate your local oﬃ  ce at: www.cengage.com/global 
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by 
Nelson Education, Ltd.
For product information, visit www.cengageasia.com

Table of Contents
Preface vii
Chapter 1.  Th e Development of China’s Environmental 
 Protection Movement 3
Chapter 2.  China’s Natural Ecosystem 25
Chapter 3. Biological Diversity 61
Chapter 4. Control and Treatment of Pollution 81
Chapter 5. Rural and Urban Environment 101
Chapter 6. Moving toward a Green Economy 123
Index 137


Preface
Nowadays, environmental degradation has become one of the most severe 
problems confronted by humanity. This is a global phenomenon. A global 
 consensus has emerged to protect the planet as well as share living space. Since 
the 20th century, human beings have created an advanced civilization via leaps 
in science and technology that substantially increased society’s productive 
capacity. However, one simultaneously fi nds that resource constraints, environ-
ment pollution, ecological damage, and other problems are becoming increas-
ingly menacing. This threatens the survival and development of the human 
race. People have realized that we must change the approach where we are “at 
odds with nature” and the conventional mode of development where we “pollute 
fi rst and treat later,” and try to seek a path of sustainable development wherein 
 society, the economy, and the environment are given their due weight.
As a developing country with the largest population in the world, China 
has a vast expanse of territory and complex natural conditions such as 
 climate and topography. Since late 1970s, China’s economy has been develop-
ing  continuously and rapidly bringing environmental problems and resource 
 constraints to the forefront. Meanwhile, China’s unique problems related to its 
large  population and natural conditions have pushed China to contemplate the 
severe challenge it faces in environmental protection.
At present, China is at the stage of accelerated development of industri-
alization and urbanization, a period in which the confl ict between economic 
growth and environmental protection is quite salient. From the 1980s onward, a 
series of ecological issues, such as water and soil erosion, grassland degradation, 
desertifi cation, disappearance of biological diversity, and so on, appeared due 
to the growth of population and over-exploitation of resources. Environmental 
pollution related to technical progress and ecological deterioration are serious 
problems in some parts of China: the emissions of major pollutants surpass 
the environmental carrying capacity; pollution of resources such as water, land, 
and soil are severe; solid waste, vehicle exhaust, and persistent organic pollut-
ants are increasing. Th is trend is moving from the cities to the countryside and 
from the east to the west. Th e eff ects are not only due to economic activities 
and population pressure, but also by climate change and the greenhouse eff ect 
that aff ects the world.

viii 
PREFACE
Yuntai Mountain in Xiuwu County, Henan Province. This mountain belongs to the ﬁ rst batch of 
World Geological Parks.

 
PREFACE 
ix

x 
PREFACE
Early in 1972, China sent a delegation to the first Conference on the 
Human Environment held by United Nations (UN) in Stockholm, Sweden, and 
realized the importance of environmental protection. As a large, responsible 
developing country, China has always attached great importance to environ-
mental  protection and established it as one of the basis of state policy aft er the 
reform and opening up in 1978. Th rough a series of important strategic mea-
sures, China has strengthened its environmental protection measures, curbed 
the deterioration of the environment, and sought to protect the planet along 
with governments and citizens of other countries. In the present global context, 
the environment and development problems in any country and region will 
become problems for human society. Solving environmental problems in China 
not only conforms to the development goals of China but also greatly embod-
ies the common benefi ts that environmental protection confers on all human 
beings.
It is inspiring to see that through the continual and considerable eff orts of 
the Chinese government and its citizens, ecological systems constituting fresh 
water bodies, forests, grasslands, wetlands, farmlands, and oceans have largely 
improved; biological diversity is being eff ectively protected; and the continuity 
of many rare wild animals, plants, and endangered species has seen improve-
ment. Th e aggravated trend of environment pollution and ecological damage 
has slowed down in China; control over the disposal of pollutants in some river 
basins has met with some success; environmental quality in some cities and 
regions has improved; the intensity of industrial pollutants has been reduced; 
and the  environmental consciousness of the whole society has been enhanced.
China is continuously returning cultivated land to forestry and tree planta-
tion on a large scale. Th is has greatly increased forest carbon sinks (the  capacity 
of a forest to absorb and store carbon dioxide). Now, China has become the 
country with the fastest growth in forestry and the largest area of artificial 
aff orestation in the world. Th e area of artifi cial aff orestation is about one-third 
of that of the world. In a short span of 2003 to 2008, the forest area in China 
has had a net increase of 20.54 million hectares.
In recent years, China has paid more attention to environment treatment 
and ecological restoration during resource exploitation, adopting a series of 
measures to protect and improve the human living environment, considering 
urban and rural environment improvement as an important part of environ-
ment protection, and focusing on solving the issue of pollutants that seriously 
harm health. China has paid utmost attention to energy-saving and emission-
reduction in recent years. Up to the fi rst half of 2009, the per unit GDP energy 
consumption of China was reduced by 13% as compared with its value in 2005. 
Th is equals an emission reduction of 8,000 million tons of carbon dioxide. Th is 
is China’s contribution to the global path of environmental protection.

 
PREFACE 
xi
China is also the country with the fastest growth in new energy and 
 renewable energy technology. With ecological protection in mind, China has 
been developing hydroelectric and nuclear power and has been supporting 
rural  initiatives to adopt new renewable energy resources such as biomass 
energy, solar energy, terrestrial heat, wind energy, and so on. China ranks fi rst 
in the world in terms of the installed capacity of hydroelectric power, under 
construction scale of nuclear power, heat accumulation area of solar water 
heaters, and solar energy power generating capacity.
Through a series of environment laws and concrete implementation 
 measures, China has achieved remarkable results in ecological protection. China 
is a developing country that formulated and implemented China’s National 
 Climate Change Program early on. China also formulated and revised the Law 
on the Conservation of Energy Resources, the Circular Economy Promotion 
Law, the Law on Renewable Energy, the Law on the Promotion of Clean Pro-
duction, the Forestry Law, the Grassland Law and so on, and considers them as 
important framework to cope with the environment and climate change.
Since 2005, the Chinese government has demonstrated clearly that the 
 scientifi c concept of development should drive the development of the econ-
omy and society by implementing the basic national policy of saving resources 
and protecting the environment, developing a recycling economy, protect-
ing the environment, speeding up the construction of an energy-effi  cient and 
environment-friendly society, and improving the harmonious development of 
man and nature. Th is spirit is fully shown in the “11th Five Year Plan Outline 
for Economic and Social Development of the People’s Republic of China.” In 
2007, the 17th Session of the General Assembly of CPC put forward a new 
and more stringent requirement of developing China on the basis of an affl  u-
ent society wherein the country’s economy would be ecologically sustainable, 
its industrial structure and economic growth would revolve around saving 
resources and protecting the environment, recycling would form a fairly large 
part of the economy, the proportion of renewable energy sources would wit-
ness a large increase, the emission of main pollutants would be controlled 
eff ectively, the ecological environment quality would be improved remarkably, 
and the environmental consciousness of society would be raised substantially. 
Th ese requirements evolve around governance ideas such as “people oriented” 
and “harmonious coexistence between human beings and nature.”
China is now quickly realizing three changes: moving from an emphasis 
on economic growth and neglect of the environment to balancing both these 
aims, placing a greater emphasis on concomitant improvement in the economy 
and environment, and integrating its laws, economy, technology, and admin-
istrative framework to solve environmental problems. China’s approach is to 
realize sustainable development through the development of clean  technology 

xii 
PREFACE
and conservation. This means that China is setting up a new social view of 
 development, a novel means of production, and a new way of life on the basis 
of extensive and thorough social involvement. At present, environmental con-
sciousness is improving in the Chinese society, and the scope and depth of 
public participation in environmental protection is constantly increasing. Envi-
ronmental non-governmental organizations (NGOs) have been an important 
force to popularize environmental education and advocacy encouraging the 
public to participate in environmental protection measures.
Protecting the environment better implies a better tomorrow. In late 2009, 
the United Nations Climate Change Conference that lasted 12 days in Copen-
hagen captured the attention of the world. Despite several diff erences, the trend 
of wanting to protect the planet will not change. In this conference, the Chinese 
government restated its own goals that the per unit GDP carbon dioxide emis-
sion would be reduced by 40%–45% as compared with that in 2005. Th is is a 
serious commitment. Having confronted various diffi  culties, the Chinese are 
confi dent of tackling the challenges that lie ahead.
On December 7, 2009, the United Nations Climate Change Conference was opened in 
Copenhagen, the capital of Denmark.



1
3
1
China’s environmental movement began in the early 1970s. The  passage 
of 40 years has helped shape an environmental protection policy system 
with  Chinese characteristics so as to prevent the rapid deterioration of the 
nation’s environment and form finely tuned environment management and 
 administrative that is based on environmental protection via a legal frame-
work. At present, China considers resource conservation as a basic state policy 
while developing an economy where recycling is important and where energy 
 efficiency is paramount. Since inception, China’s environmental protection 
movement has kept in step with the international environmental movement 
and has always striven for developing international cooperation in the area of 
environmental protection.
China’s Road to Environmental Protection
From the 1950s to the 1970s, problems associated with environment  pollution 
were being noticed in some developed countries. People began to  understand 
the harm that environment pollution does on account of events such as 
the dense fog in London and the Minamata disease in Japan. At that time, 
 China’s economy was still underdeveloped; however, China’s leaders and some 
informed individuals had been aware of the importance of environment 
 problems.
The Development of China’s 
Environmental Protection 
Movement
Chapter 1

4 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
In early December 1970, when he received guests from Japan,  Chinese 
Premier Zhou Enlai particularly asked a journalist who covered Japanese 
environment pollution for information. He invited the journalist to intro-
duce environmental protection problems to China’s scientiﬁ c, technical, and 
administrative personnel. At that time, environmental protection was a novel 
concept in China, and many Chinese considered environmental protection as 
only comprising cleaning, garbage disposal, and similar issues.
In 1972, the ﬁ rst United Nations Conference on Human Environment was 
held in Stockholm, Sweden. Although China was going through a really rough 
time, the government still sent a 40-member delegation to attend this confer-
ence. Undoubtedly, this conference proved to be signiﬁ cant in enlightening the 
Chinese as to the issue of environmental protection. People realized that envi-
ronmental protection was not an incidental and separate phenomenon but a 
global issue directly related to the development of the economy and society.
Under the personal supervision of Premier Zhou Enlai, China’s first 
 environmental protection conference was held in Beijing in August 1973—
a tough start to China’s environmental protection movement. Th is conference 
definitely held the view that China also had serious environmental prob-
lems. Subsequently, each region organized to solve a series of environmental 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
Minamata is a small fi shing village located at east side of Minamata 
Bay, Kumamoto, Japan. In 1925, Chisso Corporation built a factory 
there that used mercury-based catalysts and discharged its waste 
water into Minamata Bay. In 1956, a strange disease was found to 
occur in Minamata’s residents. Patients that suffered from a mild ver-
sion of the disease were rendered inarticulate, were unable to move 
with ease, would suffer sporadic loss of consciousness, and developed 
deformed hands and feet. Patients that contracted a more acute form 
of the disease became unsound in mind and perished. Research indi-
cated that this disease was caused by the large mercury content in 
the waste water discharged by Chisso Corportion. Minamata disease 
seriously endangered the health and happiness of the local people. By 
2006, 2,265 people had been diagnosed with Minamata disease with 
most of them succumbing to it.
MINAMATA DISEASE IN JAPAN

 
Chapter 1 The Development of China’s Environmental Protection Movement 
5
 problems to which people reacted strongly, including the treatment of water 
pollution such as that for the Guanting reservoir in Beijing, Baiyangdian in 
Heibei, the Lijiang River in Guilin, as well as the reduction of air pollution in 
cities such as Shenyang and Taiyuan.
Guilin in China’s Guangxi province is famous for its spectacular natural 
beauty. However, in the 1970s, many factories were built along the Lijiang River. 
Th is resulted in a large amount of sewage being discharged into the river  heavily 
damaging its water quality. In October 1973, Deng Xiaoping, who had just been 
reinstated, pointed out that if the Lijiang River was not treated, the rapid devel-
opment of agriculture and industry and the excellent municipal construction 
would not be able to compensate its deterioration. Th ereaft er, action was taken 
The Lijiang River in Guilin, Guangxi, is surrounded by beautiful scenery.

6 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
wherein 36 major polluting factories along the river were shut down, and soon 
clean water reappeared in Lijiang. Th is was the ﬁ rst  signiﬁ cant achievement for 
the emerging environmental protection movement in China. Th us, the Chinese 
realized that economic growth must go hand-in-hand with environmental pro-
tection, and not come at the expense of the environment.
In May 1974, the Environment Protection Leading Group of the State 
Council, a Class I national environmental protection organization, was 
formed in China to control environmental pollution by formulating policies, 
 administrative regulation, and standards. In 1975, China put forward its key 
philosophy for tackling environment pollution, that is, “control in ﬁ ve years and 
solve in ten years.” Obviously, the Chinese people had not totally recognized 
the complexities posed by environmental damage.
China’s economy developed rapidly aft er the reform and opening-up policy 
in 1979. Meanwhile, China’s environmental protection movement was moving 
to a new stage. In this year, China passed the Law on Environmental  Protection 
(trial implementation). This was the first environmental protection law in 
China. Th is signaled the road of standardization and legalization that China’s 
environmental protection was on.
In the 1980s, China was moving forward continuously on the road to 
 exploring environmental protection with Chinese characteristics. In 1983, China 
reorganized the Environmental Protection Committee under the State Council 
and issued a series of important environmental policies and procedures as well 
as signiﬁ cant decisions. At the end of 1983, the Second National Environmental 
Protection Conference was held to establish environmental protection as the 
basic state policy. Environmental protection was gradually becoming the consen-
sus of the whole society. In the 1980s, under the reform and opening up and the 
changes brought about by economic growth, a series of eﬀ ective environmental 
management organizations were built at the  central and local levels to control the 
environment eﬀ ectively based on relevant  policies, laws, and plans for environ-
mental protection. As economic growth doubles, the environment quality is still 
at the same level as during the early 1980s, and the environmental conditions in 
some areas has even improved. Th is is a phenomenon of considerable import.
In 1989, China held the Third National Environmental Protection Con-
ference and proposed to “strive to develop the environmental protection with 
 Chinese characteristics.” In December of the same year, the Law on Environmen-
tal Protection was promulgated oﬃ  cially in China, and it was exactly 10 years 
since the implementation of the Law on Environmental Protection (trial imple-
mentation). During this period, China faced a huge pressure on the  environment 
from a large population. Th e contradictions between rapid modernization and 
environmental pollution became more evident and  ecological damage became 
increasingly prominent. Th erefore, China proposed that it could not follow the 

 
Chapter 1 The Development of China’s Environmental Protection Movement 
7
old path of “pollution ﬁ rst, treatment later”—the norm in the  developed coun-
tries. Rather, it would coordinate the development of  economic construction 
and environmental protection, that is, promote  economic development by virtue 
of environmental protection and promote  environmental protection by virtue 
of economic development. In this period, China launched a series of theoretical, 
policy, legal, and administrative  constructs regarding environmental protection, 
and gradually developed and perfected a system of environmental protection 
policies with Chinese  characteristics. Meanwhile, China also conducted large-
scale industrial and urban pollution treatments, preventing a sharp deterioration 
in the  environmental conditions of the country.
From the late 1970s to the early 1990s, based on the practice of environ-
mental protection, China gradually formulated three environmental policies, 
namely, “ putting prevention ﬁ rst, combining prevention with treatment, and 
conducting comprehensive treatment”; “making the oﬀ ender responsible for 
treating the pollution generated”; and “strengthening environmental manage-
ment.” Among these policies, the policy of “putting prevention ﬁ rst” was the 
basis of China’s environmental policies. On the basis of these criteria, China 
formulated a number of  systems to protect the environment, such as environ-
mental impact assessment system, sewage discharge/charging  system, com-
A coal separating plant in Huaibei, Anhui Province, realizes totally closed production in order 
to avoid the noise, ﬂ our dust, and so on, generated during production.

8 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
prehensive urban  environmental improvement examination system,  sewage 
discharge permit system, deadline treatment system, and centralized pollution 
control system. Further, it formulated a series of specific supporting provi-
sions and measures. Th ese systems and measures together constituted a rela-
tively complete environmental management system. During this period, China 
vigorously promoted the formulation of environmental laws and rules, and 
passed four pollution control laws: Law on Environmental Protection, Law on 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
Qu Geping (the fi rst director of State Environmental Protection 
Bureau, and director member of the Environment and Resources 
Protection Committee of National People’s Congress of China)
Pan Yue (deputy minister of China’s Ministry of Environmental 
 Protection)
Liang Congjie (founding director of Friends of Nature)
Ma Jun (from the Chinese Public and Environment Research Center, 
where China’s fi rst water pollution commonwealth database was 
developed)
Wang Canfa (Environmental Laws Professor at China University 
of Political Science and Law (CUPL) and founder of the Pollution 
Victims Legal Assistance Center at CUPL)
Lin Shaozhong (deputy secretary of the CPC Committee and 
deputy director of the Beijing Environmental Protection Bureau)
Wang Yongchen (journalist at the Central People’s Broadcasting 
Station, and founder of “Green Home Volunteers,” a folk environ-
mental protection organization)
Tang Xiyang (founder of the University Students Green Camp and 
a famous author on environmental protection issues)
Jassan Suonandajie (founder of the Kekexili National Nature 
Reserve and the fi rst county CPC committee secretary for the 
 protection of wild animals)
Liao Xiaoyi (founder and director of Beijing Earth Village Environ-
mental Culture Cente
Source: www.people.com.cn
PEOPLE WHO HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO CHINA’S 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION MOVEMENT

 
Chapter 1 The Development of China’s Environmental Protection Movement 
9
the Prevention and Control of Atmospheric Pollution, Law on the Prevention 
and Control of Water Pollution, and Law on the Protection of Maritime Envi-
ronment, in succession; a batch of resource protection laws; and hundreds of 
administrative regulations and local regulations. In 1988, China established an 
independent National Environmental Protection Bureau which mainly under-
took the supervision of the implementation of the laws and regulations.
In 1992, China began to implement a socialist market economic system, 
which was a qualitative leap in the reform and opening-up policy of China. In the 
same year, the Conference on Environment and Development was held by the 
United Nations in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. China sent a large delegation to attend the 
conference and made a signiﬁ cant contribution to the success of this conference 
as a large developing country. At this conference, one of the important pioneers 
and founders of the environmental protection movement in China, Qu Geping, 
was awarded the “Sasakawa International Environmental Prize.” Th is award repre-
sented international recognition for China’s environmental protection movement.
Later, China formulated and in March 1994, adopted the China Agenda 
21—China’s 21st  Century  Population, Environment, and  Development White 
Paper, placing sustainable development as the guiding principle of China’s long 
term development. In 1997,  “sustainable 
development” was imbibed into 
the national development strategy. Since 
then, environmental protection in China 
stepped onto a new stage of develop-
ment and growth. This shift has meant 
that China’s environmental protection 
movement has transformed from a 
simple pollution treatment to a compre-
hensive environmental  treatment and 
ecological construction program.
With regard to pollution treat-
ment, based on the general treatment 
of all places across the country, China 
focused on cleaning up some of the big 
 rivers and lakes like the Huaihe River, 
the Haihe River, the Liaohe River, Taihu 
Lake, Dianchi Lake, and Chaohu Lake, 
and started the air pollution treatment 
in Beijing and the pollution treatment of 
the Bohai Bay sea area. As early as 1996, 
China shut down more than 60,000 
enterprises responsible for serious pol-
lution—this was unprecedented. The 
Qu Geping, one of the main pioneers 
and founders of China's environmental 
protection cause, now acts as the 
president of the Chinese Environmental 
Protection Foundation.

10 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
proportion of environmental protection investment in GDP rose year-on-year 
gradually approaching the levels attained in developed countries. During the “10th 
Five Year Plan” (2001−2005) period, China’s investment in environmental protec-
tion exceeded RMB 700 billion. Investment in environmental protection in 2004 
accounted for 1.4% of the GDP which is expected to double during the “11th 
Five Year Plan” (2006−2010) period attaining a value of RMB 1,375 billion. Th is 
would amount account for 1.6% of the GDP in the same period.
With regard to ecological reconstruction, China implemented some 
 policies and measures such as “fencing for aﬀ orestation,” “returning farmlands 
to forests,” “returning farmlands to lakes,” and “returning farmlands to grass-
lands,” and started the natural forest protection project. It also carried out soil 
Investment in urban environmental infrastructure
Investment in industry pollution source treatment
Investment in environment protection components for “Three simultaneity” construction projects
100 million RMB
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
2004
1,140
460.5
640.1
1,289.7
1,314.9
767.2
1,467.8
1,367.4
2,146.7
1,801.1
542.6
552.4
458.7
458.2
308.1
2005
2006
2007
2008
Source: National Environmental Statistics Bulletin, Ministry of Environmental
Protection (former National Environmental Protection General Bureau).
China’s investment in the environmental pollution treatment from 2004 to 2008

 
Chapter 1 The Development of China’s Environmental Protection Movement 
11
and water conservation actively in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, 
the Yellow River, and other rivers. A large-scale shelterbelt system was also 
constructed in the ecologically fragile areas in the north of China,  resulting 
in a magniﬁ cent green Great Wall. With regard to resource protection, China 
 implemented strict farmland protection measures to ensure dynamic equi-
librium of the total cultivated land. In the offshore waters, a fishing morato-
rium was implemented commonly to protect marine fishery resources. With 
regard to mineral resource protection, a number of small mines with backward 
 mining equipment that was causing severe damage to resources were retooled 
or  rectified. Besides, China actively carried out comprehensive utilization of 
solid waste and recycling of waste materials. The ecological environment in 
China is in an active recovery period.
The pristine and lush pasture of the Hulunbuir Grassland, Inner Mongolia.

12 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
While formulating a legal system that protects the environment and 
resources and ensuring the strict enforcement of these laws, China also  mobilized 
the general public to take part in the environmental protection movement, and 
fully carried out public opinion campaigns on environmental and resource pro-
tection. Since 1993, China has been launching a project called “China Environ-
mental Protection in the New Century”—a large-scale environmental protection 
campaign. This project mobilized a number of news agencies in the country 
to investigate and report on a specific theme each year. Through continuous 
improvement, the theme of this project tended gradually from individual case 
supervision to propaganda around collective legislation and supervision, from 
exposure to environmental pollution and ecological damage to discussion of 
complex and challenging future issues. In 1993, the theme of “Chinese Environ-
mental Protection in the New Century” was “Declaring War on Environmental 
Pollution,” and in 1999, it was “Love Our Yellow River.” In 2008, it became “Saving 
Resources and Protecting the Environment,” and in 2009, it was “Let the People 
Breathe Fresh Air.” From the evolution of the themes of this project, we can see 
that the road of China’s environmental protection cause was simultaneously diﬃ  -
cult and fruitful. “Chinese Environmental Protection in the New Century” played 
a very important role in promoting China’s environmental legislation, public par-
ticipation in environmental  protection, and ecological urban construction.
In 2005, the “Suggestions of the CPC Central Committee on Formulating 
the 11th Five Year Plan of National Economic and Social Development” put 
forward the notion that the mode of economic growth must be ﬂ exible in order 
to fully implement the scientific development view: “make saving resources 
as a basic national policy; develop a recycling economy; protect ecological 
 environment; accelerate the construction of a resource-saving and environ-
ment-friendly society; and promote economic development with  harmony 
between population, resources, and environment; promote the  informatization 
of the national economy and society; eﬀ ectively take a new road to industrial-
ization; adhere to conservation development, clean development, and safe devel-
opment; and achieve sustainable development.” Th is spirit was fully reﬂ ected in 
the “11th Five Year Plan Outline of National Economic and Social Development 
of the People’s Republic of China.” In 2007, the 17th National Congress of CPC 
put “changing the mode of growth and consumption pattern,” “treating envi-
ronmental pollution,” and “restoring ecology” on an unprecedented important 
position, reinforcing the governance philosophies such as “people-oriented” and 
“harmonious coexistence of human beings and nature.” China chooses a devel-
opment mode that relies on recycling and grasps the crucial complexities and 
nature of environmental problems. China’s environmental protection movement 
will set sail in this direction, gradually abating, even eliminating, environmental 
problems whilst promoting economic and social development.

 
Chapter 1 The Development of China’s Environmental Protection Movement 
13
For China, 2008 was unusual, both in a positive and negative man-
ner. While struck by natural disaster, the achievements of China in ﬁ ghting 
against the Wenchuan earthquake and other natural disasters and in protect-
ing  environmental quality during the Beijing Olympics impressed the world 
considerably. In facing the aftermath of the Wenchuan earthquake, China 
successfully completed the emergency response work. During the Beijing 
Olympic Games period, Beijing’s air quality reached its best level in 10 years: 
not only was the everyday air quality good, but it also reached an excellent 
level in 10 days.
Environmental Protection Organizations 
and Environmental Legal Governance
In 1973, China held its first Conference on Environmental Protection 
and reviewed and passed its first environmental protection document—
“Concerning the Protection and Improvement of the Environment.” After 
In July 2005, the journalist team of “China Environmental Protection in the New Century” 
reported the water pollution treatment situation in Danjiangkou Reservoir Area, Hubei 
Province.

14 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
this meeting, the State Council Environmental Protection Leading Group 
and Office was established, which was the first environmental protection 
organization in China. For more than 30 years after that, the environmental 
administration organization underwent many changes, and its functions were 
strengthened continually.
In 1982, the State Council revoked the State Council Environmen-
tal  Protection Leading Group and Office and set up the Environmental 
 Protection Bureau under the Ministry of Urban and Rural Construction 
and  Environmental Protection. However, in practice, this department had 
 difficulty in coordinating with other departments and localities. In 1984, 
the State Council established the Environmental Protection Committee, to 
assist the Environmental Protection Bureau in coordinating activities and 
to help it break through the organization’s limitations. In 1988, the State 
Council  carried out institutional reforms again, and the Environmental Pro-
tection Bureau separated from the Ministry of Construction and became a 
vice ministerial unit directly under the administration of the State Council. 
In 1998, the State Council streamlined the government organs and revoked 
a dozen industrial administrations. However, the National Environmental 
Protection Bureau was promoted as the National Environmental Protection 
General Bureau, becoming a ministerial level unit directly under the State 
Council. It was positioned as a legal enforcement and supervisory body, and 
its functional areas included pollution prevention and treatment, ecologi-
cal protection, and nuclear safety supervision. Th erefore, its administration 
functions were strengthened.
In 2005, the National Environmental Protection General Bureau 
strengthened the law’s enforcement capabilities, adopted a series of proac-
tive  initiatives, and overcame an “Environmental Protection Evaluation 
Storm.” Th ese measures then became a new mechanism: through the “green 
accounting of the national economy” (commonly known as “green GDP”) 
and “strategic  environmental evaluation,” the National Environmental Pro-
tection General Bureau expanded its functions and powers. The National 
Environmental Protection General Bureau and the National Bureau of Sta-
tistics, carried out the pilot “green national economy accounting” project 
with environmental accounting and investigation of the economic losses on 
account of pollution in 10 provinces and municipalities including Beijing, 
Tianjin, Hebei,  Liaoning, Zhejiang, Anhui, Guangdong, Hainan, Chongqing, 
and Sichuan. Strategic environmental evaluation refers to evaluating the 
environmental impact of an engineering project, economic plan, or policy 
in its decision-making stage in order to control pollution from the source. 
During this year, the National Environmental Protection General Bureau 
carried out planned environmental protection evaluation in the river basins 

 
Chapter 1 The Development of China’s Environmental Protection Movement 
15
of the Nujiang River, the Yalongjiang River, the middle and lower reaches of 
the Lancangjiang River, and the Sichuan Daduhe River, actively promoting 
the planned environmental protection evaluation in the key industries of 
hydropower, coal, ports, traﬃ  c and power, and so on, as well as the regional 
environmental protection evaluation of some chemical industry bases and 
energy bases.
In March 2008, the 5th Plenary Session, the First Conference of the 11th 
National People’s Congress adopted the organization reform scheme of the 
State Council, and the National Environmental Protection General Bureau was 
 promoted to the Ministry of Environmental Protection. This meant that the 
On March 27, 2008, the former National Environmental Protection General Bureau was 
renamed as the Ministry of Environmental Protection of the People’s Republic of China.

16 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
 Chinese government attached great importance to environmental protection. 
Th e functions of the Ministry of Environmental Protection were emphasized 
and strengthened further, and its main duties included developing and orga-
nizing the implementation of environmental planning, policies, and standards; 
organizing and establishing environmental division; supervising and manag-
ing environmental pollution prevention and control; coordinating and solving 
major environmental problems, and so on. Th e functional conﬁ guration of the 
Ministry of Environmental Protection was strengthened in four areas: planning 
and coordination, macro control, legal supervision and enforcement, and  public 
services. Participating in the state’s macroeconomic policy-making became 
its core function. In order to smoothly achieve the above functions, the newly 
established Ministry of Environmental Protection needed to resolve many 
preexisting problems and deal with several challenges such as implement-
ing legally horizontal functional integration and vertical power integration 
on environmental protection, building an information sharing environmental 
monitoring system, and strengthening the regulatory power of the environ-
mental protection administrative departments, and so on.
While the environmental protection organization strengthened its func-
tions, the environmental protection laws and rules improved gradually. In 
the 1960s and the 1970s, the Western countries gradually perfected their 
environmental protection laws and rules. Learning from the experience of 
the Western countries, China started its own environmental legislation. Th e 
Constitution promulgated in 1978 requires that “the country should protect 
the environment and natural resources, and prevent pollution and other pub-
lic hazards.” Since the reform and opening up, the legal construction related 
to the environment and resources has developed rapidly in China. In 1979, 
China passed the Law on Environmental Protection (trial implementation), 
and officially promulgated the Law on Environmental Protection 10 years 
later, which was the basic environmental protection law in China. In the 1980s 
and the beginning of this century, China established environmental protection 
and resource conservation as the basis of the national policy in succession, 
strengthened the legal system for environmental and resource protection, and 
made tremendous achievements in environmental legislation, environmental 
enforcement, environmental justice, environment legal supervision, and other 
aspects. China’s environmental legal system began to move forward in the 
direction of systematization.
In 2003, China promulgated the Law on the Assessment of Environmental 
Effects, clearly putting forward the environmental rights and the concept of 
“public environmental rights and interests.” This law requires that “the state 
encourages the relevant units, experts, and the public to participate in environ-
mental impact assessment in an appropriate manner; regarding those plans 

 
Chapter 1 The Development of China’s Environmental Protection Movement 
17
which may have adverse environmental impacts and directly concern public 
environmental rights and interests, the special planning preparation authority 
should hold a hearing, an evidentiary hearing, or another form to inquire the 
opinions of the relevant units, experts, and the public on the environmental 
impact draft  report, before submitting the plan for approval.” Th e promulgation 
and implementation of the Law on the Assessment of Environmental Eﬀ ects is 
of great signiﬁ cance for environmental protection in China.
In addition to the Law on Environmental Protection and the Law on the 
Assessment of Environmental Eﬀ ects, China also formulated Th e Law on the 
Prevention and Control of Solid Waste Pollution, Law on the Prevention and 
Control of Atmospheric Pollution, Law on the Prevention and Control of 
Water Pollution, Law on the Protection of Maritime Environment, Law on the 
Prevention and Control of Ambient Noise Pollution, Law on the Prevention 
and Control of Radioactive Pollution, and other pollution control laws, as well 
as a batch of laws in resource protection such as the Law on the Conservation 
of Water and Top Soil, Forestry Law, Grassland Law, Law on the Protection 
of Wildlife, Agriculture Law, Law on the Conservation of Energy Resources, 
and Law on Renewable Energy. In addition, it also formulated hundreds of 
 administrative regulations and local regulations, and more than 800 national 
China Beijing International Energy Saving and Environmental Protection Exhibition, 2009. The 
staff introduces the development and use of new energies.

18 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
standards. At present, the Nature Reserve Law is also under preparation. In 
accordance with the changes in national conditions, the legislature of China 
periodically revises these laws, and constantly promotes the legal governance 
of the environment of China, which is an important part of the strategy of 
 “governing the country according to the laws” of China.
In 2008, China promulgated the Circular Economy Promotion Law, and 
the promulgation and implementation of this law provided the most basic 
guarantee in the law for implementing the basic national policy of environ-
mental protection and resource-saving and establishing a resource saving and 
environment-friendly society. Th e Circular Economy Promotion Law expanded 
the recycling concept to the entire process of social production, circulation, and 
consumption; therefore, it effectively reduced emissions and opened up new 
resources for economic development. At the same time, it signiﬁ cantly reduced 
the production cost of enterprises and the society and increased economic 
beneﬁ ts.
With the improvement of its environmental laws, China’s environmental 
legal governance concept has improved tremendously, and the  government 
and the public pay more and more attention to the protection of the envi-
ronment and resources. In 2008, the National People’s Congress revised 
the Law on the  Prevention and Control of Water Pollution in 2008, legal-
izing “ecological compensation” in Article 7 in the form of law for the ﬁ rst 
time, so that environmental protection measures and interests protection 
 mechanisms are closely combined. This new revised law also granted the 
environmental protection authorities the right to decide the deadline for 
pollution treatment.
International Cooperation for Environmental 
Protection
From 1972 onward, when China sent a delegation to participate in the first 
United Nations Conference on Human Environment, environmental protec-
tion in China has always been an important part of the international environ-
mental protection movement. China attaches great importance to international 
cooperation on resource conservation and environmental protection. It has 
concluded or participated in more than 30 international environmental and 
resource protection treaties such as the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol, Convention on Biological Diversity, ad the 
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertiﬁ cation. Further, it has actively 
fulﬁ lled its treaty obligations.

 
Chapter 1 The Development of China’s Environmental Protection Movement 
19
In 1992, China sent a large delegation to attend the Conference on 
 Environment and Development held by the United Nations at Rio de Janeiro. 
Before the conference, in order to coordinate regarding the position of devel-
oping countries, China invited ministers from 41 countries to have a meeting 
in Beijing and issued the Beijing Declaration which set out the position and 
views of the developing countries on the environment and development of the 
world. Th is meeting had great international inﬂ uence. During the Conference, 
China cooperated with the Group of 77 and put forward position papers and 
resolution draft in the way of “77+1.” When negotiations were deadlocked, 
China played a coordinating and catalytic role. As a big developing country, 
China made a significant contribution for the successful convening of the 
conference.
After the conference, China formulated and adopted Agenda 21 in 1994. 
In order to implement Agenda 21, it also formulated the Priority Programs of 
China’s Agenda 21. The preparation and implementation of China’s Agenda 
21 were carried out under the support and assistance of the United Nations 
Development Program (UNDP), and it was listed as the official cooperation 
project of the Chinese government and the United Nations Development 
The Fourth Environment and Development China (International) Forum held in October 
2008, Beijing. During this meeting, the All-China Environment Federation signed a “stragetic 
cooperative partner agreement” with Suez Environnement.

20 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
 Program. Th is work attracted wide attention from the international community 
and received strong support and participation from many relevant government 
agencies abroad and international organizations (such as the relevant United 
Nations agencies, the World Bank, and the Asian Development Bank).
Th e conference in Rio de Janeiro adopted the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change that China signed on June 11, 1992. According 
to the convention, developing countries did not have to undertake the legally 
binding greenhouse gas emission reductions; however, all parties were required 
to develop, implement, publish, and regularly update national programs to 
deal with climate change. China was the ﬁ rst among the developing countries 
to develop and implement a National Climate Change Program. China, as 
the  second-largest emitter of carbon dioxide, is not only alert to international 
carbon-intensive and energy intensive projects moving to China but also 
 continues to improve its “green degree” and develop energy-saving and low-
pollution technologies and products. As an important performance  obligation 
The opening ceremony of the Implementation of Environmental Convention Building, Beijing, 
September 14, 2009. Attendees included, among others, the Minister of the Ministry of 
Environmental Protection of the People’s Republic of China, Zhou Shengxian (middle); 
Minister of Italian Environment, Territory and Ocean Ministry, Stefania Prestigiacomo (left); 
and Chair of the Executive Committee of the Multilateral Fund of the Montreal Protocol, 
Husamuddin Ahmadzai (right).

 
Chapter 1 The Development of China’s Environmental Protection Movement 
21
of the Climate Convention, in May 2007, China promulgated the China 
National Climate Change Program, which attached great importance to climate 
change, and in accordance with the requirements of its national sustainable 
development strategy, adopted a series of climate-change related policies and 
measures, which made a positive contribution to the mitigation and adaptation 
to climate change. The program clarified specific objectives, basic principles, 
and key policy areas in order to deal with climate change by 2010.
With the growing influence of China’s resources in the world, in recent 
years, the international community has been very concerned about environ-
mental issues in China. Indeed, China faces a series of serious environmental 
problems, such as dust storms, pollution, e-waste, and genetically modified 
food; however, it has been working on promoting environmental protection 
and has been continuously improving its environment. People around the 
world are aware of the environmental challenges facing China and send their 
good wishes. In June 2005, the UK magazine Nature launched a cover article 
entitled “China’s Position in the World” exploring the environmental issues in 
China. Th e author wrote: “In the past 20 years, China has forged an economic 
miracle. We hope that in the next 20 years, China can create another miracle, 
an environment miracle, and establish a good example for other countries 
to achieve sustainable socio-economic and environmental development. The 
result will aﬀ ect not only China, but the whole world.”
During the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games, China honored its commitments 
by running a “Green Olympics.” It can be said that China gave the best gift  to 
the environmental protection movement of the world. The Beijing Olympic 
Organizing Committee maintained an open and cooperative attitude toward 
both the domestic and the international non-governmental organizations. In 
the Environment Review Report of the Beijing Olympic Games in October 
2007, the United Nations Environment Program noted that the Beijing Olym-
pic Organizing Committee cooperated with a number of non-governmental 
environmental protection organizations. Th e air quality in Beijing during the 
Olympic Games was an issue that had concerned some and had caught the 
attention of the international media. It turned out that during the 17 days of the 
Beijing Olympic Games, the air quality was good every day and excellent for 
10 days. Th e United Nations Environment Program issued a statement  saying 
“Beijing’s air quality has improved.” Th roughout 2008 in Beijing, the number 
of days with good air quality totaled to over 274, which was 28 days more than 
in 2007. Good environment was another important asset left by the Beijing 
 Olympic Games.
China has also performed very well in other international environmen-
tal conventions. For example, China did remarkably well in carrying out 
the requirements of the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the 

22 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
Ozone Layer. By the end of 2008, the “Protocol” Multilateral Fund Executive 
 Committee had approved the elimination plan of 17 Chinese industries, of 
which 3 had been eliminated and 14 were being eliminated. In addition, the 
implementation of the Convention on Biological Diversity and Stockholm Con-
vention on Persistent Organic Pollutants were also progressing smoothly. China 
was one of the earliest countries/regions in the world to sign and ratify the 
Convention on Biological Diversity, and the Cartagena Protocol on  Biosafety of 
the Convention that came into force for China on September 6, 2005.
The scenic Beijing Olympic Center area—with blue skies and white clouds, June 2009.



2
25
2
Having a vast territory, China is divided into ﬁ ve climate zones from north to south, 
that is, the cold temperate zone, the temperate zone, the warm  temperate zone, the 
subtropical zone, and the tropical zone. Furthermore, it has complicated landform 
types. The unique climate and landform  characteristics make for a rich natural 
ecosystem. China’s natural  ecosystem can be divided into the water ecosystem, 
which includes the freshwater  ecosystem and the marine ecosystem; the terrestrial 
ecosystem, which includes the  forest  ecosystem, grassland ecosystem, and desert 
ecosystem; and the  wetland  ecosystem lying between the water ecosystem and the 
terrestrial ecosystem. Due to thousands of years of development and pressure due to 
its vast population, China’s various ecological systems are subject to diﬀ erent levels of 
 development, disturbance, and destruction, and require urgent care and protection.
The Freshwater Ecosystem
For human beings, water is the source of life. Freshwater resources are indispens-
able to human beings. Several living creatures live in these resources. Also, it is an 
economic resource that supports the sound development of the national economy.
The freshwater ecosystem of China includes its rivers and lakes. There 
are several rivers in China. Th ere are more than 50,000 rivers with a basin of 
more than 100 sq km and more than 1,500 rivers with a basin of above 1,000 
sq km. However, the distribution of rivers in China is asymmetric. Th e density 
of the river system decreases as one moves from the southeast to the north-
west. Th e runoﬀ  volume of rivers in China changes every year. In general, there 
China’s Natural Ecosystem
Chapter 2

26 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
is abundant water in  summer, low water in winter, with spring and autumn 
 representing the transition periods. There are abundant glacier resources in 
China, including more than 43,000 glaciers that are distributed in the western 
part of China and cover a total area of 58,700 sq km. Th e glaciers account for 
half of Asia’s glaciers. Their total water reserves stand at about 5,200 billion 
cubic meters. Th ese glaciers are concentrated in China’s western regions.
China has many lakes, of which, more than 2,800 natural ones cover an 
area of more than 1 sq km each. The lakes of China are widely and asym-
metrically distributed. Th e eastern plain and the Tibetan Plateau have the two 
biggest lake areas. In addition, there are many lakes in the Inner Mongolia Pla-
teau,  the Yunnan-Guizhou Plateau, Qaidam Basin, and the Junggar Basin, but 
The water ﬂ ow of the Jinsha River in the upper reach of the Yangtze River is torrential, forming 
the spectacular Tiger Leaping Gorge near Lijiang, Yunnan.

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
27
few lakes on the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, the Pearl River basin and 
 Zhejiang-Fujian.
The water reserves are large in terms of absolute value, but low in terms 
of per capita occupancy and regional occupancy. The spatial and temporal 
Poyang Lake of Jiangxi, the largest fresh-water lake in China.

28 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
distribution of water resources is uneven. Th e same is true for the  integration 
of water and soil resources. Rainwater is the main water source for rivers in 
China with 44% of rainwater being transformed into running water in the 
 rivers. However, the rainfall of China is subject to the distribution of lands and 
seas and the terrains, as a result of which, the distribution of rainfall is uneven, 
declining from the southeastern coastal areas to the northwestern inland areas. 
Th e runoﬀ  depth of the southeastern coastal areas is 1,200 mm, while that of 
the northwestern rainless regions is less than 50 mm, sometimes even touching 
zero. Th e distribution of water resources does not match that of the population 
and the farmlands. The area under farmlands in the southern part of China 
accounts for 35.9% of the nation’s farmlands, but the total water resources 
account for 81%. In the north though, there are more farmlands and more 
people along the basins of the Yellow River, the Huaihe River, the Haihe River 
and the Liaohe River. Th e total freshwater resources in these areas only account 
for 19% of the national reserve, and the per capita occupancy of water in these 
areas accounts for only about 18% of the national level.
In addition, China’s water resources are aﬀ ected by its climate. Th e rainfall 
decreases from southeast to northwest resulting in decreasing ﬂ ows in the river 
system from southeast to northwest. Th e rivers ﬂ owing into deserts or lakes in 
the western rainless region are mainly supplied by melted water from the accu-
mulation of snow. Th e runoﬀ  of this kind of water is inﬂ uenced by temperature 
ﬂ uctuations. For the rivers in the northern part of China, melted water from 
seasonal snow is the main water source. In general, there are ﬂ oods in spring. 
Th e duration for which the rivers will be frozen depends on the temperature. 
Ice-logged ﬂ ooding may occur in rivers ﬂ owing from the low latitudes to high 
latitudes once there are changes in temperature.
Only 6% of the freshwater in the world can be used to support the survival of 
Chinese people, who account for 22% of the world population. Th e conﬂ ict caused 
by the water supply and demand is becoming more obvious. In recent years, rapid 
economic development and population growth have resulted in a sharp increase 
in water consumption in China. The large-scale emission of urban industrial 
wastewater and sewage poses serious water pollution. This diminishes the sup-
ply of safe water sources available for human consumption. Water is no longer an 
inexhaustible natural resource since many cities are facing a water shortage. Water 
resource problems have seriously aﬀ ected China’s environment and development. 
According to a survey carried out by some environmental groups, among the 
various environmental problems, the primary source of drinking water pollution 
is what the Chinese public is most concerned about. Th is is especially true in the 
medium and small cities and rural areas. In order to solve this problem, China has 
strengthened the protection work of the freshwater ecosystem and water sources.
Th e Chinese Government has been paying much attention to the safety of 
drinking water and has begun protecting drinking water since the 1980s. It  has 

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
29
made great eﬀ orts to deal with pollution and the monitoring of drinking water. 
It has intensiﬁ ed the protection of drinking water sources mainly by establish-
ing drinking water resource protection zones at different levels and making 
plans for the environmental protection of drinking water sources. Different 
measures were adopted in accordance with the classiﬁ cation of the protection 
zones, for example, stopping the use of drain outlets (including industrial and 
domestic drain outlets) in the Class I drinking water source areas, stopping the 
use of the direct drain outlets in the Class II drinking water source areas, and 
banning earth excavating, earth-fetching, sand-digging, and quarrying activi-
ties in water source areas.
During the 11th Five Year Plan period (2006 to 2010), China’s focus 
was and will be resolving the environmental problems in dealing with the 
unqualiﬁ ed water source areas of 113 key cities under environmental pro-
tection and the heavily polluted water source areas in some other cities; it 
will focus on dealing with the domestic pollution in the Class I protection 
zones. In fact, China is now carrying out relevant projects to guarantee the 
safety of drinking water in the rural areas. It was predicted that 160  million 
rural residents would be involved in these projects during the 11th Five Year 
Plan period.
The Kenasi River originating from Altai Mountain, Xinjiang.

30 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
In recent years, the departments in charge of environmental protection in 
China have intensiﬁ ed pollution prevention in the key basins of China. Th is has 
produced some outstanding results. In 2008, China’s surface water  pollution 
was still serious, and the general water quality of the seven freshwater river 
systems (the Yangtze River, the Yellow River, the Pearl River, the  Songhuajiang 
River, the Huaihe River, the Haihe River, and the Liaohe River) was  moderately 
polluted—same as the previous year’s level. Among the 409 water quality 
monitoring sections of 200 rivers, only 55.0% met the national surface water 
 standards for Class I−III, belonging to potable water; this percentage was mark-
edly improved, as compared with 50.0% in 2007.
In the freshwater systems of China, the water quality of the Pearl River 
and the Yangtze River is generally good and that of the Songhuajiang River 
is lightly polluted; the Yellow River, the Huaihe River, and the Liaohe River 
are moderately polluted, and the Haihe River is severely polluted. Th e good 
water quality of the Pearl River systems is related to local protection. For 
example, the Dongjiang River (the third biggest water system in the Pearl 
Shanxi Hukou Falls located in the middle section of the Yellow River.

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
31
River basin) passes through Shenzhen and Hong Kong, and is the main 
water source of more than 30 million people, accounting for nearly 80% 
of the freshwater supply of Hong Kong. From the 1980s to the 1990s, there 
were many mines at the headwaters of the Dongjiang River. However, dur-
ing these years, more than 330 of these mines were banned and closed by 
the local governments. Unauthorized and wasteful mining has been brought 
under control. Some areas have been reclaimed and trees have been planted. 
The average forest coverage of this area has reached 78.2%. According to 
the data from the Ministry of Environment Protection, of all the rivers of 
China, the Dongjiang River can be considered as one of the rivers with the 
best water quality.
What is worrying is that according to the prediction of experts, with 
the aggravation of the warming trend in China in recent years, the glaciers 
in the Qinghai-Tibet plateau and the Tianshan Mountain will accelerate 
their retreat, and some small glaciers will disappear. Th is will then trigger 
some extreme weather and climate events. In addition, the drinking water 
or daily-use water problem across the country has not been completely 
resolved. Th e eutrophication of lakes is outstanding. According to statistics, 
The environmental monitoring authority of Harbin conducting a sampling inspection of the 
water source after a chemical pollution accident in the Mangniu River in August 2006. The 
Mangniu River is a tributary of the Songhuajiang River.

32 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
75% of the lakes in the country face the eutrophication problem. Among the 
28 key state-controlled lakes and reservoirs, six are Grade IV, ﬁ ve are Grade 
V, and eleven are worse that Grade V. In other words, the water quality of as 
many as 22 lakes is below Grade IV, which accounts for 78.6% of key lakes 
(reservoirs). Th e Songhuajiang River pollution incident in late 2006 and the 
blue green algae incidents that occurred in Taihu Lake, Dianchi Lake, and 
Chaohu Lake in the summer of 2007 resulted in people from these areas 
being unable to take water from the original water sources. Th ese problem-
atic situations mean that China still faces huge pressures in protecting and 
treating its water sources.
The Marine Ecosystem
The seas adjacent to the Chinese mainland include the Bohai Sea, the 
 Huanghai Sea, the East China Sea, and the South China Sea, covering an area 
of 4.73 million sq km. Coastlines in China (island coastlines and mainland 
 coastlines) total about 32,000 kilometers in length. Of these, the mainland 
coastlines are more than 18,000 kilometers long. Currently, these coastal areas 
Hainan Dazhou Island: a national-level ocean ecological nature reserve.

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
33
have been  facing diﬀ erent levels of ecological crises, such as less diversity in 
species, rise in sea levels, exhaustion of fishing resources, frequent natural 
disasters, and pollution of coastal waters. These crises have had an adverse 
impact on the social and economic development of the regions near the waters 
and an indirect impact on the social and economic development of the whole 
world. How to protect the marine ecological environment during the rapid 
economic development process and how to realize a harmonious coexistence 
between human beings and nature have become important issues that need to 
be resolved.
Owing to the discharge of large amounts of industrial and municipal 
waste and waste from livestock breeding, the quality of water and depos-
its in the coastal areas has dropped and eutrophication of the water has 
become more serious. Due to this, the natural ecosystem has been damaged 
and ecological fragility has become severe. Th e construction of ports, land 
reclamation, dumping of solids into the sea, and mariculture have reduced 
the sea area, changed the hydrodynamic conditions, reduced the coastal 
beach, and led to a rapid drop in the tidal ﬂ ow and self-puriﬁ cation capac-
ity. Since more sand is being excavated from the beach, the coastal shelter 
forest is becoming smaller and more soil and water is being lost, resulting in 
erosion along the coastlines in some areas. In eﬀ ect, the landscape and eco-
system are becoming seriously  compromised. Therefore, protection of the 
marine ecosystem has emerged as an urgent issue demanding immediate 
attention.
According to the monitoring data from the environmental protection 
authorities, in 2008, the general water quality of offshore waters was mildly 
 polluted, improving a little as compared to the previous year. Most of the 
offshore waters are clean, and the ocean waters maintain good water quality. 
Among the 301 oﬀ shore water quality monitoring points, the percentage of ﬁ rst 
and second-class water was 70.4%, an increase of 7.6% over the previous year; 
the percentage of third-class water was 11.3%, same as that in the previous 
year; the percentage of the fourth-class and worse-than-fourth class water was 
18.3%, down by 7.6%. Th e water quality of the oﬀ shore water in the Yellow Sea 
and the South China Sea was good—normal in the Bohai Sea and poor in the 
East China Sea.
In 2008, the general water quality of the 198 rivers that discharged into 
the sea monitored by the environmental protection authorities remained 
poor. The volume of the pollutants discharged into the sea was more than 
that of the pollutants directly discharged into the sea from the pollution 
sources. Th e total volume of river pollutants discharged into the East China 
Sea is far more than that into the other seas. Th e total volume of permanga-
nate, petroleum class, and total phosphorus pollutants into the sea increased 

34 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
The red tide is an abnormal phenomenon in the ocean ecosystem, 
and it is caused by the explosive proliferation of the red tide algae 
in the seaweed family under specifi c environmental conditions. After 
the occurrence of red tide, the sea water will become red or some 
other color such as yellow, green, or brown. The red tide is always 
accompanied with the death of fi sh and other marine creatures due 
to lack of oxygen. In addition, the red tide releases many harmful 
gases and toxins, greatly polluting the marine environment. A great 
deal of waste water and sewage with nitrogenous organic compounds 
is discharged into the sea water, causing its eutrophication, and this is 
the primary cause in the formation of red tide.
“RED GHOST” RED TIDE
In June 2007, the sea area near Shenzhen, Guangdong, was polluted by a red tide—a 
striking contrast to the blue sky and white clouds.

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
35
slightly. Also in 2008, 68 red tides occurred in the whole sea area, 14 less 
than that in the previous year. However, the accumulated area of red tide 
increased.
Now, the focus is on trying to retain the beautiful beaches and  making 
efforts to restore the marine ecosystem in the following ways: first, strength-
ening the degree of protection and strictly controlling marine  pollution and 
 second, letting the seas and oceans recuperate and rebuild themselves.
In recent years, the Chinese Government has taken many steps to protect 
the mangroves, which are also called the “forests at the bottom of the sea.” Great 
efforts have been made to allow the full play of mangroves in cleaning the 
heavy metals, farm chemicals, and sewage, and in preventing the occurrence of 
red tides. Th e mangroves mainly consist of the Rhizophoraceae plant. A man-
grove is a kind of rare woody viviparous plant and is oft en used to  balance the 
marine ecosystem. Mangroves grow on the sea beaches in the tropics and sub-
tropics and have a strong root system. Most of them are submerged in  seawater 
when there is a rising tide. The luxuriant mangroves act as green screens 
for the coastal areas and play an important role in protecting the stability of 
these areas. In addition, the root system of mangroves forms a natural sewage 
 treatment system.
Chinese mangroves are mainly found in the coastal areas of Taiwan, 
Hainan, Guangdong, Guangxi, and Fujian provinces. Guangxi Zhuang 
Autonomous Region has the most mangroves, a third of the total. It is home 
to many kinds of marine organisms like the coral reefs in the tropical seas. 
Th e mangroves of China support diﬀ erent kinds of plant species, big algae, 
phytoplanktons, zoobenthos, insects, birds, mammals, and reptiles. Many of 
them are rare and endangered species or nationally protected animals and 
plants.
So far, China has established seven mangrove protection areas at provincial 
levels and above. Th e area of the mangroves in these protection areas accounts 
for 50% of the total area of the nation’s mangroves. The Guangxi Mangrove 
Research Center is the ﬁ rst integrated mangrove protection, research, and man-
agement system established in China.
Since the 1990s, many coastal areas in China have encountered a big 
decline in marine resources caused by excessive ﬁ shing, and the sustainable 
development of the marine fishing industry has been greatly threatened. In 
order to protect marine resources, China implemented the summer fishing 
ban in 1995. In accordance with this ban, ﬁ shing in certain areas should be 
stopped during a certain period each year so as to protect the aquatic  animals 
and plants. So far, the fishing ban has been implemented in all the four sea 
areas under the administration of China, including 11 coastal provinces 

36 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
(including autonomous regions and municipalities) and Hong Kong and 
Macao Special Administration Regions. About 120,000 boats and a million 
fishermen have been involved. The fishing ban effectively stems the decline 
of marine resources. However, many high-quality fishes need ten years to 
become mature fishes. More work should be done to protect the marine 
resources of China.
The Forest Ecological System
China has rich forest resources with diverse ecological systems. The forest 
 ecological system of China plays a critical role in sustainable development, 
 ecological safety, and protection of the bio-diversity of the world economy.
As of 2008, the forest area of China is 195 million hectares; the forest 
coverage is 20.36%; and the forest volume is 13.721 billion cubic meters. 
The forest ecosystem of China is mainly distributed in the eastern region 
The mangrove shelter forest by the Sanya seaside, Hainan.

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
37
of the country. Due to the prevailing temperature conditions, the typical 
forest ecosystems distributed in succession from north to south include 
the cold temperate zone coniferous forest, the temperate zone coniferous 
and broadleaved mixed forest, the warm temperate zone deciduous broad 
leaved forest and coniferous forest, the subtropical evergreen broad-leaved 
forest and coniferous forest, and the tropical zone monsoon forest and 
rain forest.
As a country with the fastest growth in forest resources, China has 
the largest artificial forest coverage in the world. Only from 2003 to 2008, 
China’s forest area had a net increase of 20.54 million hectares. China’s 
artificial forest covers 54 million hectares, ranking the top in the world. 
Currently, China is working on several forest projects such as Three-North 
(Northeast China, North China, and Northwest China) Protection Forest, 
Yangtze River Valley Protection Forest, Coastal Protection Forest, Pearl 
River Valley Protection Forest, Treatment Project of Beijing and Tianjin 
Sandstorm Sources, Taihang Mountain Forestation Project, and Plain For-
estation Project.
Villagers in Shangdian Village, Changping District, Beijing, persistently plant trees even on 
a windy day. This area is one of the important regions included in the “Treatment Project of 
Beijing and Tianjin Sandstorm Sources.”

38 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
In order to change the hazardous conditions of sand storms and soil 
 erosion in the Three-North area (Northwest China, North China, and 
 Northeast China) from the roots, China initiated the Th ree-North Protection 
Forest Project—a large artificial forest ecological project—in 1978 and plans 
to complete it by 2050. The 73-year-long project is divided into eight phases 
in three stages. According to the plan, 534 million Mu of forest will be planted 
(15 Mu is about 1 hectare) When the project is completed, the forest cover 
 percentage of the Th ree-North region will rise to 14.95% from 5.05% of 1977, 
resulting in an eﬀ ective control over wind and sand threats and water and soil 
loss as well as a greatly-improved ecological environment.
The project involves 590 counties belonging to 13 provinces, autono-
mous regions, and municipalities, covering a total area of 4.069 million square 
kilometers, or 42.4% of China’s territory. The enormous project, dubbed the 
“green Great Wall” of China and the “largest ecological project in the world” by 
international media, surpasses the United States’ RS (1934), the former Soviet 
Union’s SRN (1948), and the ﬁ ve north African countries’ Green Dam Plan (end 
of the 1970s) in scale and scope.
By the end of 2000, the ﬁ rst three phases were completed with an aﬀ oresta-
tion area of above 22 million hectares. In total, 5.5 million hectares of forest for 
A shelter forest along the Tarim desert highway in Xinjiang.

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
39
water and soil conservancy and one million hectares of water source conservancy 
forests have been planted in the Loess Plateau and the mountainous regions in 
North China. About 140,000 sq km of water and soil loss area have been treated, 
accounting for 40% of the total. In total, more than two million hectares of forest 
for protecting croplands have been planted. Altogether, 21.3 million hectares of 
croplands form a network, comprising 64% of the total arable lands of the Th ree-
North region. Th e lumber stock volume in the Th ree-North region has reached 997 
million cubic meters. More than 3.6 million hectares of forests have been planted, 
including some bases for special fruits with annual production of 12.55 million 
tons of dried and fresh fruits and a total production value of RMB 1.7 billion.
Th e fourth phase of the Th ree-North Project started in 2001 and has seen 
the afforestation of 1.5031 million hectares and of green dunes of 1.2119 
 million hectares by 2005.
In 1998, China executed the policy of “returning farmlands to forests” 
and started the Natural Forest Resource Protection Project. Natural forests 
account for 70% of the existing forest area in China. Th e natural forest resource 
 protection project mainly addresses rehabilitation and recovery to realize 
The natural forests in Yunyang County, Chongqing, have been protected effectively.

40 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
 harmonious development of the ecology, society, and economy. Th e pilot work 
began in 1998 and was rolled out in 17 provinces, autonomous regions, and 
municipalities across China in the year 2000. The project covers the period 
2000 to 2010 with a total investment of RMB 96.2 billion, and provides practi-
cal protection to the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, the upper and middle 
reaches of the Yellow River, as well as natural forests in key state-owned forest 
regions in Northeast China and Inner Mongolia.
In 1999, Sichuan, Shaanxi, and Gansu initiated the pilot work of returning 
farmlands to forests and pastures to grasslands. The year 2002 witnessed the 
all-round rolling-out of the project. Returning the farmlands to forests and the 
grazing pastures to the grasslands is widespread in China. Th e cultivation of 
arable lands located at the slopes, which cause water and soil loss and lead to 
desertiﬁ cation, is to be stopped. Trees and grass will be planted as required and 
forest vegetation will be recovered.
In 2003, the Chinese Government put forward the policy to quicken the devel-
opment of forestry that “fully took advantage of overseas and domestic markets 
and resources.” As of 2008, the area of forests returned from farmlands reached 
The scenic Yangtze Gorges after the implementation of the “returning farmlands to forests” policy.

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
41
31.91 million hectares; the urban green coverage rate in the whole  country rose up 
to 35.11% from 29.5%; and the per capita public green area increased to 8.6 square 
meters from 6.49 square meters. These results greatly benefited the economy, 
ecology, and society: forest resources of the project area grew stably, the area with 
water and soil losses reduced, and the desertification of lands was under con-
trol. Th is signiﬁ cantly beneﬁ ted the peasants. Wuzhai County, Xinzhou City, and 
Shanxi Province are situated in the Loess Plateau. In the past, the pastures here 
were destroyed by sheep and wind. Today, more than 40,000 hectares of dunes 
are covered with vegetation, presenting a  picture of undulating green hills. The 
forests of the county cover 5.5 ten thousand  hectares with a vegetation coverage 
rate of 52% achieved by grazing bans and aﬀ orestation on the hills. Th e natural 
environment has undergone a major change and the production and living con-
ditions of villagers have improved greatly. In 2008, the total output of China was 
947,155,000 tons of fresh natural grasslands, equivalent to about 296,268,000 tons 
of hay, which has a carrying capacity of about 231.78 million sheep units.
In recent years, thanks to the forestry ecological eﬃ  ciency compensation 
system of China, the forest area and stocking volume have increased rapidly, 
age-structured forests and forest farms have had a reasonable tendency to grow, 
and forest quality has tended to improve. Th is has achieved the historical belief 
of gradually rising by a constant reduction. However, for economic  benefit, 
1998 1999 
2000 2001 
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 
2009
473
480
516
530
747
930
716.7
637
457
520
477
588
Source: National Annual Statistics Bulletin, National Bureau of Statistics.
National forestation data for 1998 to 2009

42 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
some areas have replaced natural forest by cash crops. Although the forest 
 coverage rate has increased in numbers, it will seriously aﬀ ect the forest quality 
of China in the long run. How to handle similar problems is a new task for the 
Chinese environmental protection authorities and concerned individuals.
The Grassland Ecological System
China’s grasslands cover an area of 0.4 billion hectares, accounting for 
41.7% of the territory, much larger than the forest area and land area. China’s 
grasslands are the second largest in the world aft er Australia’s, whose grassland 
area accounts for 13% of the world’s grasslands. It can be said that China is a 
country with  abundant grassland resources. Th e grassland area of 12  provinces 
(municipalities and  autonomous regions) including Tibet, Inner  Mongolia, 
Xinjiang, Qinghai, Sichuan, Gansu, Ningxia, Shaanxi, Guizhou, Yunnan, 
Guangxi, and Chongqing is about 0.33 billion hectares, accounting for 84.4% 
of the grasslands of the entire country. China’s grasslands, starting from Great 
Xingan Mountains, Songnen Plain, and Hulunbuir Plateau to the southwest 
and reaching the south border of the  Qinghai-Tibet Plateau via Inner Mongolia 
and the Loess plateaus, stretch for more than 4,500 kilometers.
Grasslands are the biggest green ecological barrier for China—the basic 
production material for pastoral areas and are home to China’s main ethic 
groups. In 2008, the natural grasslands produced a total of 947.155 million tons 
of fresh grass in the whole country, equal to about 296.268 million tons of hay, 
with a carrying capacity of about 231.78 million sheep units.
According to the relevant information, from the beginning of the 
last  century to the present, China’s north grasslands have receded about 
200  kilometers to the north and about 100 kilometers to the west; 90% of 
the natural grassland degenerates in different degrees. In recent years, about 
The beautiful Bayinbuluke Grassland of Xinjiang. Surrounded by snow mountains, it is known 
as the “Hometown of Swans.”

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
43
1.50 million hectares of grasslands has been vanishing every year and the 
trend continues. In the past few years, China has strengthened the ecological 
 development and planning management of its grasslands. As a result, adminis-
tration concerning the grasslands converts to “placing equal stress on ecology, 
economy, and social targets, and ecology is paramount” from focusing on eco-
nomical targets; grassland vegetation is recovered eﬀ ectively and the ecologi-
cal environment of the grasslands has improved gradually. From 2000 to 2005, 
the central government invested more than RMB 9 billion to carry out several 
projects on the ecological development of grasslands including natural grass-
land vegetation recovery and construction, grassland fencing, grass seed base, 
returning grazing pastures to grasslands, and the Treatment Project of Beijing 
and Tianjin Sandstorm Sources. From 2003 to 2008, the accumulated area of 
grazing pastures returned to grasslands was 34.60 million hectares.
In 2008, China carried out the returning grazing pastures to grasslands 
 project in Inner Mongolia, Sichuan, Gansu, Ningxia, Qinghai, Tibet, Xinjiang, 
Yunnan, and Guizhou. Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps invested 
RMB 1.5 billion, building 5.228 million hectares of grassland fences, treated 
27 thousand hectares of stone desertiﬁ cation land, and seeded 1.569 million hect-
ares of grassland with serious recession. In addition, it carried out the Treatment 
 Project of Beijing and Tianjin Sandstorm Source Grasslands in Beijing, Inner 
The Hulunbuir Grassland of Inner Mongolia with its well-preserved ecology.

44 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
Mongolia, Shanxi, and Hebei, investing RMB 0.39 billion, treating 0.236  million 
 hectares of grassland, building 1.21 million square meters of enclosures and 
equipping 25,540 sets of forage processing machine. Thanks to the implemen-
tation of these projects, in the project areas, the grassland vegetation coverage, 
height, and fresh grass yield has risen greatly, the ecological environment has 
improved obviously, the construction of infrastructural facilities has strengthened, 
and the production mode of animal husbandry has been converted eﬀ ectively.
To utilize the pastures eﬀ ectively, China follows a pasture division and shift  
system. It is an advanced grazing method that divides the pasture area into a 
number of units according to their productivity and utilization. The grazing 
shift  is designed to graze the livestock while maintaining the productivity of 
the pasture. In other words, the pasture division and shift system combines 
livestock grazing with the protection of pastures.
With the pasture division and shift  system, the grazing animals are limited 
to a relatively small area so that the pastures can be utilized effectively. The 
system can help 30% more livestock to be raised on the same area. Th e herds-
men use the pasturing units in turn and this ensures pastures of high quality 
for grazing. As the livestock stays in a relatively small area, the sick ones can be 
found earlier and losses caused by predators are reduced signiﬁ cantly.
The Inner Mongolia grassland follows regional rotation grazing.

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
45
Usually, wire netting is used as a fence to divide the pasturing area 
while natural formations such as wooded belts, moats, brooks, lakes, hills, 
or  man-made marks (poles, stones, or earth mounds) are utilized as natural 
boundaries for a pasturing unit. It is ideal to use an electric fence to divide the 
pasturing units.
The problems that beset grasslands are mainly fire, rodent, and insect 
attacks. In 2008, 9,895.9 hectares of grasslands were destroyed by fire in the 
whole country, reduced by 13.0% as compared to the previous year. In the same 
year, rats attacked 36.758 million hectares of grasslands; about 9.4% of the total 
grassland area, 5.6% lower as compared to the previous year. Insects damaged 
27.007 million hectares of grasslands, about 6.9% of the total area, an increase 
of 53.6% as compared to the previous year. Th e important aspect regarding the 
preservation of the grasslands ecology is to reduce these disasters.
Take prevention of rats for an example. Although small in size, rats live in 
the pastures in quite a large number and cause serious damage. In the arid and 
alpine grassland and alpine cold meadows and steppes, the area destroyed by 
rats is approximately 30%. Besides tools and drugs, it is economical and scien-
tiﬁ c to kill mice using their natural enemies. An owl can kill 1,000 ﬁ eld mice in 
summer while the ferret can eat 2,500–3,000 mice a year. Th e simplest way is to 
erect a wood pole every 500 meters for the raptors to rest and then the rodents 
can be controlled in that area.
The Ecological System of the Oases in Deserts
Land that has suffered desertification in China is scattered over 471 prefec-
tures, leagues, and cities of 18 provinces; regions and cities, mainly in the 12 
 provinces of Northeast China; the northern area of North China; western 
area of  Northeast China; and northern Tibet. In China, desertification con-
sists of wind erosion, water erosion, freezing and thawing, and soil salting. 
The  vertical distance extends to thousands of meters. From the sea level to 
the high, cold desert, desertiﬁ cation can be found everywhere. Th e land area 
under wind erosion is 1,607,000 sq km, and is mainly found in dry and semi-
arid areas. Among all types of desertiﬁ cation land, wind-eroded land has the 
largest area and range. Th e area under water erosion is 205,000 sq km, and is 
distributed in diﬀ erent parts. Freezing and thawing constitutes 366,000 sq km 
and is mainly seen in high-altitude areas in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. Th e area 
under desertiﬁ cation caused by soil salting is 233,000 sq km and is distributed 
in oases around the Tarim Basin, the plains of the northern side of Tianshan 
Mountains, the Hetao Plain, the Yinchuan Plain, the North China Plain, and the 
Yellow River Delta.

46 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
The diversifolious poplar woods along the Tarim River in the backland of the Taklamakan 
Desert in Xinjiang. These trees perform the important function of resisting wind and sand.

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
47

48 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
Most deserts are located at the sources of rivers in western China. The 
 desert is a fragile ecosystem, which is diﬃ  cult to recover once destroyed. Sandy 
land vegetation is crucial to maintaining the desert ecosystem. When treat-
ing the desert ecological system, China emphasizes the protection of desert 
 vegetation. In deserts, diversifolious poplar forests help hold the soil in place. 
Th e age of some trees can reach a thousand years. Red willows, saxauls, elms, 
Caragana Korshinskii Kom, and sea buckthorns are anti-desertification tree 
varieties that must be protected. Th e desert ecosystem protection implemented 
by China is crucial to water and soil conservation in western China.
Between the 1950s and the 1960s, China set up a desertiﬁ cation a  control 
experiment station in Shazhuyu, Qinghai, and carried out many types of 
desertification control and forestation experiments. Under the direction of 
experts, the locals controlled desertification by combining engineering and 
biological measures, established grass cultivation belts within enclosed moun-
tainous areas, stabilization belts for sands by forestation, and farm-protecting 
forest belts. This formed a comprehensive prevention and protection system 
and improved the ecology. This method was widely used in areas that faced 
desertiﬁ cation throughout the country.
Niu Yuqin, from Jinjisha Village, Shaanxi Province, is good at sand con-
trol. She began to plant trees to control desertiﬁ cation in 1984. She has turned 
7,333.2 hectares of desert into an oasis. Her outstanding accomplishment won 
her the Y.S. Rao Award of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations in 1993. She has founded a village on a 16-hectare desert, which is 
equipped with water, roads, and power, and can accommodate 24 migrant 
households.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
China is a country with several deserts. These mainly consist of 12 
large deserts, that is, the “eight deserts”—the Taklamakan Desert, the 
Gurbantunggut Desert, the Badain Jaran Desert, the Tengger Desert, 
the Qaidam Desert, the Kumutage Desert, the Ulan Buh Desert, and 
the Kubuqi Desert—and “four sandy lands”—the Mu Us Sandy Land, 
Otindag Sandy Land, Keerqin Sandy Land, and Hulunbuir Sandy Land. 
A quicksand accumulation in an arid area is called a desert, and quick-
sand accumulation in a semiarid area is known as a sandy land.
THE “EIGHT DESERTS” AND “FOUR SANDY 
LANDS” OF CHINA

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
49
The Chinese Government sees the prevention of desertification as a 
 strategic measure to improve the ecology of a region, expand the land avail-
able for living and development, boost coordinated social and economic 
 development, and promote sustainable development. In recent years, the 
 Chinese Government has promulgated and implemented the Law of  Prevention 
and Control of Desertiﬁ cation, approved the National Desert Prevention and 
Control Plan (2005–2010), implemented key projects related to desertiﬁ cation 
prevention and control, reduced both the land areas vulnerable to desertiﬁ ca-
tion as well as desert areas, and halted the expansion of desertiﬁ cation.
Since 2000, China has been guided by the principle of “stressing  prevention, 
combining prevention with control, and carrying out comprehensive  treatment” 
in desertiﬁ cation prevention and control. Stressing prevention means energeti-
cally stopping the process of desertiﬁ cation, protecting the existing vegetation, 
water, and marshes in deserts, and blocking new desertification. Combin-
ing prevention and control means controlling the rate of desertification and 
 preventing new desertiﬁ cation, controlling the parts that directly do harm to 
the public, and expanding control by planting trees and grass. Comprehensive 
treatment means controlling speciﬁ c desertiﬁ cation points and putting an end 
to large-size land desertiﬁ cation.
The Taklamakan Desert of Xinjiang is the largest desert in China.

50 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
In order to prevent the further expansion of desertiﬁ cation, China has built 
large forest and grass belts to block wind and soil erosion in the eight largest 
deserts and four largest sandy areas and has built wide-ranging forest belts for 
sand ﬁ xation between deserts and oases. At the same time, the government has 
spread the use of tillage-free method in dry arable land that is subject to the 
serious eﬀ ects of sandstorms. Th is method of tillage leaves the roots intact. Ara-
ble land suﬀ ering from desertiﬁ cation has been planted with trees and grass. In 
grasslands suﬀ ering from desertiﬁ cation, herding is the main means to halt the 
process. Experience has shown that when the grass and shrub coverage rate on 
sandy land reaches 30%, quicksand can be ﬁ xed, and when shrub coverage rate 
is higher than 40%, desertiﬁ cation can be controlled.
Th e oases of China are mainly located at the northern foot of the  Qilian 
Mountain and the Kunlun Maintain, the southern and northern foot of 
 Tianshan Mountain, and Hetao Plain. In 86 counties and cities in these areas, 
there are more than 80 oases, including 42 along the edge of the Tarim Basin, 
28 along the edge of the Junggar Basin, and some in the Hami-Turpan Basin 
and the Ili River Valley. Th ere are 21 counties and cities along the Hexi Corri-
dor (Gansu Corridor), and they form 19 big oases. Besides, there are more than 
40 towns and residential areas in the Qaidam Basin, and they form more than 
40 small oases.
For hundreds of years, many artificial oases have been shaped in the 
process of construction of long artificial canals for water diversion, drawing 
groundwater, building reservoirs, and reclaiming barren lands. The oasis of 
the Tikanlik-Daxihaizi Reservoir at the lower reaches of the Tarim River, the 
oasis of the Shihezi-Mosuo Bay in the Junggar Basin in northern Xinjiang, 
and the oasis of Kuitun-Chepaizi are all of such a kind. Th e boom in Shihezi 
is a result of oasis reclamation and  construction. Th anks to the approximately 
 half-century reclamation process that started in the 1950s, the Gobi desert and 
Plants in the Badain Jaran Desert of Inner 
Mongolia.
Plants in the Xinjiang deserts.

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
51
barren lands in Xinjiang have been developed into bases for planting cotton 
and food. In Qinghai, a number of oases in extremely cold deserts have been 
reclaimed, including the Xiangride Oasis, Shazhuyu Oasis, Nuomuhong Oasis, 
Geermu Oasis, and Delingha Oasis, giving a big boost to the  all-round develop-
ment of agriculture and livestock husbandry in these areas.
The Wetland Ecosystem
A wetland ecosystem is an ecological system connecting an open water area 
to a land experiencing the periodic drought that common aquatic life  cannot 
adapt to and the long inundation that common land plants cannot stand. 
 Wetlands are crucial to maintaining the ecological environment of the earth.
As the country with the largest wetland area in Asia, China is one of the 
countries which have the most abundant biological diversity of wetlands in the 
world. China boasts of complete wetland types, with rich numbers. According 
to the classiﬁ cation standards of the Wetland Convention on Wetlands, China 
has 31 kinds of natural wetlands and 9 kinds of man-made wetlands. Wetlands 
are spread widely across China. According to biological regional characters, 
climatic features, and abundance of biological diversity, China’s wetlands can be 
divided into 8 main regions, that is, the Northeast China wetlands; the North 
China wetlands; the wetlands in the mid- and lower reaches of the Yangtze 
River; the wetlands in the north coast of the Hangzhou Bay; the wetlands in the 
south coast of Hangzhou Bay; the wetlands in the Yunnan-Guizhou Plateau; 
the arid and semi-arid wetlands of Inner Mongolia and Xinjiang; and the high-
cold wetlands in the Tibetan Plateau.
Th e east area of China has more river wetlands; the northeast area features 
more marshes; while the western drought area has few wetlands. Th e middle 
and lower reaches of the Yangtze River and the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau have 
more lake wetlands. The lakes of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau and the north-
west drought area are mostly saltwater lakes and salt lakes. Th e Hainan Island 
and the coastal area of North Fujian Province have unique mangrove and 
 man-made tropic and sub-tropic wetlands. The Qinghai-Tibet Plateau has a 
large area of plateau marshes and lakes with the highest altitude in the world, 
forming a unique ecosystem.
There are 28 types of wetlands. Those having an area more than 
100  hectares make up 38.48 million hectares of China’s territory. Among them, 
the natural wetlands constitute 36.20 million hectares, including 5.94 million 
hectares of coast wetlands, 8.21 million hectares of river wetlands, 8.35  million 
hectares of lake wetlands, and 13.70 million hectares of marsh wetlands. 

52 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
China enjoys abundant wetland species, including 31 breeds, 12 branches, and 
7 orders of animals; 271 breeds, 32 branches, and 12 orders of birds; 122 breeds, 
13 branches, and 3 orders of reptiles; 300 breeds, 11 branches, 3 orders of 
amphibians; more than 1,000 kinds of ﬁ sh, about 2276 kinds, 815 categories, 
225 branches of wetland advanced plants; 267 kinds, 139 categories, and 64 
branches of mosses; 70 kinds, 42 categories, and 27 branches of ferns; 20 kinds, 
9 categories, 4 branches of gymnospermous plants; as well as 1,919 kinds, 
625 categories, and 130 branches of angiosperms.
At present, the protection and management system for wetlands is grad-
ually taking shape. Here, the natural reserves command the principal focus, 
and various protection and management forms including wetland parks and 
reserves coexist. Up to the end of 2008, China built more than 550 natural 
wetland reserves and 38 national wetland parks, of which, 36 are listed in the 
important international wetland catalog of the Wetland Convention. Th ere 
are more than 17.90 million hectares of natural wetlands that are eﬀ ectively 
 protected in the whole country. Th ese account for about 49% of the whole 
area of wetlands of the country. In 2008 alone, China built 20 national 
 wetland parks.
China began to reform and open up in the late 1970s and early 1980s. 
During that period, the wetlands were seriously damaged because of farm-
ing, hydropower stations, and tourism development being pursued with 
short-term economic objectives in mind. Since China joined the Wetland 
Hangzhou Xixi National Wetland Park.

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
53
Convention on Wetlands in 1992, the government has made a  concerted 
effort to protect the wetlands. The State Forestry Administration has 
set up the “Commitment Fulfillment Office of Ramsar Convention on 
 Wetlands” which is responsible for the enforcement of wetland protec-
tion. In  November 2000, the China National Wetlands Conservation Action 
Plan was promulgated. In February 2004, the State Forestry Administra-
tion  promulgated the Wetlands Conservation Planning with approval from 
the State Council. Much has been achieved in the past 20 years in terms of 
wetlands recovery and construction. After applying four times, as of now, 
36 wetlands have been listed in the important international wetland catalog 
of the Wetland Convention in China. Th ese include Zhalong of Heilongjiang, 
Qinghai Bird’s Island, Mai Po and Deep Bay of Hong Kong, Heilongjiang’s 
Th ree Rivers, East Coast of the Chongming Island, Bita Lake and La Shi Hai 
of Yunnan, Tibetan Midika, and Zoige in Sichuan.
Th e Yellow River Delta Wetlands is located at the mouth of the Yellow 
River, Dongying City, Shandong province. Covering 1,410 sq km, this place 
features a unique climate, rich wetland resources, and is the youngest, best 
preserved  wetlands ecosystem in the warm temperature zone with the larg-
est coverage in the world. Th e state-level Yellow River Delta Natural Reserve 
is established here. Its aim is to protect the primeval wetland ecosystem and 
the birds.
The Yellow River Delta Wetlands boast rich wetland types, diversified 
landscapes, a high proportion of natural wetlands, which account for 68.4% 
of the total wetland area, including the rivers and lakes of the fresh water 
 ecosystem and wet meadows, bushes, open forests, reed, and saline wetlands. 
Th e man-made wetlands mainly include ponds and reservoirs. Th e area boasts 
of rich wetland wildlife. Th ere are 116 species of high-grade plants, more than 
800 species of sea creatures and 187 species of birds. Of these, 32 species are 
under the protection of the country, including the red-crowned crane and 
The Yellow River Delta Wetlands in Dongying, Shandong.

54 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
hooded crane, and 108 species are under the protection of the Sino-Japanese 
protection agreement on migrating birds. Th e Yellow River Delta is an impor-
tant passage and an overwintering site for migrating birds from Northeast Asia 
and the Paciﬁ c Rim.
The Sichuan state-level Zoige Wetlands Natural Reserve, located at 
the east side of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, in Zoige county, Aba Tibetan 
and Qiang  Ethnic Groups autonomous prefecture, is a natural reserve of 
a  complex wetlands ecosystem. Covering 166,570.6 hectares, the Zoige 
Wetlands was approved as a state-level natural reserve in 1998 by the State 
Council, and is aimed at protecting the high-cold marsh wetland ecosystem 
and rare wildlife such as the black-necked crane. In 2005, the Zoige Wetlands 
Reserve was crowned “the most beautiful wetland of China” by National 
Geographic.
Zoige Wetland is the typical representative of the high-cold wetland 
 ecological system in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. According to international 
 wetland experts, it is “the largest, the most primitive, and the best plateau 
wetland undamaged by human beings”. The reserve is mostly a plain plateau, 
3,697 meters at its highest point and 3,422 meters at its lowest point. However, 
it is above sea level. It is cold and humid, so the peat swamp is widespread 
and supports extensive vegetation. With a great number of unique species, 
The Zoige Wetland is a well-protected plateau wetland.

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
55
the reserve is one of the key areas of biodiversity and has one of the richest 
 mountain  species in the world. Th e reserve has 207 species of plants (including 
fungi). Of these, the Circaeaster agrestis and aweto are important plants under 
state protection. Th ere are 218 species of vertebrate, including the black-necked 
crane and the bearded vulture, totaling more than 30 species. It is also a breeding 
area of the black-necked crane with about 480 black-necked cranes living there.
In recent years, the surface pond of Zoige has become markedly shallow, 
a sign of the recession of the wetland ecosystem and the desertification of 
the wetlands. Further, because the reserve is surrounded and divided by three 
roads, the survival of amphibians, mammals, and birds is also aﬀ ected. Th is has 
caused an alarm and drawn the attention of the relevant authorities.
Th e Th ree-River Plain, an alluvial plain covering about 5 million hectares, 
is the largest marsh distribution area of China, located at the upper reaches of 
the Heilongjiang River and the Ussuri River, Heilongjiang province. Th e three 
rivers refer to the Heilongjiang River, the Ussuri River, and the  Songhua River. 
Both the Three-River National Natural Reserve and the Honghe National 
Natural Reserve are located here. Th e Th ree-River National Natural Reserve 
is located in the northeast part of the Th ree-River Plain, adjacent to Russia 
with the Heilongjiang River on the north and the Ussuri River on the east, 
The lush-green Huahu Lake in the Zoige Wetland.

56 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
covering 198,100 hectares. It has 38 species of mammals, 231 species of birds, 
7 species of reptiles, 5 species of amphibians, and 77 species of ﬁ sh, includ-
ing animals under key state protection such as the oriental white stork, red-
crowned crane, Mergus squamatus, golden eagle, Haliaeetus albicilla, and 
Haliaeetus leucoryphus. Th e Honghe Natural Reserve is located at the center 
of the Sanjiang Plain, covering 21,835.7 hectares and was included in the 
List of Wetlands of International Importance in 2001. The reserve is home 
to 173 species of birds, including the oriental white stork, Ciconia nigra, the 
red-crowned crane, Grus vipio, mandarin duck, whooper swan, Haliaeetus 
albicilla, Haliaeetus pelagicus Kamchatkan, Aquila clanga, and Spotted Caper-
caillie, which are under state protection.
The urban wetlands are an important part of the urban ecology. The 
 wetland is of great significance for urban biodiversity protection, urban 
 landscape construction, and ecosystem and environment construction. China’s 
rapid urbanization is posing a serious threat to the urban wetland area. China 
has taken two main measures to protect the urban wetlands, namely, estab-
lishing wetland reserves and urban wetland parks. The urban wetlands have 
been turned into parks integrating protection, popular science promotion, and 
 recreation. Th e Management Methods of National Urban Wetland Parks (Trial) 
was promulgated by the Ministry of Construction in February 2005,  oﬀ ering 
The Heilongjiang Zhalong Nature Reserve mainly protects the red-crowned crane and other 
wild precious birds.

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
57
the legislative guarantee for urban wetland park protection. In 2004, the 
Sanggouwan Urban Wetland Park, Rongcheng City, Shandong province, was 
approved as the ﬁ rst urban wetland park of China. As of March 2009, China 
has  published ﬁ ve batches of national urban wetland park catalogs. Now, there 
are 30 national urban wetland parks in the country.
Ecological Restoration
Due to the development history spanning several thousand years and its vast 
population, China’s ecosystems are developed, disturbed, and even spoiled to 
varying degrees. Because of the decline of ecosystems, the services performed 
by them—including the conservation of water resources, defending against 
wind erosion, retaining sand, providing a buﬀ er against ﬂ ood disasters, hold-
ing soil together, and protecting biodiversity—have reduced dramatically. Th is 
has resulted in a series of ecological issues that seriously threaten national 
ecological security. Therefore, restoring the ecological systems has taken on 
the  proportion of crisis management. In recent years, a series of measures have 
been implemented by China for promoting natural ecological restoration, 
aimed at restoring 300 thousand square meters of ecological areas and treating 
22 million hectares of land suﬀ ering from desertiﬁ cation.
Ecological restoration along the Qinghai-Tibet Railway is a typical exam-
ple. Th e Qinghai-Tibet Railway crosses the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, where the 
natural environment is unique and fragile, and is listed as the priority area in 
“global biodiversity protection” by the World Wildlife Fund (WWF). During the 
construction of the railway, the borrow pit and construction site were strictly 
selected by the environmental protection departments and construction units, 
and the impact on the local ecological environment can be said to be negligible. 
However, due to human activities such as construction, vegetation growth in 
the local areas has been adversely affected. Research into the restoration of 
 vegetation speciﬁ c to those regions is now underway.
In 2001, the process of restoration of vegetation along the Qinghai-Tibet 
railway was launched. Researchers experimented with seeds of the  original 
plant on the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau to decipher what kind of plants were 
 suitable for artiﬁ cial growth, whether the cultivated plants could thrive under 
the natural conditions of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, and if the plants would 
be able to survive the winter and maintain stable growth. Th e research depart-
ments established experimental bases in the areas along the Tuotuo River and 
the Beimi River in Qinghai Province and Anduo County of Tibet  Autonomous 
Region. Th e researches on restoration of vegetation along the Qinghai-Tibet 

58 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
railway will ensure that the restoration of vegetation can be carried out quickly 
after the completion of the Qinghai-Tibet railway. At the same time, the 
research results will be applied to vegetation coverage for slope protection.
The restoration research on recessed ecosystems implemented by the 
 Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in the Otindag Sandy Land 
situated in Inner Mongolia is inspiring. Otindag Sandy Land is 180 km away 
from Beijing and is the sand resource closest to Beijing. Th is sandy land, with 
lush pastures and unique landscapes, is known as the “desert garden.” However, 
due to constant drought and over grazing, the pastures have receded, rivers and 
lakes have withered, and desertiﬁ cation has become increasingly serious. Th is 
sandy land has become one of the main sources of dust storms aﬀ ecting Beijing 
in recent years.
The research carried out by the Chinese Academy of Sciences over the 
past ﬁ ve years shows that it is not necessary to treat the ecological system of 
the Otindag Sandy Land by using artificial measures, such as planting and 
aerial seeding on a large scale. The ecological system of the Otindag Sandy 
Land can be restored by natural forces in line with the law of nature. The 
measures taken by the Chinese Academy of Sciences to maintain the land by 
The construction of the Qinghai-Tibet Railway is important for ecological protection.

 
Chapter 2 China’s Natural Ecosystem 
59
natural forces only cost RMB 20 per Mu. Moreover, money can be utilized to 
solve the problems of water, electricity, and infrastructure (rpads). Th e money 
actually used for ecological restoration is the fence expense of RMB 4  per Mu. 
Through such ecological restoration, the local places would regain their 
 pastures, shrubs, and native trees reaping obvious benefits for the ecology, 
society, and economy.
Autumn in the Otindag Sandland.


3
61
3
Biological diversity (commonly referred to as biodiversity) refers to the sum 
of the ecological complex formed by the various life forms, the environment, 
and various related ecological courses, including animals, plants, microorgan-
isms, their genes as well as the complicated ecological system formed by them 
and their living environment. It is the basic feature of life on our planet and 
includes three closely-related layers: inheritance diversity, species diversity, and 
ecological system diversity. Species diversity is at the core. Biological diversity is 
the foundation of people’s survival and development. Th e world’s citizens share 
the responsibility of protecting the planet’s biological diversity. The United 
Nations set 2010 as the Year of International Biological Diversity and its theme 
is “Biodiversity is life, biodiversity is our life.”
China is a country with signiﬁ cant biological diversity. Hence,  protecting 
China’s biological diversity is crucial and China has made great strides in 
 protecting it.
Biological Diversity and Its Protection in China
China has a vast territory. Th anks to its complex and diversiﬁ ed natural condi-
tions and a long geological history, it has abundant species of animals, plants, 
and animalcules as well as a colorful ecological combination. It is one of 
12 mega-diversity countries in the world. Its biological diversity is explained 
below:
Biological Diversity
Chapter 3

62 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
A Diversifi ed Ecosystem
China has all types of ecosystems that exist in the northern hemisphere and 
can be divided into 595 groups dominated by forests, grasslands, wastelands, 
farmlands, wetlands, and oceans.
Various Biological Species
China has a vast territory and a complicated terrain and climate. It spans 
across the Frigid Zone, the Temperate Zone, and the Torrid Zone from north 
to south. Plateaus and mountainous regions make up 80% of its territory. 
Th anks to its diversiﬁ ed biological environment, China has abundant species 
of wild  animals and plants. It is one of the bases of flora that originated in 
Laurasia, Gondwana, and the Ancient Mediterranean Sea. Its animals include 
a  majority of species that can be traced back to the Palaearctic Realm and the 
Oriental Region.
Apart from fishes, there are approximately 2,619 varieties of vertebrate, 
of which 581 are mammals; 1,331, birds; 412, reptiles; and 295, amphibians. 
China has about 2,200 varieties of bryophytes and 2,200 to 2,600 varieties of 
The Nanjiabawa Peak in Tibet has an evident vertical distribution chain of animals and plants. 
It is also known as the “World’s Natural Museum of Mountainous Vegetation Type.”

 
Chapter 3 Biological Diversity 
63
ferns. It has abundant varieties of gymnosperm in 250 species, 34 genus, and 
10  families. Meanwhile, more than 30,000 species of angiosperms in 3,123 genus 
and 328 families can be found here. Th e variety of insects that have been found 
in China stands at 3,000.
Besides, Chinese species have a higher endemicity. Among vertebrates, 
there are 667 endemic species, and 17,300 out of 30,000-odd higher plants are 
also endemic species. The panda, golden monkey, Tibetan antelope, brown-
eared pheasant, Yangtze alligator, cathay fir, dove tree, and spinulosa are all 
endemic and ancient species of China.
The primary forest of Shennongjia, Hubei, has beautiful scenery, 
pleasant climate, and many precious wild animal and plant species.

64 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
Diversifi ed Economic Species, Domesticated Species, and 
Their Wild Relatives
China is one of three original centers of cultivated plants in the world. 
 Chinese farmers have cultivated and bred diversiﬁ ed plants and animals that 
cannot be found anywhere else in the world. Rice, soybeans, millets, apples, 
pears, plums, persimmons, kiwi fruits, lichees, longans, and loquats have all 
originated from China. At the same time, there are abundant wild relatives of 
these cultivated plants, such as wild rice, wild barley, wild soybean, wild tea, 
and wild apple.
Since China’s biological diversity occupies a unique position in the world, 
its protection is crucial. Till date, China has framed its law and regulation 
system to protect biological diversity and has carried out several important 
ecological projects including returning farmlands to forests, returning grazing 
lands to grasslands, returning farmlands to lakes, protecting natural forests and 
wild life, constructing natural reserves, and issuing and implementing “China’s 
Action Plan for the Maintenance of Aquatic Life” and the “Program for the 
Protection and Management of National Biological Species Resources.” Around 
85% of natural land biological systems, 47% of natural wetlands, and 20% of 
natural forests remain. In addition, 65% of advanced plant communities and 
most national-level rare and endangered species of ﬂ ora and fauna are under 
eﬀ ective protection.
It cannot be denied that the protection of biological diversity in China 
still faces several problems and severe challenges. Th e tendency to reduce bio-
diversity is hard to change in a short span of time. Th at the habitats of some 
important species are threatened and the loss of genetic resources are hardly 
optimistic situations. According to relevant reports, about 4,000 to 5,000 
advanced plants are in danger or are being threatened in China. Th ese account 
for 15% to 20% of China’s advanced plants.
Construction of Natural Reserves, Zoos, 
and Botanical Gardens
After establishing the People’s Republic of China, the Chinese Government 
has always stressed the importance of protecting China’s biological diversity. It 
has promulgated a series of laws and regulations, established natural reserves, 
zoos, botanical gardens and artiﬁ cial propagation bases, and has participated in 
international initiatives on biological diversity protection.

 
Chapter 3 Biological Diversity 
65
The main measures for protecting species diversity include on-the-spot 
protection and out-of-spot protection.
On-the-spot protection requires building natural reserves, while  out-of-spot 
protection can be realized by establishing zoos, botanical gardens, and artiﬁ cial 
propagation bases for rare or endangered animals and plants.
The building of natural reserves is one of the most important, cost- 
eﬀ ective, and eﬀ ective measures to protect the ecology, biological diversity, and 
natural resources. At the end of 2008, China established 2,538 natural reserves 
at all levels covering a total area of 148.943 million hectares. Of these, 303 
are state-level natural reserves and cover 91.203 million hectares. As of 2009, 
China has 2,529 natural reserves. Th e state-level natural reserves constitute 319 
of these. In China, there are 28 natural reserves joining The United Nations 
 Educational, Scientiﬁ c and Cultural Organization’s (UNESCO) “international 
man and biosphere reserve network.” Among these, more than 20 reserves are 
part of the world natural heritages sites. China has a good national natural 
reserve network that is fairly complete, has a reasonable layout, and functions 
eﬀ ectively. Th is is especially true given that all the nationally protected key rare 
and endangered wild plant and animal species have been eﬀ ectively protected 
in the nature reserves.
1956    1965
1978   1982   1987   1993   2000   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008 
1
19
45
106
400
6,618.4
12,300.0
12,672.0
14,398.0
14,822.614,994.9 15,153.515,188.214,894.3
2,538
2,531
2,395
2,349
2,194
1,999
1,757
1,276
763
2,000.0
390.0
126.5
64.9
0.1
Source: National Environmental Statistics Bulletin, Ministry of Environmental Protection;
China Environmental Almanac, China Environmental Science.
The development of China’s nature reserve: quantity and area

66 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
Wolong Nature Reserve in Sichuan is famous as the “Hometown of the Giant Panda.”
The Bird Island Nature Reserve in Qinghai Lake, Qinghai Province, is a sanctuary for many 
migratory birds.

 
Chapter 3 Biological Diversity 
67
China has more than 250 wild animal rescue and breeding bases and 
 400-odd wild plant idioplasmic resource cultivation or genetic preservation 
centers. They allow more than 200 rare and endangered wild animals and 
1,000-odd wild plants to grow in stable artificial populations. In addition, 
China has also set up 14 breeding and rescue centers for rare animals such as 
The Hoh Xil Nature Reserve in Qinghai, China. The Tibetan antelope—endemic to China—can 
be found in this nature reserve.

68 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
the panda, the Hainan Eld’s deer, the Yangtze alligator, Père David’s Deer, the 
saiga, the  mustang, and the Northeast tiger.
Thanks to the wildlife protection sanctuaries such as the establishment 
of natural reserves, zoos, and botanical gardens, the habitats of endangered 
 species have been reserved and rebuilt. As a result, the population of these 
 animals is stable.
Protection of Rare and Endangered Species
Th e protection of China’s biological diversity focuses on rare and endangered 
species. In China, rare species such as the golden monkey, crested ibis, Yangtze 
alligator, gingko, Metasequoia, and silver ﬁ r are also well protected, apart from 
the world-famous panda.
Th e giant panda is a precious species. Today, the wild panda can only be 
found in the bamboo groves of 40 counties in the eastern part of the Tibetan 
Plateau, Sichuan, Gansu, and Shaanxi provinces of China. Known as a “living 
fossil,” the panda is a national treasure and a world heritage specie. Th e Chinese 
Government has greatly invested in the protection of the panda, with notable 
results. Since 1963, China has established 62 panda natural reserves, home to 
The giant panda in its nature reserve.

 
Chapter 3 Biological Diversity 
69
1,590 wild pandas at present. At the same time, studies on feeding and  breeding 
pandas have also been diversified. By 2006, China had 30 artificially bred 
 pandas—a historic high. Now, the ﬁ gure has grown to 215.
Known as the home of the panda, Baoxing County is located in the 
 transitional area between the Western Sichuan Plain and the Tibetan Plateau. 
In 1869, Jean Pierre Armand David, a French missionary and also a natural 
 historian, discovered a panda in Dengchigou of Baoxing County for the ﬁ rst 
time. Th e people of Baoxing have made great contributions to protecting the 
panda, especially in rescuing sick and hungry pandas and creating a better 
 living environment for them.
In 1983, the bamboos began to die, threatening the existence of the pandas. 
Soon thereaft er, Wang Quanan, a villager from Baoxing County, fed some sick 
and hungry pandas. One day, a hungry panda came down the mountain look-
ing for food. It found a pan of cornmeal mush in Wang’s kitchen and ate it up. 
Wang discovered this but did not scare the panda away. Gradually, the panda 
starting visiting Wang’s kitchen every night and Wang even started  preparing 
cornmeal mush and bones for the panda every night.
On the morning of March 1984, Ang Kabing, a 12-year-old Tibetan boy 
found a panda lying in a bush on his way to school. Th e boy did not disturb it 
but ran back and told Zhang Shaohua, the head of the local militias, about this. 
Based on his previous experience, Zhang guessed that the panda was probably 
hungry and asked the young boy to send some food for it. Zhang also reported 
the situation to the local government. Th e boy fed the hungry panda with corn-
bread that was prepared for his breakfast and also lit a ﬁ re to keep the panda 
warm. Under his care, the panda recovered. The next day, veterinaries and 
Tibetan militias sent the panda to a natural reserve. Th e panda rescue group of 
Baoxing County cited the young boy for his kindness.
Th ese are just a few of the many incidents of the people of Baoxing rescu-
ing the sick, hungry, and injured pandas. Most of the 119 pandas that China 
reallocated from Baoxing have recovered from sickness, hunger, and injury.
The snub-nosed golden monkey is a primate species that belongs to the 
genus Rhinopithecus in the family Cercopithecidae. Chinese golden monkeys 
are mostly distributed across Sichuan, Yunnan, and Guizhou. Merely 1,000 
of the Yunnan snub-nosed golden monkeys that inhabit the fir forest on the 
snow mountain straddling the Yunnan-Tibet border now survive. Th e Guizhou 
snub-nosed golden monkeys can only be found in their native habitat and 
currently, only 700 of these survive. Th e Sichuan snub-nosed golden monkeys 
more familiar to people are distributed in the deep mountains and forests 
in Sichuan, Shaanxi, Hubei, and Gansu. They are social animals and can be 
seen climbing and jumping between the trees. Th e three varieties of the snub-
nosed golden monkeys are all listed as state-level protected animals (Class I). 

70 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
Th e Yunnan snub-nosed golden monkey and the Guizhou snub-nosed golden 
monkey are both classified as Level-EN (Endangered) in the International 
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List. On the list, the Sichuan 
snub-nosed golden monkey is classiﬁ ed at the VU level (Vulnerable). Th erefore, 
China has established several natural reserves for each variety. For example, 
the Baimashan National Natural Reserve of Yunnan is meant for protecting 
the Yunnan snub-nosed golden monkeys and the Fanjingshan National Natu-
ral Reserve is established for the Guizhou snub-nosed golden monkeys. The 
 Zhouzhi National Natural Reserve of Shaanxi and the Shengnongjia National 
Natural Reserve of Hubei have been established for the Sichuan snub-nosed 
golden monkeys.
With the establishment of natural reserves, the increase in people’s aware-
ness of wildlife protection, and the progress of artiﬁ cial breeding, snub-nosed 
golden monkeys can be found in increasingly larger areas nowadays. Their 
population is also expanding.
Th e crested ibis is an endemic wild bird of East Asia and can currently be 
found in China, ROK, Japan, and Russia. However, in the 1960s, they could 
not be found anywhere. In the 1970s, Chinese ornithologists began to search 
for them and at last, in 1981, found seven surviving in Yaojiagou of  Yangxian 
County, Shaanxi. The discovery shocked the world. Since then, China has 
begun to protect crested ibises and conduct scientiﬁ c studies on them. Th ese 
studies have helped in the breeding of these birds. A tribute to these eﬀ orts was 
The Yunnan Snub-Nosed Golden 
Monkey, Yunnan.
The Sichuan Snub-Nosed Golden Monkey, 
Shennongjia, Hubei.

 
Chapter 3 Biological Diversity 
71
the hatching of the ﬁ rst artiﬁ cially incubated crested ibises in 1989. By 2006, 
there were more than 1,000 crested ibises in China. Th eir existence marks one 
of China’s miraculous rescues of wildlife.
The Yangtze alligator, endemic to China, is the only crocodile species that is 
distributed in temperate zones and can be traced back to ancient times. Th e  Yangtze 
alligator, which can attain the length of two meters, is a good  swimmer. It lives in 
the water and nests in dense brushwood along rivers. China has established the 
National Yangtze Alligator Natural Reserve in Anhui and the Changxing Provincial 
Yangtze Alligator Natural Reserve in Zhejiang. Since wild Yangtze alligators are very 
rarely seen, China has taken measures to protect and breed them artiﬁ cially. Th eir 
population has now grown, putting them out of the danger of extinction.
Père David’s Deer is endemic to China and can be found in wetland 
 habitats. In the 1900s, it was extinct in its native habitat. Fortunately, some 
of the deer survived in Europe and were held in captivity at Woburn Abbey 
in the United Kingdom. In 1985, 39 Père David’s Deer were introduced from 
overseas. Gradually, as their numbers grew, they were released into the wild 
under the “Reintroduction Program.” By June 12, 2006, the Jiangsu Dafeng Père 
David’s Deer Natural Reserve had 1,007 Père David’s Deer and has grown to be 
The crested ibis at Shaanxi Ningshan Crested Ibis Wildering and Letting Base.

72 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
the ﬁ rst natural reserve with more than 1,000 Père David’s Deer worldwide. Th e 
 “Reintroduction Program” demonstrates China’s achievements in protecting 
wildlife. It also shows the possibility and necessity of harmonious development 
between humans and nature. Th e Dafeng reserve started to release animals into 
the wild since 1998 and there are 118 animals living in wild now.
Th e Hainan Eld’s Deer is a state-level protected animal (Class I) and clas-
siﬁ ed at the EN level in the IUCN Red List. In China, it can only be found in 
Hainan Island. In the 1970s, the number of Hainan Eld’s Deer had dropped to 26 
and they had to be transferred to the Hainan Datian National Natural Reserve. 
With successful studies in feeding and breeding, the population of Hainan 
Eld’s deer has been gradually expanding. In 2003, the Hainan Wildlife Natural 
The Eld’s deer living in the Hainan Tropical Wildlife Park.

 
Chapter 3 Biological Diversity 
73
Reserve began to transfer Hainan Eld’s Deer to the plains and forests in Baisha, 
Tunchang, Danzhou, and Wenchang. Th is led to a clean-bred population of the 
Hainan Eld’s Deer. By 2007, 1,785 Hainan Eld’s Deer were saved from extinc-
tion. Th e Hainan Eld’s deer is recognized as one of the fastest-growing species 
amongst those that have beneﬁ ted from China’s wildlife  protection eﬀ orts.
The Northeast tiger, the largest existing feline, is distributed in Lesser 
Khingan Range (the Xiaoxing’anling forest region) and Changbai Moutain in 
Northeast China. Known as “the king of the forest,” it has a strong body and 
is very agile. Today, there are only 20 wild Northeast tigers in China. Th ey are 
listed as state-level protected animals (class I) and classiﬁ ed at the EN level in 
the IUCN Red List. China banned the hunting and killing of Northeast tigers 
in the 1950s. In 1958, Fenglin Korean Pine Natural Reserve was established in 
Heilongjiang—the home base of the Northeast tigers. In 2005, a national-level 
natural reserve was founded in the Northeast tiger habitat in Huichun, Jilin. 
Furthermore, the Northeast Tiger Artiﬁ cial Feeding and Breeding Base, which 
was founded in 1986, aims to study the feeding and breeding techniques of the 
Northeast tigers. Currently, the base has more than 620 Northeast tigers. By 
means of on-the-spot protection and artificial breeding, their numbers have 
increased and they have been saved from the brink of extinction.
Ginkgo, metasequoia, and silver ﬁ r are rare Chinese species. Th ey are consid-
ered to be national treasures and living fossils. Th ey were widely distributed in the 
northern hemisphere but the Pleistocene glaciation caused the extinction of many 
species in most regions. Only the ginkgo in the western part of China’s Zhejiang 
mountainous areas; the metasequoia in the mountain gullies of the borderland of 
Sichuan and Hubei provinces; and the silver ﬁ r in the eastern part of the Dalou 
Mountain in Guangxi and Sichuan provinces and the branch ranges of the Yuech-
eng Mountains have survived and have become very precious plant species.
Th e ginkgo is commonly known as the ginkgo nut or the maidenhair tree. 
Wild ginkgo is distributed in the subtropical monsoon region. It is not native 
only to China. However, China is the first country to cultivate, utilize, and 
study it with fruitful results. At present, China’s Nature Reserves in the Tianmu 
Mountain in Zhejiang and the Dabie Mountain and Mt. Shennongjia in Hubei 
are aimed at protecting the wild ginkgo.
In the 1940s, a surviving metasequoia found in China created a stir around 
the world. Th e Xingdoushan Nature Reserve in Hubei Province built in 1988 
aims to protect wild metasequoia communities and their environment. At pres-
ent, more than 50 countries have introduced metasequoia from China.
The silver fir is of a monotypic genus found in the 1950s in China, and 
 initially distributed in Huaping, Longsheng County; Jinfo Mountain,  Nanchuan 
County, Sichuan Province. So far, the known silver ﬁ rs are distributed in 10 coun-
ties of Guangxi, Hunan, Sichuan, and Guizhou provinces over 30  distribution 

74 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
areas. The local governments and relevant departments are very serious about 
protecting the silver ﬁ rs. At present, nature reserves have been established to pro-
tect the silver ﬁ rs in Huaping, Guangxi, and Jinfo Mountain in Sichuan.
Not all the rare and endangered species were fortunate to survive 
 extinction. The South China tiger, also known as the Chinese tiger, has been 
extinct in the wild for a long time. Th ere are only 100 animals left  in the zoos 
and breeding bases. An individual claimed to have taken photographs of the 
wild South China tiger in Shaanxi. However, these proved to be false claims. 
Siwan Lake, Jinhu County, Jiangsu Province. The metasequoia woods here 
are a sanctuary for the egrets.

 
Chapter 3 Biological Diversity 
75
People’s attention to the story signaled their concern for the tigers. Not only 
the South China tiger, but also the fate of the Chinese river dolphin, another 
 species endemic to China, is worrying people. Th ere were 300 left  in 1986 and 
only 7 left in 1998. In recent years, they have not been spotted. The Tibetan 
antelope’s fate is unfortunately the same.
Invasive Biology Control
“Biological invasion” is when a biological species is naturally or artificially 
introduced into an area where it does not belong and thus impacts the indig-
enous species. Biological invasion is one of the factors that threaten biological 
diversity. At present, China has more than 400 kinds of alien species, 100 of 
which may be quite hazardous. China has more than 50 of the world’s 100 most 
threatening invasive alien species (as classiﬁ ed by the IUCN).
Since the 21st century, the Chinese government has acquired a  better 
understanding of biological invasion and has strengthened the security 
 management of invasive species through a variety of channels such as multi-
sectoral cooperation and participation in international cooperation. In 2003, 
the State Environmental Protection Administration and the Chinese Academy 
of Sciences jointly issued the list of the First Group of Alien Invasive Species 
in China including 16 families such as the crofton weed, ragweed, smooth 
cord-grass, American white moth, and apple snail. In 2005, the Ministry of 
Agriculture formulated and promulgated the Emergency Scheme on Major 
Agricultural Pests and Invasive Biological Species. On September 6, 2005, 
China oﬃ  cially joined the Cartagena Protocol on biosafety.
The Chinese government launched a nationwide investigation of inva-
sive alien species and their control, and established alien species databases 
and monitoring systems. In 2005, the relevant departments collected data on 
more than 300 alien invasive species, established the database of Invasive Alien 
 Species in China, and drew up China’s Agricultural and Forest Invasive Alien 
Species List. In 2006, the Chinese government carried out an investigation 
on the harmful alien species in the 26 state-level nature reserves and rooted out 
the alien invasive species in an area of 1.443 million Mu. Multi-sectoral collab-
oration and signiﬁ cant progress in the control of biological invasion has helped 
China protect its bio-diversity and secure its ecology. In January 2010, the State 
Environmental Protection Administration together with the Chinese Acad-
emy of Sciences released an updated list of future biological invaders which 
included 10 plant species such as the common lantana and the giant ragweed 
and 9 animals such as the blue gum chalcid and red imported ﬁ re ant.

76 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
Spartina alterniﬂ ora Loisel, also known as smooth cordgrass, is one of 
the ﬁ rst group of blacklisted invasive plants. Smooth cord-grass is a species 
of  cordgrass that originated in southern England and is known for its saline 
alkali tolerance, submergence tolerance, and its developed root system. 
From the 1960s to the 1980s, China introduced such species from Britain, 
the United States, and other countries to withstand the wind and waves 
and protect beaches and banks. However, it brought about an ecological 
imbalance, chocking the waterways and causing the death of marine life by 
 suﬀ ocation due to intensive growth. China has more than 50 millions Mu of 
smooth cordgrass. Over the years, the Chinese have tried to eradicate this 
grass by means of sabers, digging, ﬁ re, and dicamba, but have met with little 
success.
With the support of the government, the Chinese scientists embarked 
on a study of the comprehensive integration treatment and utilization of the 
smooth cordgrass. Th e program team from the Fujian Agriculture and Foresty 
 University discovered that the best way is to cut it from beneath the soil. Aft er 
experimentation, some experts successfully extracted polysaccharide from the 
smooth cordgrass. Polysaccharide has been identiﬁ ed as a good medicine and a 
health food. Scientists have also found that smooth cord-grass serves as a bio-
fuel. According to the test results, using one acre grass to generate electricity 
can save 1 to 1.5 tons of standard coal. Once this technology is put to use, con-
trolling the smooth cordgrass is expected to become more eﬀ ective.
The First Group
The Second Group
Vegetation
Animals
Vegetation
Animal
List of alien invasive species in China

 
Chapter 3 Biological Diversity 
77
Active Participation in the Protection 
of Global Biodiversity
As human society has progressed, the protection of biological diversity has 
become a long-term, arduous task. Every country is responsible for protecting 
biological diversity and its recuperation.
The Chinese government attaches great importance to international 
 cooperation and coordination in the protection of bio-diversity. In 1993, it joined 
the Convention on Biological Diversity and formulated the Action Plan for Bio-
diversity Conservation in China, establishing a coordination team that comprised 
24 related departments to follow the Convention. It took active part in the Con-
vention meetings (9 such meetings) and played an important role in the negotia-
tion process. Th is helped on the biological diversity protection front. Currently, 
China has 22 member units enforcing the Convention on Biological Diversity.
In 2004, the Chinese government organized and prepared the National Bio-
logical Conservation and Use plan. In 2006, China launched the China Biodi-
versity Partnership Framework and China-EU biodiversity projects. On May 22, 
the International Day for Biological Diversity, China carried out a variety of 
publicity and educational activities to raise the awareness on  environmental 
Smooth cordgrass beseiging the mangroves, Fu’an City, Fujian Province.

78 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
The Sino-European Biodiversity Protection Cooperation Project signing ceremony, Beijing, 
November 7, 2005.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
An international convention focusing on protecting the biological 
resources on the earth was adopted during the Seventh Meeting 
of the Inter-governmental Negotiation Committee sponsored by 
the United Nations Environment Program on June 1, 1992, and was 
signed by the signatory countries at the United Nations Conference 
on Environment and Development held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, on 
June 5, 1992. Taking effect formally on December 29, 1993, this 
legally binding convention aims at protecting the endangered plants 
and animals in order to maximize protection for the various biological 
resources on the earth and benefi t the current and future genera-
tions. At present, this convention has 189 signatory countries and is 
the environmental convention with the most signatory countries in 
the world. China joined this convention on January 5, 1993.
CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY

 
Chapter 3 Biological Diversity 
79
protection and conservation of biological diversity. Th e  biodiversity  information 
network and monitoring system has been built with continuous focus. Th e rel-
evant policy and law framework has been expanded and  biodiversity protection 
has been promoted and China’s inﬂ uence has increased.
In 2010, which is defined as the year of biological diversity by the UN, 
China has and will continue to modify and release the Strategy and Action Plan 
for Biological Diversity Protection; try to coordinate the relationship between 
social economic development and biological diversity; strengthen the com-
munication and collaboration between all units of the coordination team; and 
encourage public participation and international cooperation in order to realize 
the aims put forward by the Convention on Biological Diversity, which include 
protection of diversity, sustainable usage of the environment, and  sharing the 
mutual beneﬁ ts equally.


81
Air pollution was the ﬁ rst environmental problem to be recognized by China. 
Aft er nearly 40 years of development, China has deepened its understanding 
of this problem. Energy-saving and emission-reduction have been important 
tasks on the 11th Five Year Plan agenda. Reduction in energy consumption and 
the total emissions of major pollutants has become a signiﬁ cant and binding 
metric upon which the development and progress of a harmonious socialist 
society can be built. Such a choice is inevitable for a society that prizes energy-
efficiency and environmental sustainability and is the only way that human-
ity can move forward. In recent years, the Chinese government put forth the 
implementation of a comprehensive scheme for energy-saving and emission-
reduction, and issued national proposals to deal with climate change. These 
policies have enabled China to consistently strengthen its control and man-
agement of pollution and achieve remarkable results in energy-saving and 
 emission-reduction.
All the targets of the 10th Five Year Environmental Protection Plan have 
not been met though. Up to 2005, the emissions of sulfur dioxide increased 
by 27.8% as compared with those in 2000, and chemical oxygen demand only 
reduced by 2.1%, which is far less than the target of 10%. In 2007, China for-
mulated the 11th Five Year National Environmental Protection Plan, placing 
the prevention and control of pollution as the most important target and the 
reduction of chemical oxygen demand (COD) and sulfur dioxide (SO2) as 
binding targets. In other words, the government needs to ensure the realization 
of the targets by reasonably deploying public resources and making eﬀ ective 
use of its administrative powers in order to ensure that by 2010, the emission 
4
Chapter 4
Control and Treatment 
of Pollution

82 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
 volumes of these two pollutants will decrease by 10% as compared with those 
in 2005.
In 2007, in order to the strengthen environmental supervision and manage-
ment, and improve scientiﬁ c decision-making and emission reduction, during 
the 11th Five Year Plan, China decided to start the ﬁ rst general investigation on 
pollution sources so as to ascertain the absolute value of countrywide pollu-
tion emissions. China’s environmental protection measures have entered into a 
new phase. In the ﬁ rst four years of the 11th Five Year Plan, China made great 
strides in pollution governance and emission reduction.
Air Pollution Control and Treatment
China’s 11th Five Year Plan requires that by 2010, the levels of COD and SO2 
are reduced by 10% as compared with those in 2005. This implies that the 
COD will be reduced from 14.142 million tons (2005) to 12.728 million tons 
and SO2 emissions will decrease from 25.494 million tons to 22.944 million 
tons (2005).
Through the implementation of desulphurization units in electric power 
plants and the construction of urban sewage disposal plants, the total emission 
10,000 tons
Total emission 
volume of SO2
Total emission 
volume of COD
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
Source: National Environmental Statistics Bulletin, Ministry of Environmental Protection.
Total emission volume of SO2 & COD in China from 2004 to 2008

 
Chapter 4 Control and Treatment of Pollution 
83
of SO2 and COD in China were both reduced for the ﬁ rst time in 2007. Th ese 
two indexes declined in 2008 as well, and SO2 emissions stood at 23.212 mil-
lion tons, reduced by 5.95% as compared with 2007 and by 8.95% as compared 
with 2005. This also meant that in general, the air quality in cities was good 
and improved. However, it cannot be denied that the pollution in some cities of 
China is still very serious and the problem of acid rain is quite severe.
A total of 519 cities in China reported the air quality during 2008, includ-
ing 21 Class I standard cities (accounting for 4.0%); 378 Class II standard cit-
ies (72.8%); 113 Class III standard cities (21.8%); and only 7 cities lower than 
Class III standard (1.4%). Th e air quality in 113 key cities improved, and the 
concentration of SO2 and inhalable particulate matter was reduced to some 
extent. In addition to the reduction in SO2 emissions, the discharge of smoke 
dust and industrial dust stood at 9.016 million tons and 5.849 tons, respectively. 
This implied a reduction of 8.6% and 16.3%, respectively, as compared with 
2007. Th e overall reduction in major emissions indicates that China has made 
signiﬁ cant progress in air pollution control and abatement.
Of the 477 cities (counties) monitored by the environmental authorities, 
252 cities, which accounted for 52.8%, witnessed acid rain; 164 cities with 
Visitors looking at the model of a desulfuration and dedusting device set at the ﬁ rst energy- 
saving technologies and products professional market that was opened in Hangzhou in 
December 2006.

84 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
the frequency of acid rain above 25% stood at 34.4%; and 55 cities with the 
frequency of acid rain above 75% made up 11.5%. Cities with acid rain were 
mainly concentrated in areas to the south of the Yangtze River and the east of 
Sichuan and Yunnan, including most areas in Zhejiang, Fujian, Jiangxi, Hunan, 
and Chongqing as well as areas in the Yangtze River Delta and the Pearl River 
Delta.
Research indicates that, the exploration, transportation, and utilization of 
coal greatly pollutes the air. Coal has become the largest source of air pollution 
in China. Th e spontaneous combustion of coal is responsible for 70% of smoke 
dust discharge, 85% of SO2 emissions, 67% of nitrogen oxide, and 80% of CO2. 
Nitrogen oxide and SO2 also cause acid rain. Th erefore, strengthening controls 
on coal exploration and combustion is the principal means of controlling air 
pollution and abatement. Engineering emission reductions, structural emission 
reductions, and supervising emission reductions are mainly applied in China to 
reduce the emission of air pollutants such as SO2.
In 2008, China’s new coal-burning desulphurization capacity was 
97.12  million KW, the installed capacity of desulphurization units reached 
363 million KW, and the proportion of thermal power generating units 
equipped with desulphurization devices to total thermal power generating 
units increased from 48% (in 2007) to 60%. In addition, a batch of steel sinter-
ing machine ﬂ ue gas desulphurization facilities was newly built. During 2008, 
more than 1,100 heavily-polluting paper enterprises were eliminated and their 
operations were suspended for consolidation; 16.69 million KW Small thermal 
power units were closed; and old-school production facilities in steel, non fer-
rous, cement, carbon coke, chemical industry, printing and dyeing, and alcohol 
were rendered obsolete in China. By strengthening statistics and monitoring 
emissions reduction and improving law enforcement and regulation, the emis-
sion standards of enterprises were increasing steadily, and the overall desulphu-
rization eﬃ  ciency of coal burning desulphurization units improved from 73.2% 
(in 2007) to 78.7%.
In 2008, China issued the appraisal results of total emission reduction of 
major pollutants in provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities directly 
under the central government and five big electric power groups. Further, it 
issued the emissions index communiqué of major pollutants in provinces, 
autonomous regions, and municipalities directly under the central government 
that made decisions such as construction suspension, environmental impact 
evaluation, rectification and change in due course, or economic punishment 
for areas and enterprises with serious environment problems. Meanwhile, local 
governments at various levels also further changed course to actively reduce 
emissions. They took multiple accountability measures to strongly push the 
development of the reduction in pollution emissions. For example, the city 

 
Chapter 4 Control and Treatment of Pollution 
85
(county) principals unable to attain annual targets would be discharged in 
some areas, while for counties and districts that did not try their best to reduce 
emissions, the approval of new projects would be halted. Some provinces 
and cities were provided with financial subsidies to support enterprises that 
 eliminated obsolete production facilities. Some areas encouraged enterprises by 
incentivizing pollution reduction.
In order to control vehicle emission pollution, China has oﬃ  cially imple-
mented Limits and Measurement Methods for Emissions from Light-duty Vehi-
cles (III, IV) (GB18352.3-2005) (“national standard III” for short) since July 1, 
2008. Beijing has enforced the national standard IV (equal to the European 
standard IV) in two stages since March 1, 2008. Th is also improves air quality.
In the first half of 2009, the emission of major pollutants in China was still 
decreasing (SO2 emissions were 11.478 million tons, reduced by 5.40% as compared 
with 2008) with air pollution control and treatment maintaining a good trend.
At present, China is the second-largest emitter of greenhouse gases aft er the 
United States; therefore, China faces great pressure from the international com-
munity to reduce its emissions. However, the greenhouse gas emission of China is 
The technicians of Guangdong power enterprises visiting the generator unit desulfuration 
device in Zhenjiang City in October 2007.

86 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
historically low with the per capita emissions always being lower than the world 
average. Th is is 87% of the world average level or 33% that of the OECD countries. 
With regard to the emissions per capita, the historical accumulated emissions, or 
historical accumulated emissions per capita, China emits signiﬁ cantly below the 
developed countries and does not need to bear the burden of emissions reduction 
alone. However, as a responsible, developing country and given the considerations 
of energy security and the threat of  climate changes, with a national perspective 
in mind, China has proceeded to take a series of policies and measures that have 
helped and will help make  positive contributions to the reduction in greenhouse 
gas emissions and the slowing down of climate change.
Th e Chinese government has made great eﬀ orts to readjust the country’s 
industrial structure and reduce energy consumption. Between 1991 and 2005, 
China reduced the annual average growth rate of energy consumption to 
5.6%, with the national economy growing at an average rate of 10.2% annu-
ally. Decreasing energy consumption reduces emissions. Burning one ton of 
coal produces 40 kg of carbon dioxide, 9 kg of nitrogen dioxide, and 100 kg 
of ash. Between 1991 and 2005, China saved around 800 million tons of coal 
equivalent on a quarter-to-quarter basis in 15 years by economic restructuring 
and  upgrading energy eﬃ  ciency. On the basis of 1994, when each ton of coal 
Vehicles on the streets of Beijing.

 
Chapter 4 Control and Treatment of Pollution 
87
equivalent  produced 2,277 tons of carbon dioxide, saving 800 million tons of 
coal  equivalent reduces 1.8 billion tons of carbon dioxide emissions.
While reducing carbon dioxide emissions, the Chinese government has 
 vigorously carried out forest planting programs to enhance the sustainability of the 
environment. In 2008, the green coverage ratio in urban areas reached 35.11% and 
the per capita public greenbelt area hit 8.6 sq m. Green spaces play a special role 
in absorbing carbon dioxide in the air. According to estimates, between 1980 and 
2005, China’s aﬀ orestation activities absorbed around 3.06 billion tons of  carbon 
dioxide, and forest management activities absorbed 1.62 billion tons of carbon 
dioxide and reduced 430 million tons of carbon dioxide from deforestation.
Control and Treatment of Water Pollution
China has always attached importance to the control and treatment of water 
pollution, especially the safety of drinking water. In 2009, the Ministry of 
Environmental Protection, National Development and Reform Commission, 
 Ministry of Supervision, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Housing and Urban-
Rural Development and Ministry of Water Resources jointly ﬁ nished evaluating 
Workers ﬁ shing out the aquatic weeds and garbage from Dianchi Lake, Yunnan, November 
2009.

88 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
water pollution prevention and treatment of 2008 in 21 provinces, autonomous 
regions, and municipalities across the key drainage areas including the Haihe 
River, the Liaohe River, the three gorges reservoir area and its upper reaches, 
the middle and upper reaches of the Yellow River, Chaohu Lake, Dianchi Lake, 
and Taihu Lake. Th e evaluation indicated that the water pollution prevention 
and treatment work of key drainage areas in 2008 was progressing well. The 
water quality of 70% of the sections attained the required standard when moni-
tored, and 40% of the planned pollution treatment projects were completed. 
However, the pollution treatment situation was still very severe and the task of 
improving water quality was still very diﬃ  cult.
Since China’s 11th Five Year Plan, the local governments in the key drain-
age areas, such as the Haihe River, have become more organized and have 
led the prevention of water pollution and treatment, reduced the principal 
water pollutants, improved environmental quality, and rapidly constructed 
water treatment projects. By the end of 2008, among the 115 evaluation sec-
tions determined in the 11th Five Year Plan, 80 regions attained the required 
standard in terms of water quality, accounting for 69.6% of the total number. 
Among the 1,834 water pollution treatment projects listed in the 11th Five Year 
Plan, 773 projects were completed accounting for 42.1% of the total  number, 
An ecological polluted water treatment plant located in Jiaoxie Town, Haian County, Jiangsu 
Province.

 
Chapter 4 Control and Treatment of Pollution 
89
and 500 projects were in progress, which accounted for 27.3% of the total 
 number. Among all the projects, the projects in the Haihe River drainage area 
made quicker progress, and those in the Three Gorges reservoir area and its 
upper reaches made slower progress.
In 2008, the total national chemical oxygen demand emission volume related 
to water pollution control and treatment was approximately 13.207  million tons, 
reduced by 4.42% as compared with the previous year and 6.61% as compared 
with 2005. In the ﬁ rst half of 2009, the total national chemical oxygen demand 
emission volume was 6.576 million tons, reduced by 2.46% than in the same 
period in 2008. Although there are still many problems (for instance, the opera-
tional eﬃ  ciency of urban polluted water treatment facilities is low and ammonia 
nitrogen [total nitrogen] pollution is a serious issue), we can still say that China’s 
water pollution prevention and treatment work is becoming more serious.
In 2007, the whole country increased its urban water treatment capacity 
to about 7 million tons/day, which included the approximately 4 million tons/
day capacity that was acquired through the improvement of the pipe network 
facilities. Over 1,400 key enterprises reduced their pollutant  emissions by 
adopting superior treatment measures and the task of eliminating the  lagging 
 productivity of the paper-making, brewery, and saponin industries made 
substantial progress. In 2008, the whole country increased its urban water 
treatment capacity to 11.49 million tons/day, established a batch of complex 
treatment projects of waste water, and continued reducing the number of obso-
lete units. By the end of 2009, the daily treatment capacity of China’s urban 
water treatment plants reached 86.64 million cubic meters, an increase of 6.9% 
as compared to the previous year. Th e treatment rate of urban water reached 
72.3%, an increase of 2.1% and the central heating area reached 3.56 billion 
square meters, an increase of 2.0%. All these factors jointly promoted the 
reduction of China’s chemical oxygen demand emission volumes.
With the development of the first national general survey of pollution 
sources, people realized that the chemical oxygen demand emission volumes 
from agricultural pollutants (such as fertilizers, farm insecticides, and straw) 
may exceed those of the industrial pollution sources, causing serious pollution to 
water bodies. Th is has aroused the attention of the environmental departments.
Control and Treatment of Other Pollutants
As compared with the 1970s and the 1980s, Chinese citizens today possess a 
more comprehensive and deeper understanding of the environment and have 
begun to pay attention to other pollutants such as noise, light, and radiation.

90 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
In accordance with the information released by the Ministry of 
 Environmental Protection, in 2008, the sound pollution was low, being rated 
as good or fairly good in 71.7% of the urban areas in the country, or in 75.2% 
of the key cities. Sound pollution due to road traﬃ  c was good in 65.3% of the 
 cities, and was good or fairly good in the key cities. In various functional areas 
of the city, the day time standard limit attained was 86.4% and the night stan-
dard limit attained was 74.7%.
Among 392 cities under environmental noise monitoring, the number of 
cities having low sound pollution accounted for 7.2%, those having fairly good 
sound accounted for 64.5%, those having light sound pollution accounted for 
27.3%, and those with mid-level sound pollution accounted for 1.0%. As com-
pared with the previous year, the number of cities having low sound pollution 
increased by 1.2%, those having fairly low sound pollution decreased by 1.7%, 
those with light sound pollution increased by 0.9%, and the number of cities 
with mid-level sound pollution decreased by 0.4%.
Among the 384 cities under road traﬃ  c noise monitoring, the urban road 
sound pollution due to traﬃ  c was low in 65.3% cities and fairly low in 27.1% 
cities. Th ere was light pollution in 4.2% cities, mid-level pollution in 2.9%  cities, 
and heavy pollution in 0.5% cities. As compared with the previous year, the 
number of cities with low road traﬃ  c sound pollution increased by 6.7%, those 
with fairly low sound pollution decreased by 6.7%, those with light sound 
 pollution decreased by 1.5%, those having mid-level sound  pollution increased 
by 1.8%, and those with the heavy sound pollution decreased by 0.3%.
Th is year, China newly revised the Standards of Sound Environment Qual-
ity (GB 3096–2008) and Emission Standards for Industrial Enterprises Noise 
at the Boundary (GB 12348–2008). Th e newly formulated Emission Standards 
for Social Living Environment Noise (GB 22337–2008) were implemented on 
October 1, 2008. In accordance with these new standards, China has expanded 
the scope of sound environment quality standards from urban to the rural 
areas and is regulating, for the ﬁ rst time, the limiting values, monitoring, and 
evaluation methods of low frequencies noises.
In 2008, environmental radiation in China was generally low. The envi-
ronmental ionizing radiation level has been kept stable, and areas surround-
ing nuclear facilities and equipment have low levels of ionizing radiation. Th e 
environmental electromagnetic radiation level was generally good; however, 
the partial environmental comprehensive electrical ﬁ eld strength of some high-
power emission facilities such as TV (frequency modulation) emission tow-
ers, and medium wave broadcasting emission station exceeded the national 
standard. In order to strengthen the monitoring of radiation pollution, on the 
basis of the ﬁ rst batch of national monitoring points of the national  radiation 
 environmental monitoring net, China established 11  automatic radiation 

 
Chapter 4 Control and Treatment of Pollution 
91
 stations in key cities, 10 land radiation monitoring points, 38  water-body 
 monitoring points, and also newly established nuclear environment safety 
warning monitoring points around 4 important nuclear and radiation  facilities. 
China established 43 electromagnetic environment quality  monitoring points 
The law enforcement ofﬁ cials of Shandong Wudi County Environmental Protection Bureau 
conducting noise monitoring at a construction site on June 3, 2008.

92 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
for the first time, and also established 41 electromagnetic  monitoring points 
around 41 key electromagnetic radiation facilities. In addition, China also 
strengthened the construction of the emergency monitoring system for nuclear 
and radiation emergencies.
The following figures need to be paid attention to. In 2008, the produc-
tion of national industrial solid waste was 1,901.27 million tons, an increase 
of 8.3% over the previous year. Th e emission of national industrial solid waste 
was 7.82 million tons, a decrease of 34.7% over the previous year. The com-
prehensively used volume (including the use of storage volume in the past 
years), the storage volume, and the disposal volume were 1,234.82 million tons, 
218.83  million tons, and 482.91 million tons, respectively, accounting for 64.9%, 
11.5%, and 25.4% of the production volume, respectively. The production 
volume of hazardous wastes was 13.57 million tons, and its comprehensively 
used volume (including the use of storage volume in the past years), the stor-
age volume, and disposal volume were 8.19 million tons, 1.96 million tons, and 
3.89 million tons, respectively.
Energy Saving, Consumption Reduction, and 
Renewable Energy Resources
In recent years, China made progress in energy saving and consumption reduc-
tion. As compared to 2.68 tons of coal equivalent in 1990, the energy consump-
tion for every RMB 10,000 of China’s GDP stood at 1.26 tons of coal equivalent 
in 2006, down by 1.33% from 2005. It is the ﬁ rst decrease of per unit energy con-
sumption of China’s GDP since 2003. Th e per unit energy consumption in China’s 
GDP decreased by 2.78% on a year-on-year basis in the ﬁ rst half of the year 2007. 
It decreased in the successive four quarters. In 2008, the energy consumption per 
RMB 10,000 of GDP decreased by 4.59% as compared with the previous year.
Th e decrease of per unit energy consumption in China’s GDP is due to the 
increase in industrial energy eﬃ  ciency.
In the ﬁ rst half of the year 2007, among the 35 kinds of major products, 
31 kinds of products experienced a decrease in comprehensive energy con-
sumption. The energy saved reached 21.45 million tons of coal equivalent. 
The comprehensive energy consumption of 17 products from seven high 
energy-consuming industries (power, steel, nonferrous metals, petrochemicals, 
 chemicals, building materials, and paper) decreased to diﬀ erent degrees and the 
energy saved reached 19 million tons of coal equivalent.
As for energy conservation, depending solely on the active promotion and 
guidance of governments and implementing extensive industrial and  mining 

 
Chapter 4 Control and Treatment of Pollution 
93
Tons of standard coal per 10,000 RMB GDP
Source: Bulletin for Unit GDP Energy Consumption and Targets of Each Province,
Autonomous Region and Municipality in 2007 and 2008 issued by National Bureau
of Statistics, National Development and Reform Commission, and National Energy
Bureau jointly.
Total energy consump ion
Year-on-year growth
100 million tons of standard coal
Source: National Annual Statistics Bulletin issued by National Bureau of Statistics 
over the years.
National unit GDP energy consumption from 2005 to 2008
The total energy consumption volume of China from 2003 to 2009

94 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
enterprises are not enough. It also needs the support and participation of the 
 society as a whole, especially the urban and rural residents. In order to carry 
out the General Work Plan for Energy Saving and Emission Reduction and 
further enhance society’s awareness of energy conservation and environmental 
protection, China organized the development of “Energy Saving and Emission 
Reduction, Common Action” for the entire country in 2007.
In order to promote further energy saving and emissions reduction and 
foster the coordination between environmental protection and economic 
development, the use of new and renewable green energies is a good choice. In 
recent years, China has made rapid development in using wind energy, solar 
energy, and biomass energy.
The wind power connected grid was developed during the 1980s. Wind 
power developed rapidly and the installed capacity of wind power increased 
from 350,000 kW to 2.60 million kW between 2000 and 2006, increasing at an 
annual rate of more than 30%. China’s installed wind power capacity ranked 
tenth worldwide in 2004 and rose to sixth by the end of 2006.
In general, the development of China’s wind power connected grid can be 
divided into three stages: the demonstration stage (1986–1992), characterized by 
small demonstration wind plants built mainly on overseas donations and loans; 
the industrial construction stage (1994–2003), during which the grid authorities 
allowed wind power plants to go live and purchase electricity in accordance with 
national regulations issued in 1994; the scale-up and home-made stage (2003–
present), during which the National Development and Reform Commission has 
promoted wind power projects, improving the manufacturing capacity of home-
made equipment and reducing electricity prices. Th e ﬁ rst oﬀ shore wind power 
station independently designed, developed and manufactured by China National 
Oﬀ shore Oil Corporation was put into operation in November 2007, marking a 
substantial breakthrough made by China in the oﬀ shore wind power industry. 
Th is power station is located in the 36-1 oil ﬁ eld, which is 70 km oﬀ shore and 
30 m deep in water. Th e power capacity is 4.4 million kwhs. Diesel consumption 
will reduce by 1,100 tons annually. Moreover, the emissions of carbon dioxide 
and sulfur dioxide will decrease by 3,500 and 11 tons per year, respectively.
In the past two years, China’s wind power industry has developed rapidly. Up 
to the end of 2008, there were 11,869 wind turbine generators and the installed 
capacity was about 12.21 million kwhs— exceeding the target of 10 million 
kwhs in 2010 in the original plan. In 2008, China was second only to the United 
States, ranking No. 2 in the world. At present, China’s wind power generators are 
distributed in 24 provinces (municipalities and autonomous regions). Th e prov-
inces (municipalities and autonomous regions) whose installed capacity exceeds 
1 million kwhs include Inner Mongolia, Liaoning Province, Hebei Province, and 
Jilin Province. In accordance with an article in the US Fortune magazine, China 

 
Chapter 4 Control and Treatment of Pollution 
95
Dongfang Wind Farm, Hainan.

96 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
has begun to take the lead in green energy and green technology becoming the 
largest producer of wind power generators in the world in 2009.
Solar energy can be used for power generation by means of solar energy 
photovoltaic (PV) generation, solar thermionic power generation, solar water 
heaters, and solar houses. Th e application of PV generation started in the 1970s 
and developed rapidly in the 1980s. Between 1983 and 1987, China brought in 
seven solar battery production lines from the United States, Canada, and other 
countries, which increased China’s production capacity of solar power sharply 
from 200 kW in 1984 to 4.5 MW in 1988.
In terms of scale, China’s solar energy industry ranks ﬁ rst in the world. China 
has become a major producer of PV batteries. It also possesses the integrated 
equipment in solar battery production, a key link of solar energy use. According 
to the latest statistics by China’s Solar Energy Industry Association, at the end 
of 2007, the production volume of China’s solar energy had reached 23 million 
square meters, and the total stock volume had reached 108  million square meters, 
which is 76% of the world’s production. China has become the largest country 
to produce and use solar energy water heaters with highly advanced technology 
and intellectual property at its disposal. Moreover, the development potential 
of China’s solar energy photovoltaic power generation is huge. By 2030, China’s 
 photovoltaic installed capacity will reach 100 million kwhs, and the annual 
 electricity generation volume will reach 130 billion kwhs, equal to the electricity 
volume generated by more than 30 large coal power plants.
China is rich in biomass resources. The theoretical volume of biomass 
resources is about 5 billion tons. In accordance with the need for economic and 
social development and the technical level attained in using biomass for energy 
in China, China will emphasize the development of biomass electricity genera-
tion, biogas, biomass solid molding gas, and biological liquid fuel.
In recent years, China has made substantial progress in the ﬁ eld of  biomass 
energy usage, especially biogas technology whose annual production has 
reached 1.15 million tons of oil equivalent accounting for 0.24% of the energy 
consumed in rural area. Th e energy saved annually by the ﬁ rewood saving oven 
kang has reached 0.525 million tons of oil equivalent. Th anks to these eﬀ orts, 
the country can increase its investments and subsidies. Biogas projects for 
households and livestock farms in rural areas have made rapid progress. Up to 
the end of 2008, the total number of household biogas pools in rural areas of 
the country was 30.50 million and the number of various livestock/farm biogas 
projects was about 35,000, including more than 2,000 large and medium live-
stock/farm  biogas projects. Th e annual production volume of biogas in rural 
areas was about 12 billion cubic meters, which equaled to 18.5 million tons of 
standard coal and was able to bring income of RMB 15 billion to the peasant 
households.

 
Chapter 4 Control and Treatment of Pollution 
97
Biogas digesters manufactured by Chinese enterprises.
Workers maintaining the crystal silicon roof at a large solar energy photovoltaic power ﬁ eld in 
Wuhan, Hubei, January 2010.

98 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
In July 2007, CLP established the first biomass energy power generation 
project—CLP Huanyu (Shandong) Biomass Heat and Power Company in 
 Boxing, Binzhou, Shandong, China. The project is an environment-friendly 
project. Using local cotton straw as its main material, the project produces 
environmental-friendly power using a highly efficient clean straw combus-
tion technology. Th e installed capacity of the project is 18 MW, and the annual 
power capacity is 120 million kwhs. If put into operation, the project can not 
only change waste into a valuable resource but also increase farmers’ incomes 
by more than RMB 60 million annually.
By 2010, China’s installed capacity of biomass power generation will hit 
5.5 million KW. The annual availability of biomass fuels and biogas will hit 
1 million tons and 19 million cu m, respectively. The annual availability of 
ethanol made from non-grain material and biodiesel will hit 2 million tons and 
200 thousand tons, respectively. By 2020, the said ﬁ gures will reach 30 million kwhs 
for biomass power generation; 50 million tons for biomass fuels, 44  billion 
cu m for biomass gas, and 10 million tons and 2 million tons for ethanol made 
from non-grain material and biodiesel, respectively.



101
China is rapidly urbanizing; however, it is still a large agrarian society with a 
vast rural area and populace. Both environmental protection and economic 
development of China cannot be achieved without the two large artificial 
 ecological systems of the rural area and urban area. As China begins its urban-
rural integration, the environmental and development problems of these two 
systems become increasingly interlinked.
The Farmland Ecosystem and Prevention 
and Treatment of Soil Pollution 
As an important artificial ecosystem, the farmlands (122 million hectares at 
present, 12.7% of the national territorial area) form the core. Chinese farm-
lands can be divided into two types: paddy ﬁ elds and dry land. Th ese account 
for 26.3% and 73.7% of the total farmland area of the country, respectively. Th e 
paddy ﬁ eld mainly grows rice, and the dry land mainly grows wheat, maize, soy 
bean, cotton, and other crops.
Th e per capita volume of China’s farmlands is small, less than one-third of 
the world average level. Th e utilization intensity and multi-cropping index is 
high though. In the past 10 years, the arable land resources have been decreas-
ing because of rapid industrialization and urbanization. Th e Central Commit-
tee of the CPC and the State Council have decided that the total arable land 
5
Chapter 5
Rural and Urban 
Environment

102 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
shall not be less than 120 million hectares and to this eﬀ ect, have implemented 
the most rigid land management system.
The Northeast Plain, the North China Plain, the Middle-Lower Yangtze 
River Plain, the Pearl River Delta, and Sichuan Basin have been targeted as 
areas of concentrated arable land. The Northeast Plain, covering more than 
35 million hectares, is the largest plain in China, which with fertile black soil, 
abounds in wheat, corn, soybean, broomcorn, ﬂ ax, and sugar beet. Th e North 
China Plain is mostly deep layered brown soil. Th e crops include wheat, corn, 
millet, and cotton. Featuring lower and even terrain and dotted with rivers and 
lakes, the Middle-Lower Yangtze River Plain is a key area for rice and fresh 
water ﬁ sh and is dubbed “the land of ﬁ sh and rice.” It also is rich in tea and silk-
worms. Crowned as the “land of abundance,’’ the Sichuan Basin, with mostly 
purple soil, enjoys warm and humid climate that can support all-year round 
crop growth. The basin abounds in rice, rapeseed, and sugarcane. The Pearl 
River Delta is rich in rice and can support two to three harvests a year.
Th ere are many mountains in China, which rely heavily on agriculture and 
support a large population. China is the ﬁ rst country in the world, to develop 
terraced farming. Th e terraced farmlands can be seen mainly in dry and semi-
dry areas on the Loess Plateau in northwest China, hills in eastern China, 
and large areas in southwest China. Chinese terraced farming techniques are 
advanced. China’s terraced farms can control soil erosion, promote optimum 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
Environmental pollution is divided into point source pollution and 
surface source pollution. Point source pollution refers to a pollution 
source with a fi xed emission point. Surface source pollution does not 
have fi xed emission points, and so it is also called non-point source 
pollution, referring to the pollutant infl ux to the recipient water from 
non-specifi c places through the channels of rainfall, snow melting, and 
irrigation, causing organic pollution, eutrophication of water, or other 
forms of toxic and harmful pollution. In accordance with the char-
acteristics of occurrence area and course, surface source pollution 
can be divided into urban surface source pollution and rural surface 
source pollution, of which the rural surface source pollution is the 
chief component.
SURFACE SOURCE POLLUTION

 
Chapter 5 Rural and Urban Environment 
103
land utilization, adjust the distribution of rain water resources, relieve water 
crisis, and increase output.
Widespread terraced plantations in China have turned lands that lost 
water, soil, and fertilizer into lands that preserved them, reduced ﬂ ood runoﬀ  
and sediments at lower reaches, brought social, economic, and ecological ben-
eﬁ ts, and have become a basic platform for agriculture and sustainable social 
and economic development in rural areas. Terrace cultivation is widespread 
in Gansu Province. By the end of 2005, the total area of terraced farms in the 
province was 1,864,600 hectares and an area of 77,500 sq km was saved from 
soil erosion. The proportion of land eroded by water is 57.35%. The slope 
Terraces reclaimed by the people of the Hani Ethnic Group, Yunyang County, Yunnan 
Province.

104 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
 treatment project with terraced farmlands as the key has made a lot possible, 
building a platform for the development of the regional economy.
Currently, the environmental problems in China’s rural areas are rather 
severe, mainly manifesting themselves in the following manner: the non-point 
source pollution is becoming more serious; industrial and mineral pollution is 
becoming quite noticeable; drinking water has hidden dangers; and pollution 
has transfered from urban to rural areas.
Soil is an indispensable and non-renewable resource in production. Toxic 
and harmful chemicals in the soil can surreptitiously endanger the survival and 
safety of human beings and animals via transmission through the air and water 
bodies. China attaches much importance to the prevention and control of soil 
pollution and views it as critical to nation building and a crucial task in envi-
ronmental protection.
In 2004, Hu Jintao, Secretary General of the Central Committee of the CPC, 
clearly required “putting the prevention and treatment of soil pollution on a prior-
ity agenda” in the CPC Central Committee Conference on Population, Resources, 
and Environment. In 2006, Wenjiabao, Premier of the State Council, stressed 
“actively developing the prevention and treatment of soil pollution” in the 6th 
National Environmental Protection Conference. The NPC Environmental and 
Resources Protection Committee has listed the formulation of the Law on the Pre-
vention and Control of Soil Pollution on the State agenda. Th e original State Envi-
ronmental Protection General Bureau has developed a series of control standards 
and technical specifications, including the Soil Environment Quality Standards 
and the Soil Environment Monitoring and Measurement Technical Speciﬁ cations.
From 2001 onward, the original State Bureau of Environmental Protec-
tion, the Ministry of Agriculture, and the Ministry of State Land and Resources 
organized a series of soil surveys. In August 2005, the State Bureau of Envi-
ronmental Protection and the Ministry of State Land and Resources started 
the national soil current status survey and pollution prevention and treatment 
special work. In 2007, the country developed the ﬁ rst general survey of pollu-
tion sources, and agriculture was found to be an important source. On January 
8, 2008, the original State Bureau of Environmental Protection held the first 
National Soil Pollution Prevention and Treatment Workshop in Beijing. On 
June 6, the State Bureau of Environmental Protection issued the Opinions on 
Strengthening the Work for Preventing and Treating Soil Pollution, clarifying 
the guiding thoughts, basic principles, and chief targets of soil pollution pre-
vention and treatment. By the end of 2008, 31 provinces (municipalities and 
autonomous regions) of the country collected 78,940 samples of soil and agri-
cultural products; ﬁ nished 78,852 analyses and tests of samples; acquired nearly 
3 million valid survey data records; and produced 8,575 maps. Th is promoted 
the environmental protection movement in the rural areas.

 
Chapter 5 Rural and Urban Environment 
105
A New Agricultural Technique
In the early 1990s, Chinese agricultural experts began to study the conserva-
tion tillage method. As compared with traditional farming, this new method 
requires keeping the crop roots intact. Th is reduces the farming workload to 
the extent that is required to guarantee seed germination, doing away with 
unnecessary crop operation procedures, carrying out reasonable shift  farming, 
and lowering fertilizer use. Th is tillage method helps improve the soil structure; 
reduces erosion by water and wind; prevents loss of nutrients; protects the soil; 
reduces water evaporation and runoff; increases water accumulation in soil; 
preserves the water, soil, and fertilizer; and creates a favorable environment 
A power plant in Zoucheng, Shandong Province. Because it uses the ﬂ ue gas desulfurization 
device, the vegetable plantations around the power plant are not affected.

106 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
for crop growth. At the same time, the agricultural labor force, machinery, and 
energy can be reduced to promote labor productivity and realize high output, 
high efficiency, low energy consumption, and sustainable development. The 
dust emission in farmlands reduced by more than 30%; the water content in 
the soil increased by 10–15%; and crop output increased by 10–15%.
In recent years, with continuous research and development in agricultural 
machinery, such as the tillage-free seeder, the mode of protective tillage has been 
gradually accepted by peasants and two protective tillage belts—“Beijing- Tianjin 
rim area” and “northwest sand wind source”—have been established. The area 
 covered by demonstration sites will rise to 10 million hectares in 2010 and the 
conservation tillage method will be used on one-third of the dry land in the 
Th ree-North area.
Promoting the efficiency of water use and building a water-conserving 
society has been accepted by the public in China. Seventeen provinces, autono-
mous regions, and municipalities have issued water consumption plans and 
water-use quotas.
Th e Th ird Plenary Session of the 15th CCCPC required actively developing 
water-saving agricultural techniques. In recent years, the farmland water saving 
programs across the country have achieved remarkable results. Th e Dry  Farming 
Technicians explaining conservation tillage technologies to the villagers of Boai County, 
Henan Province.

 
Chapter 5 Rural and Urban Environment 
107
Water Saving Agriculture Demonstrative Projects Construction  Planning, the 
Construction Standard and Investment Estimation Indices of Water Saving 
Agriculture, and the Benefits Observation and Evaluation Methods of Farm-
land Water Saving Technical Modes prepared by the Ministry of Agriculture of 
China built a solid basis for standardizing the construction of farmland water 
saving facilities and conducting technical popularization. At present, the agri-
cultural water saving irrigation area of China has increased to 320 million mu. 
From 2000 to 2004, the average water consumption volume of China’s farmland 
decreased by 29 cubic meters per mu, or by 6.1%; the water consumption for 
RMB 10,000 of agricultural GDP decreased by 211 cubic meters or by 34.6%.
In recent years, many peasants have found that there was an increase in their 
vegetable sales aft er acquiring the green band authentication. In Wulanchabu City 
of Inner Mongolia, there are nearly 1 million tons of various green or pollution-
free vegetables sold to over 20 large and medium cities in China such as Beijing and 
Shanghai and exported to many countries/districts in the world such as South Korea 
and Japan. Now, green foods have become the choice of many Chinese people.
The Chinese Government attaches great importance to product quality 
and supports safe, high-quality, highly-nutritious, and unpolluted green food. 
Chinese green food complies with the principle of sustainable development 
and is produced according to a specific production process. The green food 
mark is licensed by a competent authority. Since 1990, when the Green Food 
Project started, the Chinese green food industry has developed rapidly, and a 
green food management and technical supervision network has been estab-
lished. In 1992, the China Green Food Development Center was established 
formally, marking a period of systematic orderly development of China’s green 
food cause. Th e Chinese Government has promulgated a set of quality control 
measures for green foods from land to table and has carried out strict checks 
and authentication on thousands of products that vie for the green food mark 
in accordance with the standards of green food.
Th e Chinese organic food industry has just started and has great potential. 
China had approved 43 organic food production bases by the end of 2005, and 
these bases are mainly in 11 provinces, including Liaoning, Shandong and Jiangsu.
Chinese eco-agriculture stresses the reasonable exploitation and protection 
of natural resources, while realizing high output, high proﬁ t and low pollution, 
comprehensive promotion of economic, ecological and social proﬁ t, and sus-
tainable exploitation of resources. In 1994, seven ministries (bureaus) started 
51 eco-agriculture pilot projects all over the country. At present, China has 
more than 2,000 eco-agriculture pilot sites of varying kinds, including more 
than 160 sites at the county level and more than 10 at the prefecture (city) level.
China’s success in eco-agriculture has attracted public attention 
and  support. International organizations have also spoken highly of it and have 

108 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
The green food and organic symbols of China.
said that China is a world leader in sustainable agriculture. The UNEP has 
granted seven Chinese units—including Liuminying Village, Daxing, Beijing; 
Shanyi Village, Xiaoshan City, Zhejiang Province; and Heheng Village, Shengao 
Township, Taixian County, Jiangsu Province —with World Top 500 awards.
Peasants adopt wall body cultivation technologies to plant pollution-free green vegetables in 
Lianyungang City, Jiangsu.

 
Chapter 5 Rural and Urban Environment 
109
The New Socialist Countryside Construction
To promote the development of the rural economy and improve the ecological 
environment of rural areas, China has launched a campaign to beautify town 
construction since 2002. Th e title “National Environmental Elegant Town” has 
been awarded to seven batches of 629 towns (or villages) in China so far.
The national environmental “elegant” town must meet six basic condi-
tions and satisfy 26 speciﬁ c indicators. Th e six basic conditions are as follows: 
deploying a speciﬁ c environmental protection agency or full-time environmen-
tal protection personnel; implementing environmental protection planning for 
small towns and implementing them seriously; carrying out policies and laws 
concerning environmental protection with no reported incident of severe pol-
lution or ecological damage in the past three years; proper rural layout, well-
organized management, tidy streets, excellent environment, harmonious rural 
construction and surrounding environment; clean outskirts and white pollu-
tion under control; ﬁ ne rural environmental protection and highly  satisfactory 
rural environment. The 26 specific indicators cover the growth of rural 
 economy, social development, and environmental protection.
Boxing, a beautiful town in Binzhou, Shandong, won the title of a National 
Environmental Elegant Town in 2007. Its fiscal revenue reached RMB 
225  million, and the rural per capita net income exceeded RMB 5,000 in 2006. 
While developing its rural economy, it also put forth the requirements for 
enterprise entry into the town, paid special attention to the construction of 
environment protection facilities, and implemented the management mecha-
nism of rural environmental sanitation. The said measures greatly improved 
the overall environmental sanitation and gave the town a brand-new look. In 
recent years, the town has invested more than RMB 78 million in road con-
struction. Th e completion of the 106.2 km-long rural roadways was accompa-
nied by the beautiﬁ cation of the whole town. Th e town has also built one water 
plant, four residential communities, and 12 schools of various levels. It has 
attracted more than RMB 52 million in foreign capital and was the chosen base 
for the Jinjie Natural Gas Project, which made the rural utilization rate of natu-
ral gas increase to more than 97% and the popularization rate of clean energy 
increase by 70%. Th is has greatly improved rural production and living condi-
tions. Th e facilities in this town are complete and the environment is clean; in 
addition, with good planning, clean yards, and beautiful ﬂ owers and plants, the 
countryside overﬂ ows with vigor.
In 2005, the 5th Plenary Session of the 16th Central Committee of the CPC 
put forward the construction of a new socialist countryside with “enhanced 
 productive forces, higher living standards, civilized living style, an orderly 

110 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
and clean environment, and democratic administration.” All places across the 
 country issued speciﬁ c implementation schemes and put ecological construction 
and improvement of the rural ecological environment as being important to the 
socialist new countryside construction. In one word, the socialist new country-
side construction promoted the improvement of rural environment quality.
Th e construction of ecological villages is a basic project in the new coun-
tryside construction. The “new” in the construction is not only shown in 
rural economic development and rural management but also in preserving 
the beautiful mountains and rivers. Since 2000, Hainan province has con-
ducted  ecological village construction activities with the theme of “optimizing 
 ecological environment, developing ecological economy, and nurturing ecologi-
cal culture” in the process of driving the construction of an ecological province. 
At present, there are 5,300 ecological villages in the province.
In 1997, Zhong Rongxiu from Wenyuan Village, Jiangxi, headed the con-
struction of a 8 sq m biogas tank in the village; invested RMB 200,000 in devel-
oping the ﬂ ower industry; and set up the Wenyuan Flower Plant. Meanwhile, 
she also expanded her pigsty, renovated the toilets, working toward ecologi-
cal improvement, environmental protection, energy conservation, and high 
efficiency. She asked technicians for advice and suggestions and referred to 
Old houses preserved for more than 300 years in the scenic Longxian Village in Qingtian 
County, Zhejiang Province. The village is a world agriculture heritage protection area.

 
Chapter 5 Rural and Urban Environment 
111
 various technical books to learn advanced technology. She made biogas with pig 
manure, cooked with biogas, fed pigs, and watered ﬂ owers with biogas liquid. In 
one year, her family income increased by RMB 4,000 from energy conservation.
Zhong believes that “A single flower does not make spring.” She has 
encouraged and inspired other villagers to implement ecological and energy- 
conserving farming methods. Many have started to follow her lead, building 
biogas tanks and renovating old orchards into osmanthus fragrant gardens. 
Aft er several years of eﬀ ort, the number of biogas tanks has reached 200, and 
70% of the rural families have taken to ecological farming. This has enabled 
every family to earn RMB 1,200 more, making Wenyuan Village the ﬁ rst village 
to demonstrate ecological farming in the country.
Urban Ecological Construction
China has a total of 661 municipal cities with an urban population of 358,940,000, 
forming three urban agglomerations and eleven regional urban centers.
It advocates building ecological communities in cities. An ecological com-
munity is a living space characterized by efficient recycling of resources and 
energy and reduction of waste discharge by maintaining the original ecosys-
tem with a view to achieve harmony between communities, high economic 
eﬃ  ciency, and ecology. Th e construction of an ecological community has strict 
requirements in aspects such as energy, resources, environment, and  community. 
Energy conservation is the top priority and efforts are made to rely on new 
designs and technologies and using clean energy such as solar energy, wind, 
 biogas, and geothermal. With regard to resources, the focus is on the recycling of 
resources, for example, rainwater collection and processing, recycling of sewage, 
reclamation of solid waste and classiﬁ cation of domestic garbage. For the envi-
ronment, speciﬁ c requirements have been put down with regard to indoor and 
outdoor environment. For indoor environment, chemical pollution shall be pre-
vented; for outdoor environment, the environment shall be maintained properly. 
For the community, residents are required to foster ecological consciousness.
The Gaojiaku Community in Tiexinqiao, Yuhua District, Nanjing, is one 
such ecological community. Ecology has gained a central place here by opti-
mizing tourism, the environment, and the construction of infrastructure. 
Greenery and lighting can be found on both sides of the road. Tiexinqiao has 
set up two garbage transit hubs, three garbage stations, and a sewage disposal 
tank with a daily capacity of 400 cubic meters. In addition, it has a recreational 
area for civilians, parking lots, a ﬁ tness center, and other recreational facilities. 
Tiexinqiao has invested in building the first village-level sewage purification 
station and high-quality toilets in Nanjing City. Furthermore 217 eco-friendly 

112 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
 lavatories are being built with each community team employing one or two 
full-time cleaners.
In recent years, China has been devoting great eﬀ orts to urban  landscaping 
and building a national garden city with the view of improving people’s lives. By 
the end of 2008, the national urban aﬀ orestation coverage had reached 35.11% 
and the per capita public green area had risen to 8.6 square meters, which was 
more than double that of 2000. Since 1992, China has been regularly appraising 
its goal of being a garden state and 125 cities nationwide were given this title in 
2008. China executed a review system for these national garden cities named 
once every three years. In addition, from 2001 to 2008, 252 projects have won 
the “China Habitat Award Example.”
In order to strengthen the management and maintenance of the urban 
green space and guide the public to participate in environmental construction, 
Longlian Village in Haikou City, Hainan Province: a civilized ecological village.

 
Chapter 5 Rural and Urban Environment 
113
Xiamen City, Fujian Province, is a national garden city and has a pleasant and beautiful urban 
environment.
many cities have organized activities for adopting the urban green space over 
recent years.
Beijing started such activities in 1998 and a green space of 4.4 million 
square meters was adopted by individuals, institutions, and entities as of March 
2007. Investment in afforestation maintenance from all walks of life reached 
approximately RMB 100 million, and the urban afforestation coverage rate 
reached 42.5%. Activities of adopting urban green space also boosted people’s 
ecological awareness and the spirit of public welfare.
As an integral part of the construction of the urban aﬀ orestation system, 
the construction of country parks plays an irreplaceable role in urban cli-
mate improvement, water and soil conservation, air purification, wind and 
sand prevention, adjusting the material cycle in cities, and producing oxygen. 
Country (forest) parks in Chinese cities focus on ecological protection with 
the ancillary function of providing leisure facilities. Th e prerequisite for their 
development and construction is to strictly conserve biodiversity, ecologi-
cal resources, and the visual value of county area. Country (forest) parks are 
divided into a core area, a buﬀ er area, and a recreational area. Th e core area 
focuses on conserving the primitive natural ecological environment, where 
urban  construction, chopping, hunting, and deforestation for land explora-
tion,  mining quarries, and destroying forestry for planting fruit trees are 

114 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
not allowed. In the core area, the zones beneficial for the reproduction of 
 ecologically valuable animals are deﬁ ned, under mature conditions, as natural 
reserves for intensifying management. Urban construction, chopping, hunt-
ing, and deforestation for land exploration, quarry mining, and destroying 
forests for planting fruit trees are not allowed in the buﬀ er area. Th e position 
and structure of the forests in this area can be appropriately reformed with 
approval from the relevant institutions and can be reserved for activities such 
as scientiﬁ c experiments, visiting and inspecting, teaching, introducing vari-
ety, domestication, and fostering rare animals and plants under the premise of 
scientiﬁ c activity. Th e recreational areas can provide residents with spaces for 
hiking, outings, mountaineering, and so on.
Project Construction and Ecological 
Rehabilitation
Now, the relationship between the environment and development is the top 
concern of international and domestic society. In the past 30 years, there has 
been continuous improvement in the state’s environmental protection laws and 
A residential community in the national forest Guiyang City, Guizhou Province.

 
Chapter 5 Rural and Urban Environment 
115
regulations. Particularly after the Law on the Assessment of Environmental 
Effects was promulgated and implemented, China established the legal sta-
tus and the policy guarantee system for the assessment of the environmental 
impact of construction projects, which is of great signiﬁ cance to China’s envi-
ronmental protection.
Let us consider water conservancy projects for example. Relevant laws 
including the Water Law, the Law on Environmental Protection, the Law on 
the  Conservation of Water and Top Soil, the Law on the Protection of Wildlife, 
and the Fishery Law not only constitute the legal basis for the ecological and 
 environmental protection of water conservancy and hydroelectric projects 
but also deﬁ ne the responsibilities and obligations of river basin development 
and management. In 2006, the water conservancy department prepared the 
 Regulation for  Environmental Impact Assessment of River Basin Planning, 
establishing the technical system and protection priorities for the river basin 
planning  assessment. In addition, the Regulations on the preliminary estimate 
of Environmental Protection on Water Conservancy and Hydroelectric Projects 
formulated by the water conservancy department standardized the expenses 
for environmental protection. At present, some corresponding regulations have 
been made for the environmental protection survey on environmental supervi-
sion and completion of construction projects.
Since China implemented the Environmental Impact Assessment Sys-
tem, great progress has been made in the institutional improvement of legal, 
technical speciﬁ cations, and fund guarantee norms in terms of ecological and 
environmental protection with regard to water conservancy and hydroelectric 
projects. Th e water conservancy project of the Xinli River in Shandong Prov-
ince started in 2005. Th e Xinli River runs through south of the Binzhou Eco-
nomic Development Zone to the north of the new area in Binzhou City, and 
ﬂ ows northeast of Bincheng to the Chaohe River. Th e total length of the river 
is 31.2 km. The project is funded by the government of Binzhou City, Shan-
dong Province. Th e Xinlihe urban area project reveals a sophisticated design 
and skilful construction characterized by beautiful appearance, broad water 
surfaces, and good hydrophilicity. Th e two sides are covered with a large area 
of green space. Th is project is a model for ecological projects and an ideal place 
for recreation, ﬁ shing, and sightseeing.
Economic and social development is inseparable from the development 
and utilization of mineral resources and is related to the environment. How-
ever, the development of mineral resources has brought wealth to society but 
also considerably damaged the environment. Destruction of land and ecologi-
cal imbalance is becoming increasingly conspicuous; collapses, landslides and 
mud-rock ﬂ ows, ground subsidence, and other geological disasters are aggra-
vated. Eﬀ ectively curbing the deterioration of the environment in mines and 

116 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
 protecting the economic and social development has become an important 
issues that the Chinese government at all levels and relevant departments have 
been taking note of.
In order to improve the environment adjacent to the mines and to pro-
mote the restoration of vegetation, preventing land degradation, soil erosion, 
and geological disasters in the process of the development and utilization 
of solid mineral resources, China has promulgated several regulations. In 
December 2003, the State Council issued a White Paper on China’s Policies 
on Mineral Resources and called for “realizing the coordinative develop-
ment of mineral resource exploitation and environmental protection.” In 
2004, the State 
 Environmental Protection Administration, Ministry of Land 
and Resources, and the State Administration of Work Safety jointly carried 
out special enforcement inspections of mines nationwide. In all, 52,414 min-
ing enterprises were inspected, among which 16,413 were suspended and 
banned.
In 2004, the State invested RMB 406 million for mine-related environmen-
tal management and restoring 27,435 hectares. In 2005, the central financial 
department arranged RMB 753 million for mine-related management projects, 
An artiﬁ cial lake in Binzhou City, Shandong Province.

 
Chapter 5 Rural and Urban Environment 
117
Subsidence area of a coal mine turned into a national mine wetland park with beautiful 
scenery, Huaibei City, Anhui Province.
and further carried out the construction of mine parks and the environmental 
protection and management planning work of provincial-level mines. At pres-
ent, 28 national mine parks have been approved in China and they serve as a 
model for the sustainable development of mines.
“Yellow clouds drift though the sky and black dust settles on the 
ground”—this how residents of Liuzhou City in Guangxi Province used to 
describe their living environment. Madam Liu who lives in the community 
neighborhood of the first major industrial wastewater discharge enterprise 
in Liuzhou City, Liuzhou Steel (Group), has vivid memories of sharp odors 
accompanied by dust and acid rain. There were no flowers or grass. Since 
2007, Liuzhou Steel took to the recycling economy given the breakthroughs 
in controlling and utilizing exhaust gas, waste water, and waste residue. 
 Liuzhou Steel introduced new technology to transform more than 7,800 tons 
of sulfur dioxide emissions into 14,000 tons of ammonium sulfate fertilizers 
annually. Th e waste water processing facilities made the utilization rate of the 
industrial water cycle reach over 96%. Th e millions of tons of waste residue 
have been transformed into cement. Liuzhou has gradually restored its origi-
nal appearance of a beautiful landscape.

118 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
Inner Mongolia Ala Shan Desert National Geological Park.
Development of Eco-tourism
China’s ecotourism is mainly developed by relying on nature reserves, forest 
parks, and scenic spots. In 1982, China’s ﬁ rst national forest park—Zhangjiajie 
National Forest Park—was established. Since then, China has established 660 
national forest parks with a total area of over 11.24 million hectares to date. 
With 2,538 natural reserves, 208 national scenic spots, and 698 provincial-level 
scenic spots, China is becoming an eco-tourist hot-spot. In 1999, the Kunming 
World Expo and “99 ecological tourism” launched by the National Tourism 
Administration greatly pushed forward Chinese eco-tourism. In 2007, the 
China International Eco-tourism Expo further showcased the country’s abun-
dant domestic eco-tourism resources.
In 2001, the State Council issued a “Circular on Further Accelerating the 
Development of the Tourism Industry,” making the development of ecologi-
cal tourism resources an important guiding ideology for achieving sustain-
able development in tourism. Relevant departments and local governments at 
 various levels have made greater eﬀ orts to strengthen the development of tour-
ism resources and environmental protection. In 2005, the National Tourism 

 
Chapter 5 Rural and Urban Environment 
119
Administration, former State Environmental Protection Administration jointly 
issued the “Circular on Further Strengthening the Protection of the Tourist 
Ecological Environment. ” Th e environmental management in tourist areas was 
strengthened by combining a comprehensive rectiﬁ cation of key river basins 
and areas. Environmental Impact Assessment was carried out for planning and 
development projects in some tourist areas, and pollution prevention work was 
intensified through shutting down, relocating, and regulating the number of 
polluting enterprises near tourist areas.
At present, China’s eco-tourism is consciously following the sustainable 
development mode of integrating the tourism economy with environmental 
protection. Take Chongming Island for example. Located in the estuary of the 
Yangtze River, the island is the world’s largest alluvial island in an estuary and 
China’s third biggest island. It is also called “the portal of the Yangtze River 
and the Yingzhou Island of the East China Sea.” Th e island is surrounded by 
 rivers on three sides, with one side opening to the sea. It covers an area of 1,267 
sq km. It is flat, with fertile land, luxuriant woods, and abundant resources. 
 Therefore, it is also called “the last ecologically pure land of  Shanghai.” At 
Lugu Lake located at the borderline of Sichuan Province and Yunnan Province.

120 
CHINA’S ENVIORNMENT
 present,  Chongming Island is generally defined as an “ecological island,” 
 forming a landscape comprising five major ecological zones—the wetlands 
around the estuary, areas for migratory birds, the Acipenser Sinensis protec-
tion area, the urban  forest on the plains, and the river and lake water system of 
the alluvial island. Th is island conforms to ecological principles, establishing a 
human habitat focused on the natural island environment, where society, econ-
omy, and nature develop in a coordinated manner, where materials and energy 
are  eﬃ  ciently utilized, and the ecological cycle is sustained. Chongming Island 
is to be developed into a green island at the estuary of the Yangtze River.
Dongtan Wetland, Chongming Island, Shanghai.



123
As a developing country, China seeks a sustainable way to coordinate issues 
related to its population, economy, society, environment, and resources. 
 Protecting the environment and economic growth are usually regarded as 
contradictory. Which mechanism can make these two develop consistently? At 
present, the green economy has been put forward as a solution. Th is refers to 
a balanced economy that caters to the demands of environmental  protection 
and human well-being and is aimed at harmonizing the co-existence of the 
economy and environment and rationally protecting resources and energy. 
In practice, China is still exploring the green economy construct. Setting 
up an ecological compensation mechanism, establishing and improving 
 environmental economic policies, and developing a low carbon economy are 
several important aspects of the green economy.
Ecological Compensation Mechanism
Ecological compensation mechanism is a public system, aimed at protecting 
the environment, boosting the harmonious coexistence of humans and nature, 
and utilizing administrative means and the markets to adjust the interests of 
the ecology’s stakeholders. It just implies the polluter pays principle. In 2008, 
the Chinese legislature revised the Law on the Prevention and Control of 
Water Pollution, in which “ecological compensation” was first legalized in a 
legitimate form in Article 7, closely combining environmental protection mea-
sures with the interest guarantee mechanism. Th is legislation directly provided 
6
Chapter 6
Moving toward a 
Green Economy

124 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
a larger development space for the ecological compensation mechanism in 
China.
Actually, before this law was enforced, China had already begun research 
into and practiced ecological compensation. For instance, the ecological 
 compensation work of forest and nature reserves had achieved prominent 
results. Besides the forest ecological beneﬁ t compensation system, natural for-
ests protection, returning the farmlands to forests and other ecological projects 
can also be regarded as compensation to ecological system degradation caused 
by long-term destruction. Some of these ecological compensations have been 
quite successful.
Returning the farmlands to forests (grasslands) is thus far the  largest 
 ecological compensation practice in China in which the State invests the 
most. It is the first instance of China taking compensatory measures for a 
large-scale ecological construction project, which plays a significant role in 
curbing  substantial ecological destruction in vulnerable areas and protecting 
and restoring forests and grassland resources. The pilot project of returning 
farmlands to forests (grasslands) started in 1999 and was completely initiated 
in 2002, covering 25 provinces (autonomous regions and municipalities) and 
more than 32,000,000 rural households in 2,279 counties of Xinjiang regiments, 
involving 124 million peasants and an investment of RMB 130 billion from the 
central government. Th e ecological beneﬁ ts were huge. In addition, this project 
also solved the problem of poverty among peasants within the project regions 
and was welcomed by the masses. It was a win-win situation with regard to the 
ecology and the economy.
Other large-scale ecological construction projects have kicked off in 
China since the 1980s, including the construction of protected forests, treat-
ment of water loss, prevention of desertification, and protection of natural 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
This concept comes from the Blue Book on Green Economy pub-
lished in 1989 by British economist Pierce. It refers to a novel mode 
of  market-oriented economic development, based on a traditional 
industry that targets harmony between the economy and the envi-
ronment. It also implies a developing need generated by the industrial 
economy of meeting the demands of human environment and health.
GREEN ECONOMY

 
Chapter 6 Moving toward a Green Economy  
125
forests and the Three-river Source Area. These are significant with respect 
to  ecological compensation—compensation for the degradation of the 
 ecological  system caused by long-term destruction. The State has invested 
more than RMB 100  billion on these large projects. All these projects are 
successful practices in ecological compensation. In addition, the arable land 
occupancy compensation system has been carried out in China for several 
years. Important ecological  construction projects such as natural forest pro-
tection and  ﬁ scal subsidies for construction of nature protection regions can 
be viewed as compensatory.
In August 2007, former State Environmental Protection General Bureau 
issued its Opinion on Trial Implementation of Ecological  Compensation, 
which was the first directive document issued by the Chinese  government 
on  ecological compensation. The Opinion firstly reiterated the notion  that 
the  ecological compensation system (aimed at protecting the  environment 
and boosting harmony between humans and nature) is the environmen-
tal  economic policy whereby the interests and relationships among  the 
Peasants from Rongchang County, Chongqing City, receiving the compensation fund for 
“returning farmlands to forests,” March 2007.

126 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
 stakeholders in ecological environment protection and construction are 
adjusted. This is done based on the service value of the ecological system, 
the costs of ecological protection and development, and by the means 
of comprehensive administrative methods and the market. The Opinion 
defined five fundamental principles for ecological compensation: the devel-
oper should protect the resources; the  person who destroys the resources 
should restore them; the person who  benefits should pay the compensa-
tion; the person who pollutes should pay for it; and the obligations, rights, 
and interests should be consistent. These guidelines would enhance win-
win situations. The government would guide policy decisions and combine 
these with market control. The measures should be altered to suit local 
conditions, and innovations should be encouraged. In September 2007, the 
former State Environmental Protection General Bureau claimed to carry 
out the trial implementation of ecological compensation in four regions 
including natural reserves, important ecological function areas, mine 
resource development areas, and water environmental protection areas. 
Through trial implementation, China started to build a standardized sys-
tem of ecological compensation for key areas, to explore diversified eco-
logical compensation modes and to lay solid foundations for setting up a 
nationwide ecological compensation system.
For ecological compensation in the river basin, local practices mainly focus 
on the protection of urban drinking water sources and the ecological com-
pensation issues between upstream and downstream along medium and small 
water basins within administrative districts; for example, the water resource 
protection cooperation in the water source areas between Beijing and Hebei 
province, the ecological compensation of Guangdong province for the upstream 
Dongjiang River, and the ecological compensation of Zhejiang Province for the 
Xin’anjiang River in its region. Some local places also explore models like water 
trade, for instance. Dongyang city of Zhejiang province  successfully concludes 
the trade for water use rights with Yiwu city, i.e., Dongyang city transfers the 
permanent water use rights of 50 million cubic meters in the Hengjin reservoir 
to Yiwu city.
Through these ecological compensation practices, China has gradually 
enriched its ecological compensation system. However, these practices also had 
drawbacks because they relied on the projects, and when these projects were 
completed, changes occurred. This meant that ecological protection lacked 
continuity. Besides, it was difficult to clarify the compensation obligations 
in practice. Relevant authorities have to continuously explore how to adjust 
the mechanism of government intervention in priority areas to a mechanism 
whereby market measures drive and sustain change.

 
Chapter 6 Moving toward a Green Economy  
127
Establishing and Improving Environmental/
Economic Policies
As compared with the local governments and economic authorities, China’s 
current environmental protection authorities lack strong deterrents. In recent 
years, China’s environmental protection authorities have cooperated with 
China’s ﬁ rst “Inter City Water Right Trade Project” was successfully launched on January 6, 2005, 
in Yiwu City, Zhejiang Province and the city residents said goodbye to water shortage. The water 
coming from the Dongyang Hengjin Reservoir ﬂ ows into Yiwu City Water Storage and Regulation.

128 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
many economic authorities, jointly establishing and putting forward many 
 environmental/economic policies, and have made environment protection 
permeate every aspect of economic policy-making, i.e., from production to the 
ﬁ elds of logistics, distribution, consumption, and foreign trade. Establishing and 
improving a set of eﬀ ective environmental/economic policies is a good guaran-
tee for the holistic development of the environment, economy, and society.
Since the second half of 2007, China successively came up with several 
policy approaches such as green credit, environmental pollution liability insur-
ance, green trade, and green security. Environmental/economic policy attained 
a new stage of practice.
Green credit is an effective approach to curbing industrial pollution 
 leading to a green economy. It aims at cutting oﬀ  credit to enterprises that ﬂ out 
 environmental laws and ensuring that banks perform their  environmental 
 obligations. This is the first environmental/economic policy carried out in 
China. In July 2007, the former State Environmental Protection General Bureau, 
the Bank of China, and China Banking Regulatory Commission  Co-operation 
entered the information of 1.8 enterprises that violated  environmental laws 
In August 2008, the working staff of the China Industrial Bank provided credit service 
consultation to clients. This bank put forward the slogan “Energy-saving and Emission-
reducing Green Credit.”

 
Chapter 6 Moving toward a Green Economy  
129
into the bank credit rating system. Th e China Banking Regulatory Commission 
released documents requesting the bank to suspend offering loans to enter-
prises that violated environmental laws. According to the incomplete statistics, 
aft er this policy was implemented, ﬁ ve large banks in China totally pushed back 
loans worth RMB 3,934 million from enterprises not conforming to the State’s 
energy saving and emission reduction policy.
In 2008, the Ministry of Environmental Protection provided the Credit 
Collection System of the People’s Bank of China with substantial information 
on enterprises that violated environmental laws and oﬀ ered an inquiry service 
to financial institutions such as commercial banks. These commercial banks 
used part of the information to suspend or limit the loans to enterprises that 
violated environmental laws and these enterprises had to take active mea-
sures to deal with pollution in order to regain their loan access. Th e Ministry 
of Environmental Protection will further intensify the information exchange 
mechanism with ﬁ nancial departments to jointly formulate the “management 
regulations of reporting and exchanging of green credit information,” further 
standardizing information reporting and exchange.
Environmental pollution liability insurance is an eﬀ ective measure to pre-
vent and control environmental risk. At the beginning of 2008, the Ministry 
of Environmental Protection and China Insurance Regulatory Commission 
jointly released Opinions on Carrying out Environmental Pollution Liability 
Insurance, selecting high-risk industries to develop products for environmen-
tal pollution liability insurance. The Ministry of Environmental Protection 
and China Insurance Regulatory Commission organized local environmental 
protection authorities and insurance companies in Jiangsu, Hubei, Hunan, and 
Shanghai to conduct some trial implementations. Soon after this policy was 
carried out, China’s ﬁ rst environmental pollution liability insurance compen-
sation case transpired. A manufacturer of pesticides purchased compensation 
insurance from Ping An Insurance Company for leakage of hydrochloric gas on 
September 28. An incident occurred and the neighboring vegetable ﬁ elds were 
polluted. Aft er the event, Ping An Insurance Company carried out its investiga-
tions and paid out the compensation.
With the support of several economic authorities, the Ministry of Environ-
mental Protection created a new double-high directory (i.e., the directory of 
products with high pollution and high environmental risk) and proposed the 
cancellation of export rebates and processing trade for these products and took 
constraining measures. In June 2007, the former State Environmental Protec-
tion General Bureau came up with over 50 kinds of double high products and 
proposed the cancellation of their export rebates. Th is proposal was accepted 
by the Ministry of Finance and State Administration of Taxation, resulting in a 
40% drop in the export of those products.

130 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
At the beginning of 2008, the Ministry of Environmental Protection 
again released the 140 types of double high products directory, covering six 
industries such as pesticides, inorganic salts, batteries, and paints and dyes 
that involved the export of more than 2 billion dollars, a value accepted by all 
economic authorities. In April 2008, the Ministry of Commerce released the 
directory of forbidden processing trade and adopted the directory of all prod-
ucts submitted by the Ministry of Environmental Protection, clarifying the 
stance of curbing the exports of double-high products. Th e Ministry of Finance 
and State Administration of Taxation released the list of goods whose export 
rebates were cancelled at end of July 2008, among which 26 goods were double 
high products.
In 2007, the environmental protection authorities held back 
10  enterprises with environmental problems; these enterprises were to 
be listed on the securities markets. In June 2008, the Ministry of Envi-
ronmental Protection released a Directory of Classification Management 
of  Environmental Examination of Listed Companies, listing 14 seriously 
 polluted industries, including thermal power, steel, cement,  electrolytic 
 aluminum, coal, metallurgy, construction material, mining,  chemical 
 industry,  petrifaction, pharmacy, paper making, textile, and leather  industry. 
It covered hundreds of enterprise types. Th is measure had a  positive eﬀ ect 
on restraining the listing of polluting industries on the securities  market 
and coerced enterprises into performing their social obligations. The 
 environmental exposure system of the listed companies was greatly sup-
ported by the China Securities Regulatory Commission and the Shanghai 
Stock Exchange that released a Guide of Environmental Information Exposure 
of Listed  Companies in May 2008.
China’s environmental authorities and the Ministry of Finance released 
a series of documents where electricity price increases (due to the use of 
desulfurization technology that boosted energy- saving  environmental pro-
tection) as well as the establishment of a downtown waste water collection 
network were announced. Besides, the Ministry of Environmental  Protection 
and several other authorities set up the environmental tax  cooperative team, 
which would continue to cooperate with the relevant authorities to formulate 
the environmental tax implementation plan and carry out  environmental tax 
collection.
China’s environmental/economic policy is still in the nascent stage and 
requires further work to attain an optimum. Several technological  diﬃ  culties 
will appear in the implementation process. For example, the information 
 sharing system has not been established and a matching directory and relevant 
standards for policy implementation are lacking. All these need to be developed 
and improved upon by the relevant authorities in China.

 
Chapter 6 Moving toward a Green Economy  
131
Development of a Low-Carbon Economy
As early as in 1999, the concept of a low-carbon economy was brought into 
China; however, it did not become popular until recently. Nowadays, as climate 
change has become an issue of concern, the notion of a low-carbon economy is 
more conspicuous. China as well as other countries have begun to realize that it 
is the new trend of economic development in the future.
In February 2003, British Prime Minister Tony Blair released a white book 
concerning British energy titled Our Future Energy—Creating a Low Caron 
On February 18, 2008, the original State Environmental Protection General Bureau and the 
China Insurance Regulatory Commission jointly issued a document, formally determining the 
roadmap of establishing a liability insurance system for environmental pollution.

132 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
Economy. It emphasized that the development of a low carbon economy was 
not only technologically feasible but also reasonable, and would make eco-
nomic development more secure and stable. Th e United Nations Environment 
Program named the World Environmental Day in 2008 as “kicking the habit 
and facing a low-carbon economy day,” which strengthened this concept. In 
addition to Britain, Japan, and the United States, other developed countries also 
put forward the idea of establishing a low carbon economy and society.
A low-carbon economy is based on low energy consumption, low 
 emissions, and low pollution. It targets growth with low carbon emissions. Its 
development will be achieved through the development of system control, and 
will be reﬂ ected as enhancement of energy eﬃ  ciency, optimization of energy 
use, and rational consumption behavior. This mode undoubtedly provides a 
new way of sustainable development for many countries including China.
In December 2006, the Chinese government released a National 
 Assessment Report of Climate Change, putting forward the adoption of a low 
carbon economy for the ﬁ rst time. In June 2007, the Ministry of Science and 
Technology released the “Special Activities Undertaken by China to Respond to 
Climate Change,” reiterating the adoption of a low-carbon economy. Ministers 
from the Ministry of Science and Technology and the Ministry of Environ-
mental Protection proposed that China should expedite establishing a national 
low-carbon economy development strategy.
The “Media High Level Forum of Climate Change and Low Carbon Economic Development” 
held in Beijing in July 2009.

 
Chapter 6 Moving toward a Green Economy  
133
In September 2007, China’s President Hu Jingtao addressed the 15th 
 Informal Leadership Meeting of APEC where he stated that, “Climate change is 
actually the problem related to development, and it can be appropriately solved 
only under sustainable development. We should set up the production mode 
and consumption pattern in conformity with the requirement of sustainable 
development, optimize energy structure, boost industry upgrading, develop a 
low- carbon economy, strive to set up resource saving and a friendly environ-
ment society, and fundamentally respond to the challenges of climate change.”
In 2008, financial crisis swept across the globe and had an impact on 
 people’s exploration of the low-carbon economy to a certain extent. Some 
 people were worried about the development of a low-carbon economy, but 
 others thought that the financial crisis would on the contrary promote it. 
China did not change its stance on account of the ﬁ nancial crisis and a series 
of  measures indicated that it was still on the way to developing a low-carbon 
economy. In response to the financial crisis, the Chinese government intro-
duced an RMB 4  trillion rescue package, a substantial part of which was used 
on the environment and creating a green economy.
In June 2008, the China Council for International Cooperation on 
 Environment and Development and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) 
jointly released the Report on China’s Ecological Track Record. It indicated 
that China consumed 15% of the world’s biological capacity and the resources 
China consumed were more than twice the resources provided by its own 
In January 2008, the China low-carbon city development project was launched in Beijing. 
Shanghai and Baoding were the trial point cities.

134 
CHINA’S ENVIRONMENT
 ecosystem. Th is implied that China needed to promote a low-carbon economy 
as soon as possible. Th ree months later, the Low-Carbon Economy Institute of 
Tsinghua University was established, which was dedicated to research on a low-
carbon economic policy and strategy development system, to make proposals 
for the sustainable development of China, the global economy, and the society.
Emissions trading, that is, market compensation trading with a  limited 
emission quota of pollutants emission, is an eﬀ ective way of controlling the total 
amount of pollutants. At present, some developed countries and  international 
organizations are fervent in their belief that the markets will get developing 
countries onto the low-carbon economic trajectory. Some local  governments 
in China are passionate about this and Beijing, Shanghai, and Tianjin have 
set up three Environment and Climate Exchanges to carry on  public trading 
for  environmental rights. In November 2008, at the Emission Rights Trading 
 International Seminar sponsored by the Chinese Academy for Environmental 
Planning of the Ministry of Environmental Protection, some people proposed 
that China should carry out emission trading for sulfur  dioxide in the electricity 
industry and incorporate it into the “12th Five Year Plan.”
The ofﬁ ce of the folk environmental protection organization “Earth Village,” established 
in Daping Village in August 2009. The ﬁ rst low-carbon ecological village of China was 
established preliminarily in Daping Village, Pengzhou—a heavy-disaster area during the 
Wenchuan Earthquake.

 
Chapter 6 Moving toward a Green Economy  
135
At the beginning of 2008, the WWF selected Shanghai and Baoding as 
the pilot areas to carry out the low-carbon city development demonstrative 
 projects. In the process of developing a low-carbon city, Shanghai was dedicated 
to conducting survey and statistics on the energy consumption of buildings, 
publishing the energy consumption conditions, and conducting energy audits, 
in order to enhance the energy eﬃ  ciency of large-scale buildings. Baoding put 
forward the concept of building “China’s Electricity Valley,” constructing “Green 
Baoding and Low Carbon City,” and developing seven large industrial parks of 
photovoltaic, wind power, electric transmission and transformation equipment, 
new energy storage, energy efficiency and saving, power electronics compo-
nents, power automation, and power soft ware on the basis of the new energy 
technology and energy equipment industries in the National High-tech Area of 
Baoding.
The low carbon projects carried out by the above-mentioned two pilot 
 cities generated good social benefits. At present, besides Beijing, Shanghai, 
and Baoding, many other cities such as Zhuhai, Hangzhou, Tangshan, and 
Jilin also show great interest in establishing a low-carbon economic zone. Th e 
 transition to a low carbon economy is a comprehensive move, away from the 
current industrial and energy structure, and a complete reform of the current 
 production processes. China’s attempts with respect to development within 
the framework of a low-carbon economy, if successful, will provide substantial 
beneﬁ ts to the society as a whole.

137
INDEX
A
Aﬀ orestation, 11, 39, 41, 87, 112, 113
Artiﬁ cial oases, 50
B
Biological diversity, 18, 22, 51, 61–79
Biological invasion, 75
Biomass,  94, 96, 98
Biosafety, 22, 75
Botanical gardens, 64–68
C
Chemical oxygen demand, 81, 89
China Green Food Development Center, 107
Chongming Island, 53, 119–120
Climate change, 20–21, 81, 86, 131–133
D
Desertiﬁ cation, 41,  45, 48–49, 55, 124
Deterioration, 3, 5, 7, 115
E
Ecological compensation, 18, 123–127
Ecological construction, 9, 110–114, 124–125
Ecological damage, 6, 12, 109
Emissions per capita, 86
Endangered species, 35, 64, 68–75
Endemicity, 63
Environmental carrying capacity, 41–42
Environmental degradation, 116, 124–125
Environmental Impact Assessment System, 
7, 115
Environmental sustainability, 81
Eutrophication, 31–35, 102
F
Freshwater ecosystem, 25, 28
G
Genetic preservation centers, 67
Glaciers, 26, 31
Green band authentication, 107
Green Economy, 123–135
Green Great Wall, 11, 38
Greenhouse gas emission,  
20, 85–86
I
Industrialization, 12, 101
Inexhaustible natural 
resource, 28
Informatization, 12
Invasive Biology Control, 
75–76
K
Kyoto Protocol, 18
L
Low-carbon economy, 
131–135
M
Mangroves, 35, 77
Minamata disease, 3–4
N
Natural reserves, 52, 64–65, 68, 70, 114, 
118, 126
O
On-the-spot protection, 65, 73
Out-of-spot protection, 65

138 
INDEX
P
Panda, 63, 68–69
Point source pollution, 
102, 104
Polluter pays, 123
Q
Qinghai-Tibet Railway, 57–58
R
Red tide, 33–35
Reform and opening up, 6, 9, 16
Returning farmlands to forests, 10, 39–40, 
64, 124–125
Returning grazing lands to 
grasslands, 64
S
Surface source pollution, 102
T
Terraced farmlands, 102, 104
U
Urbanization, 56, 101
W
Water resources, 28, 57, 87, 103
Wetlands, 51–56,  62, 64, 120
Z
Zones, 25, 29, 71, 114, 120

