
Th e Sinopedia Series
China’s 
Diplomacy

Th e Sinopedia Series
Editorial Board
Chief Advisor: Wang Chen
Chief Conceptualiser: Wang Zhongwei
Executive Producer: Guo Changjian
Publisher: Li Xiangping
Chief Editor: Wu Wei

Th e Sinopedia Series
China’s 
Diplomacy
ZHANG
QINGMIN
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States

© 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the 
copyright herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored or used 
in any form or by any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, 
including but not limited to photocopying, recording, scanning, 
digitalizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, or 
information storage and retrieval systems, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.
China’s Diplomacy
Zhang Qingmin
Publishing Director: 
Paul Tan
Editorial Manager: 
Yang Liping
Associate Development Editor: 
Tanmayee Bhatwadekar
Associate Development Editor: 
Joe Ng
Senior Product Director: 
Janet Lim
Product Managers: 
Kevin Joo 
Lee Hong Tan
Assistant Publishing Manager: 
Pauline Lim
Production Executive: 
Cindy Chai
Translator:
Zhang Qingmin
Copy Editor: 
Angela Dove
Cover Designer: 
Ong Lay Keng
Compositor:
Integra Software Services, 
Pvt. Ltd.
Printed in Singapore
1 2 3 4 5 12 11 10
For permission to use material from this 
text or product, submit all requests online at 
www.cengageasia.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be emailed to
asia.permissionrequest@cengage.com
ISBN-13: 978-981-4319-73-7
ISBN-10: 981-4319-73-2
Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd
5 Shenton Way #01-01
UIC Building
Singapore 068808
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning 
solutions with oﬃ  ce locations around the globe, including 
Singapore, the United Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil and Japan. 
Locate your local oﬃ  ce at: www.cengage.com/global
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by 
Nelson Education, Ltd.
For product information, visit www.cengageasia.com

Table of Contents
Preface vii
Chapter 1.  Building a Harmonious World of Sustained Peace and 
 Common Prosperity 3
Chapter 2.  Adhering to Independence, and Safeguarding Sovereignty 
 and Security 13
Chapter 3.  Participating in Multilateral Diplomacy, and Playing a 
 Constructive Role 37
Chapter 4.  Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, and 
 Developing Omnidirectional Diplomacy 67
Chapter 5.  Adapting to Globalization, and Promoting Comprehensive 
 Diplomacy 103
Index 129


Preface
The year 2009 marks the 60th anniversary of the founding of the People’s 
Republic of China (PRC), and New China’s diplomacy has also gone through a 
journey of 60 years.
The 60-year history of the PRC can be divided into the first 30 years 
after its founding and the second 30 years since opening up and reform 
were  initiated in 1978. Th e major diplomatic task of the ﬁ rst 30 years was to 
oppose the threat from big powers, consolidate national independence, and 
safeguard sovereignty and territorial integrity. Th e second 30-year period was 
dedicated to creating a good international and peripheral environment for its 
domestic economic development and to promoting China’s development in 
accordance with the changing international situation.
Th e two 30-year periods of China’s diplomatic history have remarkably dif-
ferent features, but are intimately related to each other. Th e ﬁ rst 30 years scored 
great achievements in consolidating the state and safeguarding independence. 
More speciﬁ cally, the New China had a clear break with the old diplomacy of 
humiliation; stabilized a new kind of diplomatic relations with other countries 
on the basis of equality and mutual benefit; secured an equal position and 
dignity on the global stage; gained diplomatic independence by safeguarding 
and strengthening national independence, and protecting national security 
and territorial integrity; settled the border disputes left  over from history with 
most neighbors by peaceful means, creating a stable neighborhood in general; 
established strong friendships with the vast majority of developing countries 
through mutual support; and set up a new diplomatic contingent for seeking 
the diplomacy of independence.
The third plenary session of the 11th Central Committee of the Chinese 
Communist Party ushered in a new epoch in Chinese history and commenced 
a new era in terms of China’s diplomacy. Holding high the banner of peace and 
development, China’s diplomacy since then has scored new achievements.
First of all, China’s diplomacy has created a peaceful international environ-
ment for domestic economic development, contributing to a sustained and stable 
high economic growth, raising China’s overall national strength and its interna-
tional competitiveness. China’s gross domestic product (GDP) has climbed from 
RMB 364.5 billion in 1978 to more than RMB 30 trillion in 2008. China’s contri-
bution to world economic growth has surpassed more than 10 percent.

viii 
PREFACE
Second, China has been actively integrated into the international 
 community. It has joined more than 100 intergovernmental international 
 organizations, acceded more than 300 international multilateral treaties, 
 participated in 24 UN peacekeeping operations, and dispatched more than 
10,000 peacekeeping personnel. All of this makes China an important player on 
the international stage. While integrating itself into the activities of the inter-
national community, China insists on its identity as a developing country and 
makes its utmost effort to enhance and promote the interests of developing 
countries according to the principle of balancing between rights and  obligations.
Third, China upholds justice in international affairs and has become a 
responsible power along with its improved international standing. China stands 
for peaceful negotiation and diplomatic consultation in the settlement of global 
and regional conﬂ icts, assumes due international responsibilities, and lives up 
to its commitments in the settlement of such global issues as global climate 
change and public health. China’s proactive policies have been fully recognized 
by the international community, winning an international image better than 
ever before.
Fourth, China’s diplomatic front has been gradually extended with a good 
omnidirectional foreign relations structure. Currently China maintains dip-
lomatic relations with 171 countries. In its relations with developed countries, 
China adheres to the principle of surpassing the diﬀ erences in social systems 
and ideologies in order to develop relations with them, seeking common 
ground while reserving differences. China upholds dialogue while avoiding 
confrontation, properly manages differences and frictions, expands the areas 
where bilateral interests meet, and establishes strategic partnerships of various 
types and cooperative relations with different countries. In conformity with 
the principle of equal consultation, mutual understanding, and mutual accom-
modation, China has signed boundary agreements or treaties with 13 of its 14 
land neighbors and solved 90 percent of its land border disputes or has reached 
provisional agreements on those that are still diﬃ  cult to solve according to the 
principle of shelving the disputes. Th ese have created a peaceful, stable, cooper-
ative, and win-win peripheral environment on the basis of equality and mutual 
trust. In relations with other developing countries, China has emphasized 
its commitment to continuing to enhance solidarity and cooperation with its 
neighbors. In addition to providing assistance to some of them to the best of its 
capability, China has increasingly expanded the areas of cooperation according 
to the principle of “equality and mutual beneﬁ t, emphasizing practical results, 
diversity in forms, and attainment of common development.”
Given the new domestic and international situation, China has endeav-
ored to coordinate domestic development and opening up, and has advocated 
the concept of comprehensive diplomacy: promoting security diplomacy, 

 
PREFACE  
ix
 economic diplomacy, and humanitarian diplomacy. It has developed economic 
 cooperation with all countries, promoted dialogues and communications with 
other civilizations, and increased the knowledge about and understanding of 
China by the international community.
China has accumulated a wealth of experience in diplomacy over the past 
60 years, realizing  that China cannot develop without the world, and the world 
cannot become prosperous without China. The future and fate of China has 
been intimately tied with the rest of the world. Whatever changes take place 
in the international situation, the Chinese government and people will always 
hold high the banner of peace, development and cooperation; pursue an inde-
pendent foreign policy of peace; and safeguard China’s interests in terms of 
sovereignty, security, and development.
The Chinese government and people will continue to contribute to 
regional and global development through its own development, and expand 
the areas where China’s interests meet those of various sides. While secur-
ing its own development, China will accommodate the legitimate concerns of 
other  countries, especially other developing countries. The Chinese govern-
ment and people will increase market access in accordance with internationally 
 recognized economic and trade rules, and protect the rights and interests of 
their partners in accordance with relevant laws. China will continue to support 
international efforts to help developing countries enhance their capacity for 
independent development and improve the lives of their people so as to narrow 
the North–South gap. Th e Chinese government and people will continue to sup-
port the eﬀ orts to improve international trade and ﬁ nancial systems, advance 
the liberalization and facilitation of trade and investment, and properly resolve 
economic and trade frictions through consultation and collaboration.
Looking into the future, we believe that China’s diplomacy is now at a new 
starting point. As China becomes stronger with a raised international stand-
ing, China’s diplomacy is facing greater missions. Th e burden is heavy and the 
road is long. What is certain is that China will adhere to the road of peaceful 
development and that the Chinese people will join the peoples from all other 
countries to work toward realizing the loft y dreams of human beings.




1
3
1
Unswervingly adhering to the road of peaceful development is the sincere 
desire and unshakable choice of the Chinese people.
Constructing a harmonious world of sustained peace and common 
prosperity is the fundamental aspiration and unremitting goal of China’s 
diplomacy.
Giving birth to one of the four great ancient civilizations, China has 
made marvelous contributions to the world. In developing its relations with 
 peripheral nations and countries over the past centuries, China has formed a 
China-centered and moral-based harmonious system, which is referred to as 
the “Chinese World Order.”
The Western powers forced open China’s door with warships and 
 cannons in the 19th century. In the 100 years aft er the ﬁ rst Opium War in 
1840, China suffered repeated invasions, reducing China to a semicolonial 
and  semifeudal country. Eliminating war and achieving peace, and establish-
ing an independent, rich country where its people could live a happy life 
have been the assiduous goals for which the Chinese people have struggled 
in China’s recent history.
Led by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), the Chinese people of 
 different ethnic groups, after a long period of difficult and tortuous strug-
gle, overthrew the rule of imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucratic capi-
talism, succeeded in new democratic revolution, and founded the People’s 
Republic of China (PRC) in 1949. China’s diplomacy opened a new chapter 
from then on.
Building a Harmonious 
World of Sustained Peace 
and Common Prosperity
Chapter 1

4 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
The new Chinese government has held high the banner of peace, 
 development, and cooperation, and insisted on the peaceful foreign policy 
of  independence. The Common Program adopted by the Chinese People’s 
Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) on September 30, 1949 says: “Th e 
principle of the People’s Republic of China’s foreign policy is protection of the 
independence, freedom, and integrity of the territory and sovereignty of the 
country, upholding lasting international peace and the friendly cooperation 
The letter from Chinese Foreign Minister Zhou Enlai to governments of various countries in 
the world on the proclamation of the Central People’s Government, which says China is 
willing to establish normal diplomatic relations with all countries.

 Chapter 1 Building a Harmonious World of Sustained Peace and Common Prosperity 
5
between peoples of all countries, and opposition to the imperialist policy of 
aggression and war.”
Reaffirming the above provision, the first Constitution of New China 
enacted in 1954 announces to the world: “On international affairs, our 
unswerving principle is to work for the holy goal of world peace and human 
progress.” In the past half century, China has consistently been a proponent of 
peaceful means, and has strongly opposed using or threatening to use military 
force either in handling its relations with big powers, or in the settlement of 
past issues with its neighbors, or in the settlement of international disputes or 
regional hot issues that are not directly related to China’s interests.
Since its reform and opening up in 1978, China has, in light of the changes 
in the international community, grasped peace and development as the two 
major themes of the present era; persisted on economic development as the 
core; emphasized that its diplomacy was to create a long-lasting peaceful 
international and peripheral environment for domestic economic develop-
ment; held high the banner of peace; stabilized its relations with big powers; 
cemented friendly cooperation with its neighboring countries; consolidated 
traditional friendship with other developing countries; actively participated in 
multilateral diplomacy; and advocated a new international, political, and eco-
nomic order on the basis of the ﬁ ve principles of peaceful coexistence.
Facing the new international environment, China has continued to strive for 
a new international political and economic order, promoted the development of 
multipolarization, and advocated the democratization of international relations 
and diversiﬁ cation of economic development modes. China has successively put 
forward its new concepts on security, civilization, and development, as well as 
the guideline of building a good neighborly relationship and partnership with its 
neighbors. China has also tried its utmost to coexist peacefully and seek com-
mon prosperity with other countries as it develops and strengthens itself.
In his speech to the Asia-Africa Summit held in Jakarta in April 2005, 
 Chinese President Hu Jintao proposed that Asian and African countries should 
work together to build a harmonious world featuring friendly coexistence of 
different civilizations, conduct dialogue on an equal footing, and strengthen 
development and prosperity. In his speech to the United Nations in September 
the same year, he further elaborated the ideas of “building a harmonious world 
of sustained peace and common prosperity,” revealing a new perspective on 
world aﬀ airs with Chinese characteristics.
The idea of building a harmonious world of sustained peace and common 
prosperity is a crystallization of earlier Chinese diplomatic thoughts. It empha-
sizes coordination of interests of different parties and resolving conflicts that 
may exist among them, seeking win-win results to further their utmost  interests, 
and to gain win-win goals through peaceful and cooperative means, given that 

6 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
diversity, conﬂ icts of interest, and the coexistence of diﬀ erent civilizations are the 
reality of the world. Th e idea of “building a harmonious world” is also a demon-
stration of the peace-loving elements in Chinese traditional culture. The con-
cept of a harmonious world complies with the spirit of the UN Charter and the 
domestic policies of China, embodying the unity of China’s peaceful development 
and the world’s stability and prosperity as well as the unity of the fundamental 
interests of both the Chinese people and the people throughout the world.
Building a harmonious world of sustained peace and common prosperity 
is the loft y goal of China on its road toward peaceful development. China holds 
that a harmonious world should be democratic, friendly, fair, and tolerant. To 
reach this goal, China advocates the following four principles:
1. Upholding democracy and equality to achieve coordination and 
 cooperation. All countries should, on the basis of the UN Charter and the 
Five  Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, promote democracy in interna-
tional relations through dialogue, communication, and cooperation. The 
internal aﬀ airs of a country should be decided by its people. International 
aﬀ airs should be discussed and solved by all countries on an equal  footing. 
 Developing  countries ought to enjoy the equal right to participate in and 
make decisions on international affairs. All countries should respect each 
other and treat each other equally. No country is entitled to impose its own 
People in Beijing mark the International Peace Day on the Great Wall on September 21, 1999.

 Chapter 1 Building a Harmonious World of Sustained Peace and Common Prosperity 
7
will upon others, or maintain its security and development at the price of the 
interests of others. When handling international relations, it is necessary to 
proceed from the common interests of all the people throughout the world, 
make eﬀ orts to expand common interests, enhance understanding through 
communication, strengthen cooperation through understanding, and create 
a win-win situation through cooperation.
2. Upholding harmony and mutual trust to realize common security. All 
countries should join hands to respond to threats against world security. 
We should abandon the Cold War mentality, and cultivate a new security 
concept featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, and coordination. 
We should build a fair and eﬀ ective collective security mechanism aimed at 
jointly preventing conflict and war, and cooperate to eliminate or reduce, 
as much as possible, threats from nontraditional security problems such as 
Dove of Peace. This gilded dove of peace is a gift to the late Chinese leader, Deng Xiaoping, 
from UN Secretary-General Javier Perez de Guellar in May 1987.

8 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
terrorist activities, ﬁ nancial crises, and natural disasters, so as to safeguard 
world peace, security, and stability. We should persist in settling international 
disputes and conﬂ icts peacefully through consultations and negotiations on 
the basis of equality, and work together to oppose acts of encroachment on 
the sovereignty of other countries, interference in the internal aﬀ airs of other 
countries, and willful use or threat of use of military force. We should step 
up a cooperative, resolute ﬁ ght against terrorism, stamp out both the symp-
toms and root causes of terrorism, especially the root cause of the menace. 
We should achieve eﬀ ective disarmament and arms control in a fair, rational, 
comprehensive, and balanced fashion, prevent the proliferation of weapons 
of mass destruction, vigorously promote the international nuclear disarma-
ment process, and maintain global strategic stability.
3. Upholding fairness and mutual benefit to achieve common development. 
In the process of economic globalization, we should stick to the principle of 
fairness, achieve balanced and orderly development, and benefit all coun-
tries, developing countries in particular, instead of further widening the gap 
between North and South. We should propel economic globalization toward 
common prosperity. Developed countries should shoulder a greater respon-
sibility for a universal, coordinated, and balanced development of the world, 
while developing countries should make full use of their own advantages 
to achieve development. We should actively further trade and investment 
liberalization, remove all kinds of trade barriers, increase market access, and 
ease restrictions on technology exports, so as to establish an international 
multilateral trading system that is public, fair, rational, transparent, open, 
and nondiscriminatory, and create a good trading environment conducive to 
orderly global economic development. We should further improve the inter-
national ﬁ nancial system to create a stable and highly eﬃ  cient ﬁ nancial envi-
ronment. We should step up worldwide dialogue and cooperation on energy, 
and jointly maintain energy security and energy market stability. We should 
actively promote and guarantee human rights to ensure that everyone enjoys 
equal opportunities and the right to pursue overall development. We should 
make innovations in development, promote the harmonious development of 
man and nature, and take the road of sustainable development.
4. Upholding tolerance and creating an open society to achieve dialogue 
among civilizations. Diversity of civilizations is a basic feature of human 
society, and an important driving force of human progress. All countries 
should respect other country’s right to independently choose their own 
social systems and paths of development, learn from one another, and draw 
on the strong points of others to make up for their own weak points, thus 
achieving rejuvenation and development in line with their own national 
conditions. Dialogues and exchanges among civilizations should be 

 Chapter 1 Building a Harmonious World of Sustained Peace and Common Prosperity 
9
 encouraged, and misgivings and estrangement between civilizations should 
be done away with. We should develop together by seeking common ground 
while putting aside differences, so as to make mankind more harmonious 
and the world more colorful. We should endeavor to preserve the diversity 
and development patterns of civilizations, and jointly build a harmonious 
world where all civilizations coexist with and accommodate one another.
The world today is facing unprecedented opportunities and challenges. 
 However the situation changes, China is determined to hold high the banner of 
peace, development, and cooperation, persist in taking the road of peaceful devel-
opment, pursue an opening-up strategy of mutual beneﬁ t with all as winners, and 
promote the building of a harmonious world based on enduring peace and com-
mon prosperity. Th is is a solemn commitment of the Chinese government!
Chinese President Hu Jintao delivers a speech titled “Building a Harmonious World of 
Sustained Peace and Common Prosperity” at the summit meeting marking the 60th 
anniversary of the founding of the UN on September 15, 2005.

10 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
Period 
No. of countries
1949–1959 
 32
1960–1969 
 17
1970–1979 
 67
1980–1989 
 16
1990–1999 
 34
Since 2000 
  5
Total 
171
THE NUMBER OF COUNTRIES WITH WHICH 
CHINA HAS ESTABLISHED DIPLOMATIC TIES



2
13
2
Diplomacy is the oﬃ  cial exercise of sovereignty externally by an independent 
state and an important means for a country to defend its interests and imple-
ment its foreign policy. Diplomatic independence is impossible without the 
independence of national sovereignty.
Ever since its founding, New China has achieved and consolidated its 
national and diplomatic independence, maintained national security and 
 territorial integrity, and has gained equal status and dignity for China on the 
international stage. China cherishes its hard-won independence and respects 
the independence of other countries, and makes it the fundamental principle of 
its foreign policy.
The Development of Independent 
Foreign Policy
China’s external relations and diplomacy in the 100 years before the found-
ing of the PRC in 1949 were subjected to endless bullying and humiliation. 
After the first Opium War in 1940, the imperialist powers forced upon the 
late Qing government a series of unequal treaties by which they seized many 
prerogatives in China, including leaseholds, spheres of inﬂ uence, open ports, 
extraterritorialities, and unilateral, most-favored nation status, among others. 
Countless Chinese people with noble ideals in recent history had waged tireless 
and arduous struggles for China’s national independence and liberation, but all 
Adhering to Independence, 
and Safeguarding Sovereignty 
and Security
Chapter 2

14 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
failed to change China’s fate. By the time the People’s Republic of China (PRC) 
was founded, the Western imperialists still enjoyed such privileges in China as 
stationing troops, carrying on free trade, inland river navigation, maintaining 
jurisdiction and customs administrations, and setting tariﬀ s.
On October 1, 1949, the PRC was founded. Chinese people ﬁ nally stood up. 
Th ereaft er, the main diplomatic task of New China has become safeguarding 
national independence, territorial integrity, and sovereignty.
It was imperative to do away with the prerogatives imperialists enjoyed 
in China, and have a clear break with the legacy of Old China’s diplomacy of 
humiliation in order to achieve independence. Th e New Chinese government 
adopted and carried out three major foreign policies, namely “cleaning up the 
house before entertaining guests,” “starting anew,” and “leaning to one side.”
To implement the policy of “cleaning up the house before entertaining 
guests,” new laws were promulgated to gradually clear up the political, economic, 
and cultural prerogatives enjoyed by the imperialists. Th e implementation of this 
policy changed the situation that China had to depend upon other countries, 
making it an independent country in political, economic, and cultural realms.
The Soviet Union is the ﬁ rst country to establish diplomatic ties with New China on October 2, 
1949.

 Chapter 2 Adhering to Independence, and Safeguarding Sovereignty and Security 
15
To carry out the policy of “starting anew,” it is imperative to cease the Old 
China’s diplomacy of humiliation, and renounce the diplomatic relations the 
Old Chinese government had established with foreign countries, and start New 
China’s diplomatic relations with foreign countries on the basis of equality. 
As for those who did not want to recognize or develop relations with the new 
 Chinese government on an equal footing, China would not recognize the diplo-
matic missions accredited to old China as diplomatic envoys. As for the treaties 
or agreements made between the old Chinese government with foreign coun-
tries, the new Chinese government, aft er a review, would decide to recognize, 
abrogate, revise, or renegotiate according to their respective contents.
By pursuing the policy of “leaning to one side,” New China took its stand 
in the socialist camps headed by the Soviet Union according to the different 
policies and attitudes of the United States and the Soviet Union toward New 
China in the context of the Cold War between the East and the West. Upon the 
founding of the PRC, the Common Program adopted by the Chinese People’s 
Political Consultative Conference clearly states: “Th e People’s Republic of China 
shall unite with all peace-loving and freedom-loving countries and peoples 
throughout the world, ﬁ rst of all, with the USSR, all peoples’ democracies and all 
oppressed nations. It shall take its stand in the camp of international peace and 
democracy to oppose imperialist aggression, and to defend lasting world peace.”
To carry out the policy of “leaning to one side,” Chairman Mao Zedong 
paid a visit to the Soviet Union shortly after the founding of New China. 
The two sides signed in February 1950 the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship, 
 Alliance, and Mutual Assistance, in which the two parties undertook to cement 
Sino-Soviet friendly cooperation and jointly prevent a repetition of imperial-
ist aggression. Th e Sino-Soviet treaty provided China with a reliable ally and a 
guarantee for its security.
Opposing the threats from superpowers and safeguarding national secu-
rity was the main task for maintaining New China’s independence in the early 
days after its founding. After the outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950, 
American President Harry Truman issued a declaration ordering US forces 
to intervene directly in the Korean War and the American seventh ﬂ eet to be 
deployed in the Taiwan Straits. He also increased the American military pres-
ence in the Philippines and the American military assistance to French troops 
in Indochina. Truman’s declaration linked up the Korean Peninsula, Taiwan 
Straits, and Southeast Asia with the same target at the newly founded China. 
While intervening in the Korean War, US military aircraft  intruded into China’s 
airspace over Northeast China and bombed Chinese villages along the Sino-
Korean border. At the same time, the US manipulated the UN, when the PRC’s 
legitimate seat in the UN was deprived, and passed resolutions to impose sanc-
tions against China. Th e US navy forced interrogations and examinations on 

16 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
India’s ﬁ rst Ambassador to China, K.M. Panikkar presents his credentials to Chairman Mao 
Zedong in May 1950.
Sweden is the ﬁ rst Western country to establish diplomatic relations with New China in June 1950.

 Chapter 2 Adhering to Independence, and Safeguarding Sovereignty and Security 
17
Chinese commercial ships on the high seas, encroaching on the Chinese rights 
of free voyage and causing great damage and losses to Chinese people’s lives 
and property.
China was forced to get involved in the Korean War, and in the end, won 
the war, and brought peace to the Korean Peninsula, meeting the goal of 
defending the country and protecting the people’s home. This raised China’s 
international status, and greatly enhanced its independence, sovereignty, and 
security. In Indochina, China supported the struggles of the Indochinese 
people for their national independence and actively participated in the Geneva 
conference, which restored peace to Indochina and eliminated the US threat 
from the south. Th ereaft er, the core and key issue in China’s relations with the 
US shift ed to the opposition of the US infringement upon the Chinese territory 
of Taiwan, and to the opposition of US interference in China’s internal aﬀ airs. 
Th ese have remained two of China’s major foreign policy tasks until today.
Independence has been New China’s fundamental diplomatic principle. It 
has been the deﬁ ning feature that makes New China’s diplomacy  remarkably 
different from that of Old China and has penetrated every aspect of New 
China’s diplomacy. During the 1950s when the “leaning to one side” policy was 
China’s foreign policy strategy, Mao Zedong, Zhou Enlai, and other Chinese 
leaders repeatedly exhorted that China should not depend upon the Soviet 
Union too much or copy its experiences blindly. Th ey said that China should 
think and act independently, and that “although strategically we are allies, 
 tactically we should not relinquish our right of criticism.” Due to the differ-
ences in their international positions, China and the Soviet Union began to 
diﬀ er on the international situation as well as diplomatic strategies, especially 
their strategies toward the US, from the late 1950s. Th e Soviet Union tried to 
bring China onto its track of “Soviet-US cooperation for world domination.” 
Despite great pressure, Mao Zedong and other Chinese leaders declined the 
suggestion from USSR as it would undermine China’s sovereignty and diplo-
matic independence, and upheld China’s independence in developing its rela-
tions with other socialist countries.
Th e international situation underwent major changes in the late 1960s. Th e 
US was bogged down in the quagmire of the Vietnam War, while the Soviet 
Union seized the opportunity and started expansionism. After US President 
Richard Nixon took oﬃ  ce, he put forward the Nixon Doctrine in an attempt to 
reduce the US presence in the Asia-Paciﬁ c region and the world as a whole. At 
the same time, the Soviet leader put forward the Brezhnev Doctrine, the core of 
which was that the Soviet Union was entitled to interfere in the internal aﬀ airs 
of other Socialist countries. Th e two doctrines symbolized the decrease of the 
US threat and the increase of the Soviet threat toward China. Realizing that the 
Soviet Union had become the major threat to China’s security and world peace, 
China started to improve its relations with the US. 

18 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
As the Soviet threat toward China increased, China started pursuing a 
policy strategy of opposing the two superpowers with a focus on opposing the 
Soviet hegemonism in the 1970s. In his meeting with foreign guests in 1973, 
Mao Zedong proposed: “Th e US, Japan, China, Pakistan, Iran, Turkey, the Arab 
World, and Europe, should be united; the Third-World countries must get 
united” to oppose the Soviet threat.
From the late 1970s to the early 1980s, the Soviet expansion encountered 
diﬃ  culties aft er its invasion of Afghanistan, while the US started to roll back 
the Soviets. Th e international balance of power witnessed a new shift  to a vir-
tue of balance between the two superpowers. Th e likelihood of war diminished 
and the threat China faced declined, making it possible for China to concen-
trate on domestic economic development. Aft er the Th ird Plenary Session of 
the Eleventh CPC Central Committee in 1978, China placed more emphasis on 
the principle of independence in its foreign relations. In his opening remarks 
at the 12th National Congress of the CCP in 1982, Deng Xiaoping reiterated: 
“China’s aﬀ airs should be run according to China’s speciﬁ c conditions and by 
the Chinese people themselves. Independence and self-reliance have always 
been, and will always be, their basic stand. While the Chinese people value 
their friendship and cooperation with other countries and peoples, they value 
even more their hard-won independence and sovereignty. No foreign country 
should expect China to be its vassal or to accept anything that is damaging to 
China’s own interests.”
A group photo of the Chinese delegation to the Geneva Conference in 1954. The Delegation, 
headed by Chinese Premier and Foreign Minster Zhou Enlai, attended the conference aimed 
at seeking a peaceful solution to the Korean question and resumption of peace in Indochina 
from April to July 1954.

 Chapter 2 Adhering to Independence, and Safeguarding Sovereignty and Security 
19
After the Tiananmen Square Incident occurred in China in 1989, some 
Western countries, led by the US, made unwarranted charges against China, 
interfered in China’s internal affairs, and even imposed sanctions on China. 
While meeting with foreign guests, Deng pointed out: “Sovereignty and national 
security should always be the priority. ” and “China will never allow any country 
to interfere in its internal aﬀ airs.” Th e Chinese government carried on the peace-
ful foreign policy of independence, and successfully broke those sanctions.
A photo of China’s ﬁ rst ambassador to France, Huang Zhen with French President De Gaulle. 
France was one of the ﬁ rst Western countries to establish diplomatic relations with China in 
January 1964.

20 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
Having faced pressures from the West since the 1990s, China did not 
 compromise or give in. Rather, it became more resolute in safeguarding its 
national sovereignty, national interests, and national dignity. In light of that, 
some countries advocated after the Cold War that “human rights are more 
important than sovereignty” and other theories that go against the purpose 
and principles of the UN Charter and infringe upon the principles of internal 
law and other international norms. China continued to adhere to the principle 
of independence, and was resolutely opposed to any country’s interference in 
China’s internal aﬀ airs for whatever reason.
Th e world has undergone tremendous changes since the end of the Cold 
War, and the traditional concept of security has evolved as well. In addition 
to territorial integrity and noninterference in sovereignty, which remain the 
major security issues, nontraditional security issues—such as economic secu-
rity, cultural security, information security, ecological security, cross-border 
crimes, proliferation of nuclear technology, ethnic strife, drug traﬃ  cking, ter-
rorism, and trans-border migrations— have become more and more salient. As 
the Report to the 17th National Congress the CCP states: “Whatever changes 
take place in the international arena, the Chinese government and people will 
always hold high the banner of peace, development, and cooperation, pursue 
Premier Zhou Enlai meets the US table tennis team in Beijing in April 1971. This visit opened 
the door to Sino-American contacts and was dubbed the Ping-pong diplomacy.

 Chapter 2 Adhering to Independence, and Safeguarding Sovereignty and Security 
21
an independent foreign policy of peace, safeguard China’s interests in terms of 
sovereignty, security, and development, and uphold its foreign policy purposes 
of maintaining world peace and promoting common development.”
The Contents of Independent Foreign Policy
Ever since its founding, the PRC’s diplomatic strategies and foreign policies 
have undergone changes in response to the changing international situation; 
however, maintenance of independence has remained its basic theme. As a 
fundamental principle of Chinese foreign policy, independent foreign policy 
includes the following major aspects:
China is a uniﬁ ed, multinational country. Realizing national unity and 
maintaining national territorial integrity is a premise for independence and a 
notable manifestation of independent foreign policy. China can never tolerate 
an encroachment upon its national unity, territorial integrity, and national 
dignity. Under the complex domestic and international circumstances, oppos-
ing the threat to national unity and security from Taiwan independence, East 
Turkistan Islamic Movement, Tibet Independence, and other secessionist 
forces is one premise and fundamental task for China’s independent foreign 
policy.
Sovereignty is the fundamental attribute and symbol of nation states. 
China holds that sovereign countries have the right to choose for themselves 
their own social system, independently determine their domestic and foreign 
policy, and choose their own road of national development without external 
inference. On international affairs, China values the rights of every people 
to choose their own roads of development by themselves, does not interfere 
in the international affairs of other countries, and does not impose its will 
on others, nor does China permit any other countries to interfere in China’s 
internal aﬀ airs.
By upholding independence, China advocates the democratization of 
international affairs. Countries, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, 
are all equal members of the international community. Th ey should enjoy the 
same and equal rights and shoulder the same and equal obligation on issues 
that concern world peace and the development of human beings as a whole. 
On international aﬀ airs, China holds that all countries should uphold the pur-
poses and principles of the United Nations Charter, and observe international 
law and other universally recognized norms of international relations. Politi-
cally, all countries should respect each other and conduct consultations on an 
equal footing. Economically, they should cooperate with each other, draw on 

22 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
each other’s strengths, and work together to advance economic globalization in 
the direction of balanced development, shared beneﬁ ts, and win-win progress. 
Culturally, they should learn from each other in the spirit of seeking common 
ground while shelving differences, respecting the diversity of the world, and 
making joint eﬀ orts to advance human civilization. On environmental issues, 
they should assist and cooperate with each other to take good care of the Earth.
By holding independence, China supports any activities that are con-
ducive to maintaining world strategic balance and stability. China holds 
that countries should enhance mutual understanding and trust, and endeavor 
to solve international disputes and conflicts through peaceful means. China 
advocates the new concept of security of mutual trust and mutual beneﬁ t, and 
equality and cooperation, to maintain regional and global security through 
cooperation of mutual beneﬁ ts. China advocates solving international disputes 
through consultation and proposes seeking stability through cooperation and 
meeting the common challenges facing the world through enhancing multilat-
eral security cooperation. China opposes the use or threat of use of force, and 
also opposes the policies of war, aggression, expansion, and the arms race.
Head of Chinese delegation Deng Xiaoping delivers a speech on China’s principles on 
foreign relations at the 6th Special Session of the UN General Assembly in April 1974.

 Chapter 2 Adhering to Independence, and Safeguarding Sovereignty and Security 
23
In upholding independence, China does not enter into any alliances 
with any big powers or power blocks, or form military blocks, or engage in 
the arms race or military expansion. China pursues a national defense policy 
that is defensive in nature. It does not seek spheres of inﬂ uence; neither does 
it support one country opposing another. China opposes hegemonism and 
 commits that it will never seek hegemony, engage in expansionism, or pose a 
military threat to any other country.
In upholding independence, China develops friendly cooperation of 
mutual beneﬁ t with all countries according to the ﬁ ve principles of peaceful 
coexistence. China does not decide its relations with other countries according 
to any ideological standards or social systems. China is “prepared to maintain 
contacts and make friends with everyone.”
China is not inﬂ uenced or controlled by any speciﬁ c issue at any speciﬁ c time. 
Rather it is determined to develop omnidirectional relations with all countries 
with a view to maintaining world peace and promoting economic development.
In upholding independence, China never yields to any external  pressure. 
Rather it decides its position and policy on international issues by consider-
ing the interests of the people of China and the world at large, the merits of 
The 17th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party in session in Beijing in October 
2007. The political report delivered at this congress states that China will adhere to the 
independent foreign policy of peace.

24 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
the issues themselves, whether it is conducive to maintaining world peace and 
 stability, whether it can promote cooperation among countries, and contribute 
to the prosperity of the world economy, culture, and human progress.
Safeguarding National Unity and Territorial 
Integrity
One premise for diplomatic independence is to realize and maintain national 
unity and secure national territorial integrity. China’s foreign policy of inde-
pendence is ﬁ rst reﬂ ected in its consistent opposition to foreign interference in 
China’s internal aﬀ airs, in its struggle for reuniﬁ cation of the two sides of the 
Taiwan Straits, and in its diplomatic practice to resume the exercise of sover-
eignty over Hong Kong and Macau.
Taiwan is an inalienable part of the Chinese territory. After the war 
against China in 1895, Japan forced the Qing Government to sign the Treaty 
of  Shimonoseki, and occupied Taiwan thereafter. In December 1943, the 
 governments of China, the US, and Great Britain issued the Cairo  Declaration, 
which stipulated that Japan return all the territories that it had seized or  occupied, 
including Northeast China, Taiwan, and Penghu to China. The  Potsdam 
 Proclamation signed by China, the US, and Great Britain on July 26, 1945, which 
was subsequently adhered to by the Soviet Union, reiterated that the terms of the 
Cairo Declaration shall be carried out. In August of the same year, Japan surren-
dered. Th e condition of the surrender was that Japan accepted the provisions in 
the declaration. On October 25, the Chinese government recovered Taiwan and 
Penghu, and resumed sovereignty over Taiwan. Taiwan and Penghu had been put 
back under the jurisdiction of Chinese sovereignty not only de jure but de facto.
The government of the PRC was founded on October 1, 1949, replacing 
the government of the Republic of China (ROC) to become the sole legiti-
mate government of all China and the only legitimate representative of China 
 internationally. Some of the ruling Nationalist Party and the administrative 
oﬃ  cials of the old ROC government withdrew to Taiwan, creating a situation 
of separation on the two sides of the Taiwan Straits.
Against the backdrop of East-West confrontation, the US deployed its  seventh 
fleet to the Taiwan Straits when the Korean War broke out in 1950, and signed a 
Mutual Defense Treaty with the Taiwan authorities in 1954, bringing China’s  Taiwan 
Province under US “protection.” The US policy infringed upon China’s territorial 
integrity and sovereignty, causing long-lasting tension along the Taiwan Straits.
Th e Taiwan question is a result of the Chinese civil war. Seeking reuniﬁ ca-
tion between Taiwan and the Chinese mainland is purely a Chinese domestic 

 Chapter 2 Adhering to Independence, and Safeguarding Sovereignty and Security 
25
aﬀ air. Th e Chinese government has consistently opposed any interference by 
any country in China’s internal aﬀ airs on the Taiwan question.
Th e US has been the most important foreign country supporting Taiwan’s 
confrontation with the mainland, and prevents China from reaching national 
reunification. In the Joint Communiqué issued in Shanghai during Nixon’s 
visit to China in 1972, the US stated: “Th e United States acknowledges that all 
 Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Straits maintain that there is but one China 
and Taiwan is part of China. Th e United States does not challenge this position.”
In December 1978, the US government accepted the three preconditions 
raised by the Chinese government for establishing diplomatic relations—that 
the US sever its diplomatic ties with Taiwan, abrogate the Mutual Defense 
Treaty signed by the US and the Taiwan authority, and withdraw its troops 
from Taiwan. Aft er that, China and the US issued another joint communiqué 
on establishing diplomatic ties between the two countries. The communi-
qué provides: “The United States of America recognizes the Government of 
the People’s Republic of China as the sole legal government of China. Within 
this context, the people of the United States will maintain cultural, commercial, 
and other unoﬃ  cial relations with the people of Taiwan. . .Th e government of 
the United States of America acknowledges the Chinese position that there is 
but one China and Taiwan is part of China.”
Taiwan compatriots on the Great Wall. In October 1987, the Taiwan authorities began to allow 
compatriots in Taiwan to visit their relatives on the mainland.

26 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
China hoped that the relaxation of bilateral relations and the final 
 establishment of diplomatic ties between China and the US would facilitate the 
reuniﬁ cation of the two sides of the Taiwan Straits. When Sino-US diplomatic 
ties were established, the Chinese government, in order to promote world peace, 
made a change to the policy of “we must liberate Taiwan”—a policy China had 
promoted ever since its founding—and proposed the “one country, two systems” 
formula in an attempt to realize a peaceful reuniﬁ cation of the motherland.
However, the US abandoned its policy of not interfering in China’s  internal 
aﬀ airs on the Taiwan issue aft er China and the US established diplomatic ties. 
In March 1979, the US Congress passed a so-called Taiwan Relations Act, 
which contains many provisions that contradict the Sino-US joint  communiqué 
and the principles of international law, including provisions that the US will 
continue to sell weapons to Taiwan.
Th e US sales of weapons to Taiwan caused the ﬁ rst crisis in Sino-US rela-
tions after their normalizations. In order to solve the problems of American 
arms sales to Taiwan, the Chinese government and the US government reached 
another agreement in August 1982 through negotiation, and the two sides 
issued the third joint communiqué on bilateral relations. Th e US government 
states in the communiqué: “It (the US government) does not seek to carry out a 
long-term policy of arms sales to Taiwan, that its arms sales to Taiwan will not 
exceed, either in qualitative or in quantitative terms, the level of those supplied 
in recent years since the establishment of diplomatic relations between the 
United States and China, and that it intends gradually to reduce its sale of arms 
to Taiwan, leading, over a period of time, to a ﬁ nal resolution.”
As Sino-US relations stabilized in the 1980s, the cross-straits relations 
also relaxed. Nonoﬃ  cial exchanges between the two sides of the Taiwan Straits 
started in 1987. Aft er the end of the Cold War, the Taiwan authorities changed 
its policy on reunification and gradually deviated from the one-China stand 
to seek  Taiwan independence in the name of so-called “expanding (Taiwan’s) 
international space.” The Taiwan authorities had made attempts to partici-
pate in the United Nations since 1993, and Lee Teng-hui, the leader of Taiwan 
regime, even referred to the cross-straits relations as “special state-to-state 
relations.”. During this process, the US government has time and again broken 
its commitments made in the August 17 Joint Communiqué, and upgraded 
its arms sales to Taiwan both in quantitative and qualitative terms. The US 
decision to sell Taiwan 150 F-16s fighter planes in 1992, and the package of 
advanced weapons sold to Taiwan in 2001 and 2008 all violated its commit-
ments on this issue, creating obstacles and new external blocks for the peaceful 
settlement of the Taiwan question. Such American moves have been strongly 
opposed by the Chinese government and have resulted in several frictions and 
crises in bilateral relations.

 Chapter 2 Adhering to Independence, and Safeguarding Sovereignty and Security 
27
Wang Daohan, Chairman of the Association for Relations across the Taiwan Straits from the 
mainland, and Koo Chen-fu, Chairman of the Straits Exchange Foundation from Taiwan, hold 
talks in Singapore in April 1993. This was the ﬁ rst meeting of the top leaders of authorized 
nongovernmental organizations from both sides of the Taiwan Straits.
China not only opposes the US sale of weapons to Taiwan, but also opposes 
any other countries selling weapons to Taiwan or entering into a military alli-
ance with the Taiwan authorities. The Netherlands government, disregarding 
the Chinese government’s opposition, insisted on selling weapons to Taiwan, 
which led to a downgrade of the bilateral relations in 1982. Th e French govern-
ment’s decision to sell weapons to Taiwan in 1992 also caused big twists and 
turns in Sino-French relations, which did not return to normal until aft er the 
French government reaﬃ  rmed its policy on this issue.
As the sole legitimate government of China in the world, the PRC has a 
clear and consistent policy on Taiwan. Th ere is but one China and Taiwan is 
an inalienable part of Chinese territory, and all countries that have diplomatic 
ties with China should respect her sovereignty and territorial integrity. China 
strongly opposes any country that has diplomatic relations with China such as 
treating Taiwan as an “independent political entity,” or establishing or develop-
ing oﬃ  cial ties with Taiwan, or creating “dual recognition” in whatever form, or 
creating “two Chinas” or “one China, one Taiwan.” Th is is a principle the PRC 
has insisted upon in developing its relations with other countries.
Th e Chinese government safeguards all the legitimate rights and  interests 
of Taiwan compatriots abroad. On the basis of the one-China principle, the 
Chinese government has made arrangements for Taiwan’s participation in 

28 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
some intergovernmental international organizations that accept regional 
 memberships in an agreeable and acceptable way according to the nature, regu-
lations, and actual conditions of these international organizations. As a region 
of China, Taiwan has participated in the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and 
the Asia-Paciﬁ c Economic Cooperation (APEC) in the name of Chinese Taipei, 
and the World Trade Organization as a separate Taiwan-Penghu-Jinmen-Mazu 
tariﬀ  zone.
However the situation changes, the Chinese government is commit-
ted to the policy of “one country, two systems” and peaceful reunification, 
and will make its utmost effort with an utmost sincerity to promote the 
 peaceful  development of cross-straits relations in an attempt to realize peace-
ful reunification. But it has also made clear that it will never allow anyone 
to split Taiwan from the motherland in any form or in whatever name. Th e 
 Anti-Secession Law passed by the Chinese National People’s Congress in 
2005 reaffirmed in legal terms the Chinese government’s policy of peaceful 
reuniﬁ cation of the two sides of the Taiwan Straits, but it also provides that 
“if the Taiwan secessionist forces should act under any name or by any means 
to cause the fact of Taiwan’s secession from China, or that major incidents 
entailing Taiwan’s secession from China should occur, or that possibilities 
for a peaceful  reunification should be completely exhausted, the state shall 
employ nonpeaceful means and other necessary measures to protect China’s 
 sovereignty and  territorial integrity.”
The 5th Cross-Straits Economic, Trade, and Culture Forum is held in Changsha, Hunan 
Province in July 2009.

 Chapter 2 Adhering to Independence, and Safeguarding Sovereignty and Security 
29
Resuming the Exercise of Sovereignty over 
Hong Kong and Macau in Accordance with the 
Principle of “One Country, Two Systems”
The “one country, two systems” formula was initially put forward for the 
 settlement of the Taiwan question, but was first successfully implemented in 
China’s resuming the exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong and Macau.
Hong Kong has been part of Chinese territory since the British army 
invaded and occupied Hong Kong Island during the ﬁ rst Opium War in 1840. 
According to the Treaty of Nanking imposed onto the Qing government by 
the British in 1842, Hong Kong was ceded to Britain. In 1856, the British and 
French launched the Second Opium War and compelled the Qing government 
to conclude the Convention of Peking in 1860, which led to the cession from 
China of the southern region of the Kowloon Peninsula. In the wake of the 
Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895), Britain forced the Qing government to sign 
the Convention for the Extension of Hong Kong Territory in 1898, according 
to which the new territories and 262 neighboring islands were leased to Britain 
for 99 years, a contract which expired on June 30, 1997. Th e ceding of Hong 
Kong to Britain was one of the most humiliating episodes in Chinese history.
In conformity with the changing international situation, Deng Xiaop-
ing put forward the idea of “one country, two systems” to solve the problem 
of national reunification after 1978. “One country, two systems” means that, 
under the one-China premise, the main part of the country keeps its socialist 
system, while Hong Kong and Macau, as an inalienable part of China, retain 
their  capitalist system and way of life for a long period of time to come as spe-
cial administrative regions.
In accordance with the above policy, the Chinese government and the 
 government of Britain signed, aft er rounds of negotiation, the Joint Declara-
tion in December 1984, which provided the time, policies, and arrangements 
 during the transition for the return of Hong Kong, laying out rules that could 
be  followed for the ﬁ nal settlement of the Hong Kong issue.
In 1985, the Chinese National People’s Congress established a Basic Law 
Drafting Committee for the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of 
China. The Basic Law for the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, 
passed in April 1990, speciﬁ es in clear and concrete terms the relations between 
the Central Government and the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, 
the basic rights and obligations of the people in Hong Kong, the political and 
 economic system as well as the foreign aﬀ airs in Hong Kong. Th is had paved 
the way for China to resume sovereignty over Hong Kong.

30 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
Chairman Mao Zedong meets with visiting British ex-Prime Minister Edward Heath in May 
1974. The hosts and guests discussed the Hong Kong question.
In the early days aft er the signing of the Sino-British Joint Declaration 
in 1984, the two sides cooperated well and smoothly. However, the British 
Hong Kong authorities misjudged the situation after the end of the Cold 
War, went against the spirit of the Joint Declaration and other relevant 
agreements reached between China and Britain on Hong Kong’s return, and 
prepared to have a “democratic” reform in Hong Kong during the transition 
or before the PRC resumed sovereignty. Th e British intended to establish a 
“democratic” system in Hong Kong during the last years of British rule so 
as to retain its political and economic inﬂ uence in Hong Kong aft er it was 
returned to China.
Such policies of the British Hong Kong authorities were rejected resolutely 
by the Chinese government. At midnight of June 30, 1997 a grand ceremony of 
Hong Kong’s return to China was held at Hong Kong Conference and Exhibi-
tion Hall. At the same time, the Chinese troops took over Hong Kong’s defense 
duty, starting the exercise of sovereignty over Hong Kong.
The problem of Macau has similarities with the Hong Kong situation. 
Th e Portuguese landed in Macau to engage in trade in 1535 and started to 
live there in 1557. Portugal forced the Qing government to sign the Sino-
Portuguese  Protocol of Lisbon and Sino-Portuguese Treaty of Beijing in 
March and December of 1887, respectively. From then on the Portuguese 
had occupied and lived in Macau and treated it as a Portuguese territory. 

 Chapter 2 Adhering to Independence, and Safeguarding Sovereignty and Security 
31
The heads of government of China and Britain formally sign the Sino-British Joint Declaration 
on the Hong Kong Question in Beijing on December 19, 1984.

32 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
Aft er its  formation in 1949, the PRC government stated on many occasions 
that Macau has always been Chinese territory and that the question of Macau 
was a question left  over from the past. Th e Chinese government held that the 
questions should be settled through negotiations when conditions were ripe, 
and that, pending a settlement, the status quo should be maintained for the 
time being.
Th e settlement of the Hong Kong question provided a model for settling 
the question of Macau. Th e Chinese government and the Portuguese govern-
ment signed a Joint Declaration on Macau in April 1987, which stipulated that 
the PRC would resume sovereignty over Macau on December 20, 1999.
Th e Basic Law for the Macau Special Administrative Region was passed in 
March 1993 by the Chinese National People’s Congress. On December 19, 1999 
the Chinese government and the Portuguese government jointly held a solemn 
ceremony for the return of Macau to the motherland.
Th e return of Hong Kong and Macau to China made the people in Hong 
Kong and Macau the true owner of these two regions, put an end to Western 
colonialism in China, and ushered in a new era for Hong Kong and Macau.
Ever since their return, Hong Kong and Macau have achieved social 
 stability and economic prosperity under the eﬃ  cient leadership of the two spe-
cial administrative regions and the strong support from the Chinese central 
China and Britain hold a ceremony for the return of Hong Kong on July 1, 1999.

 Chapter 2 Adhering to Independence, and Safeguarding Sovereignty and Security 
33
 government. The successful practice of “one country, two systems” in Hong 
Kong and Macau has paved the way for the ﬁ nal settlement of the Taiwan ques-
tion and the eventual reuniﬁ cation for China.
Opposing National Separation, and 
Safeguarding National Unity
China is a unified, multiethnic country, with 56 ethnic groups. All these 
 ethnic groups witnessed fusion during their formation and evolution. During 
this long historical process, frequent migration of each group resulted in the 
 distribution pattern of China’s ethnic groups living together over vast areas 
while some live in individual concentrated communities in small areas. The 
Han Chinese people have the largest population, scattered all over the country. 
In spite of small populations mainly inhabiting remote areas, ethnic minori-
ties can also be seen living in the county-level or higher level administrative 
regions in the  hinterland of China. This fact determines that it is conducive 
to maintaining a harmonious and stable interethnic relationship and seeking 
Leaders of China and Portugal toast the Sino-Portuguese Joint Statement on the Macau 
Questions, formally signed in Beijing on April 13, 1987.

34 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
common  development to establish autonomous local governments of ethnic 
minorities in various types and levels on the basis of concentrated areas of eth-
nic minorities. Th is system of regional ethnic autonomy was provided for in the 
Constitution of People’s Republic of China adopted by the 1st National People’s 
Congress in 1954, and remains in the constitution aft er several amendments.
Given the sophisticated situation of today, China’s diplomacy faces the task 
of safeguarding national unity and opposing national separation, and the Tibet 
and Xinjiang issues are especially salient.
Tibet is an inseparable part of China and Tibetans are an important mem-
ber of the multiethnic Chinese family. Th e Tibetans have lived on the Tibetan 
plateau for generations and created a magniﬁ cent culture, which is a precious 
property of the Chinese culture.
Tibet in history was under the despotic feudal serf system marked by a com-
bination of government and religion that was worse than the system in Europe 
during the Middle Ages. Although the slave owners accounted for less than ﬁ ve 
percent of the Tibetan population, they owned all the means of production and 
educational resources. The Dalai Lama, the head of the Tibetan Buddhism and 
Tibetan local government, controlled all the religious and administrative power.
Tibet was liberated through peaceful negotiation in 1951. In 1959, a demo-
cratic reform was carried out in Tibet, and the despotic feudal serf system was 
abolished. Th e 14th Dalai Lama went in exile abroad. Over the past half a cen-
tury, the Chinese government has placed great emphasis on the protection and 
development of Tibetan culture according to the Constitution of the People’s 
Republic of China and the Law of Regional National Autonomy. Meanwhile, 
the Chinese government has also tried its best to develop modern science and 
upgrade the educational system there.
Th e Dalai clique, turning a blind eye to the truth and taking religion as its 
cover, spread the rumor of “the extinction of traditional Tibetan culture” in the 
world, demanding a withdrawal of the Chinese army and its military facilities 
from Tibet in an attempt to realize the so-called “Independence of the Great 
Tibetan Zone.” In order to draw the attention of the international community, 
the Dalai clique has also instigated riots and created social instability, causing 
injuries, deaths, and losses in Tibet.
The Chinese government is firmly against any activity aimed to separate 
the country and have Tibetans seek independence. China holds that the Dalai 
Lama issue is by no means a religious issue, but a political one. Th e 14th Dalai 
Lama is more a political refugee engaging in splitting the motherland, rather 
than a religious figure. China is of the view that as long as the Dalai Lama 
genuinely gives up his divisive stand, stops his activities to split the mother-
land, admits in public that Tibet is an inalienable part of China, and that the 
 government of the PRC is the sole legitimate government representing the 

 Chapter 2 Adhering to Independence, and Safeguarding Sovereignty and Security 
35
whole of China, the central government is willing to contact and negotiate with 
him on his personal arrangement in the future.
Th e fact that Tibet is an inalienable part of China has been recognized by 
all the governments around the world. There is not a single government that 
has recognized Tibet’s “independence” or the so-called “Tibetan government in 
exile.” Th e so-called Tibet problem was, in the ﬁ rst place, the result of imperial-
ists vainly attempting to carve up China, and to turn China into their colony 
or semicolony. Aft er the Dalai clique defected abroad, some anti-China forces 
have continued to support “Tibetan independence” activities of the Dalai clique. 
Th erefore, the so-called Tibet problem is by no means an ethnic minority issue, 
a religious issue, or a human rights issue, but an issue concerning the Western 
anti-China forces’ conspiracy of containing, splitting, and demonizing China. 
China is ﬁ rmly against the Dalai Lama visiting any foreign country to promote 
activities of splitting China in any capacity, and against any country providing 
facilities and forums that support the Dalai Lama’s activities of splitting China.
Xinjiang is also an inalienable part of Chinese territory. Xinjiang Uygur 
Autonomous Region was founded in 1955. For half a century, Xinjiang has 
made great progress in all aspects of economy and society. Aft er the end of the 
Cold War, under the inﬂ uence of religious extremism, ethnic separatism, and 
international terrorism, East Turkistan Islamic Movement forces both inside 
and outside China have resorted to separating and sabotaging activities with 
terrorist violence as their chief means. Th ey have plotted a number of incidents 
of terror and violence, seriously jeopardizing the lives, property, and security of 
the Chinese people of various ethnic groups, and posing a threat to the security 
and stability of the countries and regions concerned.
Aft er the September 11 Incident, the calling for international cooperation 
on the war against terrorism became very strong. In order to get out of their 
predicament, the East Turkistan forces once again raised the banner of “human 
rights,” “freedom of religion,” and “interests of ethnic minorities,” and have 
fabricated claims that “the Chinese government is using every opportunity to 
oppress ethnic minorities.” Th is is done to mislead the public and deceive world 
opinion in order to escape blows dealt by the international struggle against ter-
rorism. At the same time, they have constantly conspired for various terrorist 
incidents jeopardizing regional peace and stability, and thus have become the 
target of the Shanghai Five and Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
In September 2002, the UN Security Council included the East Turkistan 
Islamic Movement on its list of terrorist organizations. China has always actively 
participated in international cooperation against terrorism. China opposes any 
double standard on anti-terrorism and any support by any country in any pre-
text to any terrorist and separatist activities intending to split the country.


3
37
3
Participating in Multilateral 
Diplomacy, and Playing a 
Constructive Role
Chapter 3
Th e relationship between modern China and the world has witnessed such a 
historic change that China’s future has been closely bound up with that of the 
world. China is promoting the world’s development and prosperity through its 
own development and prosperity, and playing a constructive and responsible 
role in maintaining world peace and advancing human progress. China’s active 
participation in multilateral diplomacy, its constructive role in international 
aﬀ airs, and its eﬀ orts to push for a more just and rational international order 
have become the most active aspects of China’s foreign relations.
Participating in International Institutions, and 
Promoting Multilateral Diplomacy
Throughout world history, conflicts and wars occurred among ancient 
 civilizations, leading to their rise, fall, and fusion. The Chinese civilization is 
remarkable in that it has, in general, managed to maintain its main characteris-
tics and integrity despite its contact with others in history. Th is is due to the fact 
that the Chinese civilization was separated from the Indian civilization in the 
Southwest by the Himalayas, and from those in the Middle East and Europe by 
vast deserts and plateaus in the Northwest. Th e Chinese civilization is the only 
one of the four great civilizations that has survived and continues until today.

38 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
In recent history, the West became strong economically after it took the 
lead in industrialization, and promoted global economic integration and cul-
tural collisions and fusions. China’s door was forced open by Western countries 
with warships and cannons, reducing China to a semicolonial and semifeudal 
country from a “Celestial Empire.” During this bloody process of humiliation, a 
fair number of people with loft y ideals made various attempts to rescue China. 
Th e Westernization Movement characterized by “Chinese learning for essence 
and Western for practical use” failed aft er the Sino-Japanese war (1894–1895). 
Th e reform movement of 1898 lasted only for 100 days. Th e Revolution of 1911 
succeeded in overthrowing the feudal ruling, but still failed to uplift China’s 
international status. China was in the end drawn into the international system 
passively and plunged into a subordinate position.
Led by the Communist Party of China, the Chinese people of all ethnic groups 
overthrew the rule of imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucratic capitalism, won the 
new democratic revolution, and founded the People’s Republic of China in 1949 
aft er hard, protracted, and tortuous struggles. New China’s government hoped that 
China could establish relations with Western countries based on the principle of 
equality and mutual respect, and that China could participate in the international 
community and render its contribution to world peace and prosperity.
The presidents of China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan meet 
for the ﬁ rst time and sign the Declaration on the Establishment of the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization in June 2001.

 Chapter 3 Participating in Multilateral Diplomacy, and Playing a Constructive Role 
39
Soon aft er the founding of New China, Premier and Foreign Minister Zhou 
Enlai sent a telegraph to then UN Secretary General Lie, demanding that the 
UN expel the representatives of the Taiwan authorities, and informed the UN 
that New China had appointed Zhang Wentian as the permanent representative 
of China to the UN. Due to US obstruction, China’s demand was not accepted. 
After the Korean War, the United States manipulated the United Nations to 
shelve the discussion of China’s legitimate seat in the UN under the pretext of 
the Korean War. Constrained by the division of international political forces 
and Cold War confrontation, China’s contacts with the international commu-
nity were initially limited to its relations with the Soviet Union, East European 
socialist countries, and a few neighboring countries.
After the Sino-Soviet relations deteriorated in the 1960s, China was not 
only in confrontation with Western countries in the international system, but 
its relations with socialist countries were terribly aﬀ ected. In the wake of the 
Cultural Revolution, China was once again trapped in isolation as it withdrew 
from the few international organizations that it had only just joined, and even 
ceased to participate in some international sports contests for a while.
The 1970s witnessed positive changes in China’s relationship with the 
international community. On October 26, 1971, the United Nations General 
Assembly adopted, at its 26th session, Resolution 1758, which expelled the 
 representatives of the Taiwan authorities and restored the seat and all the  lawful 
APEC leaders pose for a group photo in Shanghai, China. In October 2001 the annual 
Informal Meeting of Asia-Paciﬁ c Economic Cooperation Leaders was held in Shanghai.

40 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
rights of the government of the PRC in the United Nations, which marked 
an important step of China’s participation in international organizations and 
 integration into the international system. By 1977, China had joined 21 inter-
national organizations including the UN, and had signed off on 45 interna-
tional treaties, agreements, and conventions.
The year of 1978 was a turning point in Chinese history. China began to 
practice an opening-up policy, which was carried out gradually from the coastal 
areas to the interior of China. While working hard to “invite foreign organizations 
and investors in,” China took an active step to “go out” by actively participating in 
the activities of the UN, starting the process of integration into the international 
system. In the realm of the economy, China joined the World Bank and the Inter-
national Monetary Fund (IMF) in 1980, and resumed its observer status in the 
General Agreement and Tariﬀ  and Trade (GATT) in 1982. China formally applied 
for the restoration of its contracting party status in GATT in 1986. In the realm of 
security, China began, in 1980, to participate in the Conference on Disarmament 
in Geneva and its aﬃ  liated special committees and working groups. By the end of 
1986, China had joined the UN and all of its aﬃ  liated multilateral organizations.
Jubilant Chinese delegates at the 26th UN General Assembly. The legitimate seat of the PRC 
was restored in October 1971.

 Chapter 3 Participating in Multilateral Diplomacy, and Playing a Constructive Role 
41
A group photo of Chinese President Hu Jintao with leaders of other countries at the North-
South Informal Summit in Evian, France, in June 2003.
The Forum of China-African Cooperation Beijing Summit is held in Beijing in November 
2006.

42 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
The end of the Cold War removed the political obstacles of exchanges 
between the East and the West, and the world economy was integrated 
into a whole. Globalization has blurred the border between domestic and 
 international issues, and many problems facing human kind, such as environ-
mental problems, epidemic diseases, energy deficiency, migrant problems, 
and trans-boundary crimes are becoming convergent, and they cannot be 
solved by a single country. In security areas, the end of the Cold War erased 
the  possibility of large-scale wars between superpowers. On the one hand, 
the international situation relaxed in general; on the other, various traditional 
security problems are still far from being solved while nontraditional secu-
rity problems become prominent. Multilateral cooperation on international 
 security issues becomes an important ﬁ eld of multilateral diplomacy in the 
post-Cold War era.
Demand for the international community to reinforce coordination and 
broaden cooperation to address common challenges has been on the rise. 
 International organizations are becoming more important, and multilateral 
diplomacy has become more active than ever before.
In the context of globalization in the post-Cold War era, China has 
unswervingly followed the policy of opening up, adapted itself to the trend 
Chinese Primer Wen Jiabao attends the opening ceremony of the 6th Asia-European Summit 
in Finland in September 2006.

 Chapter 3 Participating in Multilateral Diplomacy, and Playing a Constructive Role 
43
of economic globalization, and actively participated in international eco-
nomic cooperation and competition. While making full use of the beneficial 
 conditions and opportunities of economic globalization, China is fully aware of 
the risks that result from economic globalization. China has joined more inter-
national regimes and expanded its multilateral diplomacy, making it more 
 integrated into the international community.
By 2008 China had joined more than 130 intergovernmental organizations 
and thousands of nongovernmental international organizations, including such 
international organizations as the UN, G8+5 and G20, regional international 
organizations such as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and ASEAN+3 
Dialogue Mechanism, and transregional international organizations such as the 
Asian-European Summit, APEC and China-Africa Cooperation Forum. China 
had also signed or acceded to 300 multilateral international treaties, conven-
tions, agreements, and protocols compared to 157 in 1989, covering the ﬁ elds 
of politics, security, economy, culture, and so on.
While integrating into the international community, China has followed 
an open win-win strategy of mutual benefit. This strategy calls for China 
Margaret Chan Fung Fu-chun, former Director of Health of China’s Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region Government, is elected the Director-General of the World Health 
Organization in November 2006. She is the ﬁ rst elected head to a special organization of the 
UN nominated by China.

44 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
to promote regional and global development by its own development, and 
extend the convergence of interests with other parties. In participating in 
international organizations, China has maintained multilateralism and open 
regionalism. As a developing country, China has actively engaged in summit 
diplomacy, advocated China’s views, expanded its relations with other coun-
tries, and taken due responsibilities and obligations while safeguarding China’s 
interests and improving its global image. China has played a constructive role 
in  solving global and regional problems. For instance, China spearheaded 
the Bo’ao Forum, promoted the establishment of the Shanghai Cooperation 
 Organization, and hosted the six-party talks on the Korean nuclear issue. 
China has gradually changed its mode of passive participation in multilateral 
organizations, becoming an active participator, an advocator, and a leader in 
multilateral diplomacy.
Th e relationship between modern China and the world has undergone 
 historic changes. China’s economy has become a vital part of the world 
economy, and China has become an important member of the international 
system. China’s future has been closely bound up with that of the world. 
China cannot realize its development while being isolated from the world, 
nor can the world have its prosperity and stability without China. China is 
promoting global development and prosperity with its own development 
and prosperity.
Leaders present at the 2008 annual meeting of the Bo’ao Forum for Asia pose for photo. The 
forum has been held annually in Hainan, China since 2002.

 Chapter 3 Participating in Multilateral Diplomacy, and Playing a Constructive Role 
45
Playing a Constructive Role in the 
United Nations
The United Nations is the most universal, representative, and authoritative 
intergovernmental organization in the world and its membership has grown 
from 51 at its founding to today’s 192. The UN activities and functions now 
cover politics, economy, security, human rights, and other social aﬀ airs in the 
post-Cold War era.
As one of the founding members of the UN and one of the permanent 
members of the UN Security Council, China has placed great emphasis on 
the role of the UN, participated actively in the UN’s work in all aspects and all 
ﬁ elds, and rendered its full support to the UN.
Aft er China had its legitimate seat in the UN restored, it sent high-ranking 
delegates to the annual general assembly meeting, elaborating China’s stances 
and views on global and regional issues. Given the enhanced role of the UN in 
international aﬀ airs aft er the Cold War, Chinese leaders have attended all the 
important meetings within the UN framework.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin attended the United Nations Millennium 
Summit in 2000 and elaborated to the world the Chinese government’s support 
Leaders of the ﬁ ve permanent members of the UN Security Council meet during the 
Millennium Summit of the United Nations in September 2000 at China’s suggestion.

46 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
of the organization. He stated that the active role of the UN must be strength-
ened, not weakened, and its authority defended, not jeopardized, in the new 
situation. China has firmly defended the purposes and principles of the UN 
Charter and held that the UN and its Security Council should continue to play 
an active role in handling international aﬀ airs and safeguarding world peace, 
and ensure that all its member states enjoy equal rights in participating in 
world aﬀ airs.
President Hu Jintao was present at the Conference in Commemoration of 
the 60th anniversary of the founding of the UN in 2005. He proposed at the 
conference that the UN and other multilateral mechanisms should continue 
to play their constructive role in solving international disputes, maintaining 
peace, providing humanitarian aid, and many other ﬁ elds. He also elaborated 
on China’s diplomatic thought of “building a harmonious world of sustained 
peace and common prosperity.”
While supporting the UN’s important role, China has played an 
increasingly important, positive, and constructive role in maintaining 
world peace and settling international and regional hotspot issues under 
High Level International Conference on Millennium Development Goals is held in Beijing in 
March 2004.

 Chapter 3 Participating in Multilateral Diplomacy, and Playing a Constructive Role 
47
the framework of the UN. Examples include China’s participation in the 
UN peacekeeping  operations, promotion of arms control and disarma-
ment, and cooperation in human rights affairs within the framework of the 
UN, among others.
Participation in the UN Peace Keeping Operations
Peacekeeping operations are one of the important means for the UN 
to  perform its duty in maintaining international peace and security as 
 stipulated by the UN Charter. Since the 36th general assembly of the UN in 
1981, China has adopted a positive attitude toward the role of UN peace-
keeping  operations in relaxing tensions. China began to pay its due to UN 
 peace-keeping operations in 1982 and became a member of the UN Special 
Committee on Peacekeeping  Operations in 1988. By June 2008, China had 
sent more than 10,000 military personnel and police to 24 UN peacekeeping 
operations, during which three Chinese oﬃ  cers and ﬁ ve soldiers laid down 
their precious lives for the missions.
The second group of peacekeeping troops of the Chinese PLA leaves China for its mission 
in Cambodia in February 1993.

48 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
In September 2007, the Chinese major general Zhao Jingmin was desig-
nated as commander in chief for the United Nations mission for referendum in 
Western Sahara, and became the ﬁ rst Chinese serviceman serving as a senior 
commander of the UN peacekeeping forces.
China holds that the UN shall play an irreplaceable role in peacekeeping, 
which should comply with the purposes and principles of the UN Charter 
and other universally recognized norms of international relations, especially 
the principles of respecting the sovereignty of all countries and noninterfer-
ence in other countries’ internal aﬀ airs, obtaining agreement from the country 
 concerned beforehand, maintaining neutrality and nonuse of force except for 
self-defense. China believes that these principles are essential to the smooth 
and successful implementation of the peacekeeping missions.
Promoting Disarmament within the United Nations Framework
China is one of the ﬁ ve permanent members of the UN Security Council and a 
nuclear power. Since the very day China had nuclear weapons, it has solemnly 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
• In January 1982, China began to pay its due to the UN 
peacekeeping operations.
• In April 1989, China joined the special committee on 
Peacekeeping Operations.
• In November 1989, China sent nonmilitary personnel to the UN 
peacekeeping operations for the fi rst time.
• In April 1990, China sent military observers to the UN 
peacekeeping operations for the fi rst time.
• In April 1992, China sent noncombat units to serve in UN 
peacekeeping operations.
• In January 2000, China fi rst sent civilian police to UN 
peacekeeping operations.
• In January 2002, China formally participated in the Class-A 
stand-by arrangements mechanism for the UN peace-keeping 
operations. Class-A mechanism stipulates that personnel and 
equipments are to be deployed in position within 90 days.
CHRONICLE OF CHINA’S PARTICIPATION IN 
UN PEACEKEEPING

 Chapter 3 Participating in Multilateral Diplomacy, and Playing a Constructive Role 
49
undertaken not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear-
weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free zones. Since China formally joined in 
the work of the Geneva Conference on Disarmament and its sub-committees 
and working groups in 1980, it has actively attended the annual meetings of 
the First Committee of the United Nations General Assembly that deliberates 
issues on disarmament and international security. China has been present at 
the annual conference of the Disarmament Commission of the UN. China has 
supported the United Nations’ important role in nonproliferation. It has so far 
acceded to all the international treaties on nonproliferation, joined in the rel-
evant international organizations, and has so far established a comprehensive 
legal system for export control of nuclear, biological, chemical, missile, and 
related dual-use items and technologies.
In the realm of conventional weapons control, China has earnestly fulﬁ lled 
its obligations under the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW) 
and its additional protocols. It has taken concrete measures to ensure that its 
anti-personnel landmines in service meet the relevant technical requirements 
of the Amended Protocol on Landmines. China actively participates in the 
work of the Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) on Cluster Munitions, and 
is preparing to ratify the Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War.
Qian Qichen, Vice Premier and Foreign Minister of China, signs the Comprehensive Test Ban 
Treaty (CTBT) at the United Nations Headquarters in New York in September 1996.

50 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
In addition, China has taken strides to reduce its military personnel and 
increase its military transparency. Th e Central Military Committee of the Chi-
nese government decided to cut its military personnel by one million in 1985 
and it went another step forward in 1997 by resolving to cut another half a 
million in three years. A third cut was made in 2003 by another 200,000 in two 
years, bringing China’s total military force to 2.3 million.
Promoting Human Rights within the Framework of the UN and 
International Cooperation on Human Rights Issues
One of the principal aims of the United Nations is to promote and encourage 
the respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms of human beings, and 
protecting and promoting human rights are the goals of the United Nations 
Charter.
China began to participate in the United Nations human rights conference 
as an observer in 1979, and was elected to the Human Rights Commission in 
the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations in 1981. China has 
been on the Human Rights Commission since 1982 and has attended in the 
annual meetings ever since.
After the end of the Cold War, some countries made use of the human 
rights issue to criticize and interfere in other countries’ internal aﬀ airs, mak-
ing human rights one of the focal contradictions between the North and the 
South.
The China Arms Control and Disarmament Association is set up on August 21, 2001. The 
association was the ﬁ rst nongovernmental organization for arms control in China.

 Chapter 3 Participating in Multilateral Diplomacy, and Playing a Constructive Role 
51
China sets store by human rights and has promulgated or revised many 
of its laws to protect and promote human rights. China is not against the 
 discussion of human rights with other countries on the basis of equality and 
mutual respect, but China opposes interference in its internal aﬀ airs with the 
excuse of human rights and is against the politicization of the human rights 
issue in the UN Human Rights Commission. In order to enhance international 
communication, China has published white papers since 1991 to explain to the 
world the eﬀ orts and the progresses China has made in this regard. Th ese white 
papers include Human Rights Situation in China (1991), China’s Progresses in 
Human Rights (1995), Progress in China’s Human Rights Cause in 1996 (1997), 
Freedom of Religious Belief in China (1997), New Progress in Human Rights 
in the Tibet Autonomous Region (1998), Fifty Years of Progress in China’s 
Human Rights (2000), Progress in China’s Human Rights Causes in 2000 (2001), 
Progress in China’s Human Rights Cause in 2003 (2004), and China’s Progress 
in Human Rights in 2004 (2005).
China has actively conducted bilateral dialogues on human rights with 
the European Union, Australia, Canada, America, Norway, and other coun-
tries. It has been involved in international cooperation on human rights within 
the framework of the UN, joined 22 international human rights conventions, 
and signed the Memorandum of Understanding for the Technical Coopera-
tion in Human Rights with the UN High Commissioner of Human Rights in 
 November 2000.
Chinese President Hu Jintao meets with the UN Secretary General Koﬁ  Annan in Beijing in 
October 2004.

52 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
China is in favor of and supports the reform of UN human rights  bodies 
for more democracy and transparency. The essence of the reform is the 
 depoliticizing of human rights issues, rejecting double standards, and  replacing 
Cold War mentality with dialogues based on equality and mutual respect. 
China proposed that human rights issues should be handled in a  balanced 
manner so as to properly handle the relationship between the  universal and 
special aspects of human rights, and that the choices of diﬀ erent countries in 
protecting and promoting human rights should be respected.
Supporting the UN Reform
In order to better adapt to the changing international situation and increase the 
eﬃ  ciency of the UN, China has been actively supporting the UN reform. Th e 
Chinese government issued China’s Position Paper on UN Reform, which laid 
out China’s policy on UN reform in a systematic and comprehensive way. Th e 
paper states: Reform should be in the interests of multilateralism, and enhance 
the UN’s authority and eﬃ  ciency, as well as its capacity to deal with new threats 
and challenges. Th e reform should be all-dimensional and multisectoral, and 
should aim to succeed in both security and development; especially, the reform 
Chinese President Hu Jintao meets with the UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon in Beijing in 
July 2008.

 Chapter 3 Participating in Multilateral Diplomacy, and Playing a Constructive Role 
53
should aim at reversing the trend of the “UN giving priority to security over 
development.” Th e reform shall accommodate the propositions and concerns of 
all UN members, especially those of developing countries.
On the core issue of UN reform—the reform of the United Nations Security 
Council—China proposes: The reform of the UN Security Council is multifac-
eted, encompassing the enlargement of the UN Security Council and the increases 
in its eﬃ  ciency. Th e reform should be conducive to enhancing the authority and 
eﬃ  ciency of the Council, and strengthening its capacity to deal with global threats 
and challenges. Increasing the representation of developing countries should be 
given priority. The principle of geographic balance should be adhered to, with 
 representation of diﬀ erent cultures and civilizations taken into consideration.
Playing a Responsible Role in the Settlement 
of Global Issues
As China grows in power and becomes more integrated with the interna-
tional community, the Chinese government has proactively participated in the 
coordination and cooperation within the international society, lived up to its 
obligations, and shared the responsibility of a big power in maintaining world 
security and promoting global development.
Handling the Global Economic Issues with a Strong Sense of 
Responsibility
As economic globalization has led to an intimately connected world economy, 
an economic crisis or recession in any form will have negative repercussions on 
a global scale. Since its opening up, China’s export-oriented economy has made 
China and the world so intertwined as to make them an inseparable whole. All 
global economic crises have had great negative impact on the Chinese economy. 
However, China is convinced that in the era of globalization,  China’s economy 
cannot sustain fast development without the development and  prosperity of 
the world economy as well as the rise of its neighbors; and China has realized 
that helping others is helping itself. When a regional or global  economic crisis 
happens, China is ready to bear the cost, undertake its responsibility, and plays 
a very positive role. For instance, China found its economy under great pres-
sure when China’s Southeast Asian neighbors were struck with a serious ﬁ nan-
cial crisis in 1997. Having surmounted many difficulties,  domestically China 
maintained the stability of its Renminbi and increased its domestic consump-
tion. Internationally China provided large amount of economic aid to those 

54 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
 Southeast Asian countries seriously hit through bilateral arrangements and the 
International Monetary Fund. Th is had helped Southeast Asian countries over-
come the crisis and enabled China to win the trust of its neighbors.
Since its participation in the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001, 
China has adhered to the principle of balancing rights and obligations while 
strictly following the WTO rules to fulﬁ ll its obligations. China have lived up 
to its commitments by lowering tariﬀ s and reducing other trade barriers, revis-
ing its domestic laws and regulations, opening up more areas to the outside 
world, increasing the degree of free trade in commodities, enlarging trade 
openness in the service sector, stepping up intellectual property rights protec-
tion, and increasing transparency in trade policies. Within the WTO, China 
stands for perfecting the international trade and ﬁ nancial system, promoting 
free trade and open investment, and the settlement of trade frictions through 
coordination and cooperation.
Th e subprime crisis that started in the US in 2008 has caused an interna-
tional ﬁ nancial crisis, which has produced a far-reaching impact on the world 
economy and taken a heavy toll on the Chinese economy. In order to cope with 
the crisis, the Chinese government has swift ly adjusted its macroeconomic pol-
icy and formulated a proactive ﬁ scal policy and a moderately loose monetary 
policy in addition to a stimulus package that aims at driving economic growth 
A group photo of Chinese President Hu Jintao with other leaders attending the 3rd G-20 
Financial Summit held in Pittsburgh, USA in September 2009.

 Chapter 3 Participating in Multilateral Diplomacy, and Playing a Constructive Role 
55
through both consumption and investment. Domestically China accelerated 
investment, giving priority to projects aﬀ ecting people’s well-being, infrastruc-
ture, and environmental protection. Globally, China has vigorously participated 
in international cooperation. It has opposed trade and investment protection-
ism, calling for countries to maintain conﬁ dence, enhance communication, and 
render mutual support. China has called for the following measures: enhancing 
and improving the IMF’s surveillance over the macro-economic policies of the 
economies of the major reserve currencies; improving the governing body of 
the IMF and the World Bank; streamlining the international monetary system 
so as to enhance surveillance over the issuing and administrating mechanisms 
of the major reserve currencies; stabilizing exchange rates between the major 
reserve currencies; and pluralizing and rationalizing the international mon-
etary system. What the Chinese government did has minimized the negative 
impact of the international financial crisis on China, and contributed to the 
recovery and growth of the world economy.
International Cooperation on the Global War on Terrorism
The September 11 attack against the US has transformed terrorism from an 
ordinary nontraditional issue into a public hazard of the world. Taking strict 
precaution against and opposing terrorism have become major new tasks of 
national security and strategy facing major countries of the world.
China has been a victim of terrorism. The Eastern Turkistan Islamic 
 Movement and other terrorist groups have carried out terrorist attacks in 
 China’s Xinjiang Autonomous Region, resulting in injuries and deaths as well as 
damage to property, seriously jeopardizing the social stability and the lives and 
property of the peoples of diﬀ erent ethnic groups in the area. In coping with 
this public hazard, China has made its policy on anti-terrorism in  conformity 
with the new concept of security featuring “mutual trust, mutual benefit, 
 equality, and coordination” and joined the international efforts in  fighting 
global terrorism.
China holds that the war against terrorism should be conducted in a com-
prehensive way to address both the root causes and symptoms with a focus 
on rooting out the causes of terrorism. Fighting terrorism should depend 
on concrete evidence and have a clear target in conformity with the purpose 
and principle of the UN Charter and other universally accepted international 
norms. Th e United Nations and its Security Council should play a leading role. 
Terrorism should not be linked to any speciﬁ c nation or religion and double 
standards should be avoided in ﬁ ghting terrorism. Th e international commu-
nity should make joint eﬀ orts to resolutely condemn and ﬁ ght terrorism in all 
forms regardless of their targets, places, and manifestations.

56 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
China firmly supports and takes part in international anti-terrorism 
cooperation. China has acceded to the International Convention for the Sup-
pression of Terrorist Bombings and signed the International Convention for 
the  Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. Th e country has joined 10 and 
signed one of the 12 international anti-terror conventions. China and other 
members of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization signed the Shanghai Con-
vention on the ﬁ ght against terrorism, separatism, and extremism in 2001.
China has conducted consultations and exchanges on counter- terrorism 
with the US, Russia, Britain, France, Pakistan, India, and more than 
30 other countries, and has actively participated in the UN Security Coun-
cil’s  Commission on Fighting Terrorism. At the suggestion of China, the 
APEC Shanghai Summit Meeting issued a statement on fighting terrorism. 
In  addition, China also prompted the heads of government, ministers of 
defense, heads of the law-enforcement ministries, as well as foreign minis-
ters of the members of Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) to issue a 
joint  statement on ﬁ ghting terrorism. It also supported the establishment of a 
permanent SCO anti-terrorism center to organize joint anti-terrorist military 
exercises within the framework of the SCO. For example, a Sino-Kyrgyzstani 
joint  anti-terrorist military exercise was conducted in October 2002; a similar 
exercise was  organized in August 2003, involving Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, and 
Chinese and foreign servicemen in a joint anti-terrorism military exercise.

 Chapter 3 Participating in Multilateral Diplomacy, and Playing a Constructive Role 
57
Russian  Tajikistan in China’s Xinjiang and Kazakhstan; and a Sino-Russian 
exercise titled “Cooperation-2007” took place in September 2007,  participated 
by the Chinese  military police and the Russian police of the Ministry of 
 Internal Aﬀ airs.
Participating in the Programs of International Community in 
Dealing with Climate Change
Global climate change and its adverse effects are a common concern of 
 mankind. Fully aware of the importance and urgency of addressing climate 
change and taking into overall consideration both economic development and 
ecological construction, the Chinese government released in 2007 the China 
National Plan for Coping with Climate Change, setting its general objectives to 
be met by 2010.
China has actively participated in the international programs for  dealing 
with climate changes. China adheres to the principle of being “mutually 
 beneﬁ cial, pragmatic, and eﬀ ective” and “common but diﬀ erentiated in respon-
sibilities” in participating in and promoting international cooperation in the 
ﬁ eld of climate change. China’s president and premier have both stated China’s 
position at multilateral and bilateral exchanges, including the outreach session 
of the G8 summit, Asia-Paciﬁ c Economic Cooperation (APEC) meeting, East 
Asia Summit (EAS), and Bo’ao Forum for Asia.
China has acceded to more than 50 international treaties or conventions 
on environment protection, including the United Nations Framework Conven-
tion on Climate Change, the Kyoto Protocol, the Montreal Protocol on Sub-
stances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, the Stockholm Convention on Persistent 
Organic Pollutants, the Convention on Biological Diversity, and the United 
Nations Convention to Combat Desertiﬁ cation.
China energetically cooperates with foreign governments, international 
organizations, and research institutes in climate change research. It actively 
participates in international scientific cooperative programs, including the 
World Climate Research Program (WCRP) under the framework of the Earth 
System Science Partnership (ESSP), International Geosphere-Biosphere Pro-
gram (IGBP), Global Climate Observation System (GCOS), Global Ocean 
Observation System (GOOS), Array for Real-Time Geostrophic Oceanography 
(ARGO), and the International Polar Year. In addition, China has stepped up 
its eﬀ orts to share information and resource with international organizations 
and institutions. Up to July 20, 2008, China had 244 cooperative projects under 
the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) successfully registered with the 
United Nations; and these projects were expected to reduce carbon dioxide 
emissions by 113 million tons annually.

58 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
Promoting the Settlement of Regional 
Hot Issues
Aft er the end of the Cold War, the international situation relaxed in general but 
regional hot spots and conﬂ icts remain common, jeopardizing regional stabil-
ity. At the same time, earthquakes, tsunamis, and other natural disasters have 
frequently caused damages to the human lives and development.
Whenever a country is struck by any natural disaster, the Chinese 
 government has always been ready to provide humanitarian assistance. For 
instance, when the Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami caused disastrous 
consequences in 2004, the Chinese government and people started the big-
gest foreign assistance campaign since the founding of the PRC by providing 
timely and sincere assistance to the tsunami-hit countries for disaster relief and 
Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi addresses the UN High-level Meeting on Climate 
Change in September 2007.

 Chapter 3 Participating in Multilateral Diplomacy, and Playing a Constructive Role 
59
 reconstruction. In the settlement of regional hot spots, the Chinese government 
has followed international principles, and spoken out for justice by playing a 
constructive role.
On the Middle East Issue
Th e Middle East issue or the conﬂ icts between Arab countries, including Pales-
tine, and Israel have brought the two sides to three large-scale wars since 1947, 
making nearly one million Palestinians homeless. Th e conﬂ icts between Arabs 
and Israelis have been escalating, making it the longest regional hot issue in 
the world.
China has always been sympathetic to the misfortunes of the Palestinian 
people and has resolutely supported the struggle of Arabic and Palestinian peo-
ple to recover their lost land and restore their national right. As early as 1988, 
China recognized the State of Palestine and established diplomatic ties with 
it. On the other hand, China does not oppose the Jewish nation or the Israeli 
people, and does not support the idea of dismantling the state of Israel.
Th e history and reality of the Middle East has shown that military force 
cannot solve the issue, and confrontation is detrimental to the settlement of 
The UN Meeting for Asia and the Paciﬁ c on the Question of Palestine is held in Beijing in 
December 2003.

60 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
the issue. China has supported the Middle East peace process, dispatched its 
special envoy for Middle East aﬀ airs, and made its eﬀ orts and due contribu-
tion to the progress in the Middle East peace process. China holds that the 
relevant UN resolutions on the Middle East issue and the “land for peace” 
principle set in the Madrid peace conference have provided a basis for Middle 
East peace talks. Th e key to breaking the deadlock in the Middle East peace 
talks is that the parties concerned should faithfully implement the agreements 
and understandings that have been reached. China has held that the parties 
concerned should settle the Jerusalem issue, the crux and most diﬃ  cult part of 
the Middle East issue, through negotiation based on the relevant UN resolu-
tions; and unilateral actions that go against the settlement of the issue should 
be avoided.
On the Afghanistan Issue
Afghanistan is China’s close neighbor and one of the first few countries that 
established diplomatic ties with China. As the only Afghan neighbor that does 
not have any unsettled issue left  over from history with Afghanistan, China has 
always supported the Afghan people’s righteous cause of national liberation 
and national sovereignty.
Aft er the September 11 Incident in 2001, Afghanistan became the focus of 
international attention as the focus of the US counter-terrorist war shift ed to 
this country. As a close neighbor of Afghanistan, China hopes that Afghanistan 
becomes a peaceful country, a country that can cooperate with the international 
community, and a country where diﬀ erent ethnic groups can live together in 
peace. China holds that the independence, sovereignty, and territorial integ-
rity of Afghanistan should be respected, and that the Afghan issue should be 
ﬁ nally settled by the Afghans themselves. China has supported the eﬀ ort by the 
Afghan interim government to encourage the diﬀ erent factions within Afghan 
to give priority to their country and peace, and maintain peace and stability so 
as to proceed with their national building. At the same time, China holds the 
view that the political settlement of the Afghan issue is impossible without the 
role of the UN. China supports the eﬀ orts of the UN toward the peaceful settle-
ment of the Afghan issue, and supports the United Nations Assistance Mission 
in Afghanistan to play a leading and coordinating role in the process of Afghan 
reconstruction.
China has vigorously supported the eﬀ orts of the Afghan government and 
people in maintaining stability in their country, developing their economy, and 
national reconstruction. China has rendered aid to Afghanistan in the forms of 
material, cash, and preferential loans, and has joined the international commu-
nity to push forward Afghan reconstruction and promote peace and stability 

 Chapter 3 Participating in Multilateral Diplomacy, and Playing a Constructive Role 
61
by participating in the construction of such infrastructure as roads, water con-
servancies, and hospitals.
On the Issue of Darfur in Sudan
Due to drought and desertiﬁ cation in the western part of Sudan, conﬂ icts and 
competition for water and grassland between diﬀ erent tribes began to occur in 
the 1960s and 1970s, leading to the deterioration in the regional situation and 
culminating in large-scale conﬂ icts between the anti-government troops and 
the government forces, making Darfur a hot spot attracting the attention of the 
international community.
China has advocated that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Sudan 
should be respected and the Darfur issue should be settled through political 
means by equal dialogue and consultation. Pressures or sanctions, or threaten-
ing with force, should be avoided. China has held that the measures taken by the 
United Nations Security Council should reﬂ ect the common wishes of the inter-
national society, address the legitimate concerns of the Sudanese government, 
and take the ﬁ nal and proper settlement of the issue as the basis. Th e interna-
tional community should help Sudan improve the humanitarian and security 
situation in Darfur, and provide assistance in reconstruction and development 
An agreement is signed in Beijing in January 2002 on assistance of the Chinese government 
to the Interim Government of Afghanistan.

62 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
so as to realize peace, stability, and development in the Darfur area as early as 
possible. While trying to settle the Darfur issue, the  international community 
should give full play to the leading role of the UN-African  Union-Sudanese 
government trilateral mechanism, with a balanced consideration for peacekeep-
ing and the political settlement of the Darfur issue.
Keeping in mind the long-term stability and development of Sudan, China 
has provided constructive suggestions and advice to the Sudanese government 
and facilitated communication and coordination between the Sudanese gov-
ernment and related parties. The Chinese government dispatched its special 
envoy to Darfur in 2007, who paid visits to Sudan and other related countries 
including those in Europe, America, and Africa, as well as the United Nations, 
the African Union, the Arab Union, and EU headquarters. China has main-
tained close contacts with, and persuaded on diﬀ erent occasions, related par-
ties to narrow their diﬀ erences, increase mutual trust, and reduce suspicion of 
each other so as to reach an agreement on the deployment of a Joint Mission 
in Darfur along with the African Union and the United Nations. China, as the 
chair of the United Nations Security Council in July 2007, pushed the United 
Nations Security Council to pass resolution 1769 unanimously, attaining a 
The second batch of peacekeeping troops of the Chinese PLA to Sudan set out from 
Xinzheng International Airport, Henan Province on January 16, 2007.

 Chapter 3 Participating in Multilateral Diplomacy, and Playing a Constructive Role 
63
ﬁ rst-phase achievement in the eﬀ orts by the international community to settle 
the Darfur issue. At the request of the United Nations, China promised to send 
315 multifunctional engineers to join the peacekeeping mission in Darfur. In 
addition, China has provided humanitarian aid to Darfur and participated in 
its reconstruction and development.
On the North Korean Nuclear Issue
Th e international security environment has undergone tremendous changes 
following the end of the Cold War. On the one hand, some countries started 
their eﬀ orts to develop nuclear weapons for their own security or other con-
cerns. On the other hand, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction 
and their delivery system has become a major worry of and a hot issue in the 
international community. Th e nuclear issues in North Korea and Iran are two 
salient examples.
The North Korean nuclear issue has remained a focus of international 
concern since the early 1990s. As a close neighbor who has vital interests in the 
settlement of the North Korean nuclear issue, China has paid close attention 
A scene of the six-party (China, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the United 
States, the Republic of Korea, Japan, and Russia) talk on the Korean nuclear issue held in 
Beijing.

64 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
to the issue and vigorously engaged itself in multilateral diplomacy in order to 
solve the issue. Aft er the issue escalated in 2003, China hosted ﬁ rst the Th ree-
Party Talk (China, North Korea, and the United States) and then the Six-Party 
Talk (China, the Democratic Republic of Korea, the United States, the Republic 
of Korea, Russia, and Japan) in Beijing. China has been instrumental in getting 
the participants to issue the Initial Actions for the Implementation of the Joint 
Statement in February 2007 and the Second-Phase Actions for the Implemen-
tation of the Joint Statement in October 2007. Th is has set the ﬁ nal goal of a 
nuclear-free Korean Peninsula.
An opponent of nuclear proliferation, China has advocated the denucle-
arization of the Korean Peninsula and has made relentless eﬀ orts to maintain 
long-lasting peace and stability in the Peninsula. China expressed its oppo-
sition when the Democratic Republic of Korea (DPRK), in defiance of the 
opposition from the international community, conducted two nuclear tests in 
October 2006 and May 2009, respectively. China voted for the United Nations 
Security Council’s resolution 1874 on North Korean nuclear tests when the 
DPRK conducted its second nuclear test, demanding that North Korea stop any 
activities that would worsen the situation. At the same time, China has held 
that as a sovereign nation and a member of the United Nations, DPRK should 
be respected in terms of its sovereignty, territorial integrity, and other legiti-
mate security concerns, as well as its development interests; and that DPRK 
should enjoy the same right to peaceful use of nuclear technology as other sig-
natories once it returns to the Non-proliferation Treaty. China stands for the 
peaceful settlement of the North Korean nuclear issue through dialogue and 
consultation so as to maintain the peace and stability of the Korean Peninsula 
and Northeast Asia at large.
On the Iran Nuclear Issue
Th e Iran nuclear issue, which is identical in nature to the North Korean issue, 
escalated into an international hot one in 2003. Iran has insisted that it is 
entitled to peaceful use of nuclear technology, but has not been able to main-
tain a consistent stand in its cooperation with the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) and its suspension of uranium enrichment activities. Th e West 
has exerted pressure on Iran’s nuclear plan, leading to a deadlock between the 
two sides over this issue.
China has been in favor of the international nuclear nonproliferation 
system all along. It maintains that the Iran nuclear issue should be settled by 
political and diplomatic means so as to maintain peace and stability in the 
Middle East area; Iran should enjoy the right to peaceful use of nuclear tech-
nology. China appreciates Iran’s repeated promise that it does not have the plan 

 Chapter 3 Participating in Multilateral Diplomacy, and Playing a Constructive Role 
65
to develop nuclear weapons and that it is willing to cooperate with the IAEA. 
China also holds that Iran, a signatory of the Non-proliferation Treaty, should 
live up to its international commitments, help maintain the international non-
proliferation mechanism, and enhance its cooperation with the IAEA as it 
enjoys the right to the peaceful use of nuclear technology.
China has been actively involved in the process of examining the Ira-
nian nuclear issue in the IAEA and the United Nations Security Council, and 
has attended the conferences on Iran’s nuclear issue that involve the foreign 
ministers of six countries and the political director-generals from the foreign 
ministries of the six countries. In April 2008, it hosted the meeting of political 
director-generals from the foreign ministries of the six countries on the Iranian 
nuclear issue in Shanghai in order to promote a peaceful settlement of the issue.


4
67
4
Mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual nonaggression, 
noninterference in each other’s internal aﬀ airs, equality and mutual beneﬁ t, and 
peaceful coexistence are important international norms. China’s diplomacy has 
been characterized by developing peaceful and friendly relations with all coun-
tries on the basis of these ﬁ ve principles.
China has faithfully adhered to these five principles of peaceful coexis-
tence in developing its relations with different countries of the world. This 
has stabilized China’s relations with the developed countries as a whole, 
and improved its relations with its neighbors and developing countries, 
leading to a best ever international and peripheral environment for China 
since 1949.
The Development of the Five Principles of 
Peaceful Coexistence
The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence was first proposed by Chinese 
Premier Zhou Enlai when meeting with an Indian delegation visiting China in 
December 1943 to negotiate with its Chinese counterpart on questions con-
cerning their relations with Tibet of China. Premier Zhou proposed in his talk: 
“Immediately aft er its birth, New China has set its principles on  handling its 
relations with India, namely: mutual respect for territorial integrity, mutual 
nonaggression, noninterference in each other’s internal affairs, equality and 
Following the Five Principles 
of Peaceful Coexistence, and 
Developing Omnidirectional 
Diplomacy
Chapter 4

68 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence.” The Indian side agreed with these 
principles, which were later included in the Preamble to the Agreement 
between the People’s Republic of China and the Republic of India on Trade and 
Intercourse Between the Tibet Region of China and India.
The Chinese delegation led by Zhou Enlai participated in the Asian-
African (Bandung) Conference attended by 29 countries from Asia and 
Africa, which was held in Bandung, Indonesia in April 1955. The 10 prin-
ciples on international relations adopted in the final communiqué of the 
conference is an extension of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. 
Th ereaft er, China settled the boundary issues that were left  over from his-
tory with Burma, Mongolia, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, consecutively, on the 
basis of these principles.
In his tour to 14 countries in Asia, Africa, and Europe from the end of 1963 
to early 1964, Zhou Enlai put forward eight principles on China’s economic 
and technical aid to foreign countries, which extended the Five Principles of 
 Peaceful Coexistence to the ﬁ eld of international economic cooperation. Many 
international instruments, including the Joint Communiqué between the 
People’s Republic of China and the United States of America (also referred to 
Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai reiterates the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence at the 
Asian-African Conference held in Bandung, Indonesia in April 1955.

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
69
as the Shanghai Communiqué) reached between the two governments when 
American President Nixon visited China in 1972, the Joint Communiqué on 
the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations between the People’s Republic of 
China and the United States of America in 1978, as well as the Sino-Japanese 
Treaty of Peace and Friendship signed by the two governments in 1978, have 
all emphasized the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence as the guiding prin-
ciples in developing bilateral relations.
The five principles were put forward initially to guide China’s relations 
with countries with diﬀ erent social systems. However, later historical experi-
ences have shown that if the principles are followed, countries with diﬀ erent 
social systems can live in harmony and maintain amicable cooperation, not just 
countries with similar social systems.
China is not only an advocator but also a practitioner of the Five  Principles 
of Peaceful Coexistence. So far the Five Principles have been incorporated 
in the communiquéés or other important bilateral instruments between 
China and 171 countries. China sticks to them in establishing and developing 
Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai meets Kliment Yefremovich Voroshilov, Chairman of the 
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet in Moscow during his visit to the Soviet Union, Poland, and 
Hungary in January 1957. During the visit Premier Zhou stressed that the socialist countries 
should also observe the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence.

70 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
 relations with all countries of the world and aims to build a peaceful, stable, 
fair, and reasonable international political and economic order.
Maintaining Stable and Peaceful Relations 
with Developed Countries
Diplomacy is an important instrument for countries to further their foreign 
policy goals and to safeguard their national interests. National interests are 
multidimensional and vary from time to time due to diﬀ erent circumstances. In 
the ﬁ rst 30 years aft er the founding of the PRC, the priority of China’s national 
interests was to safeguard national sovereignty, territorial integrity, and security. 
With the shift from political to economic issues domestically, the priority of 
China’s national interests since the 1980s changed to that of promoting China’s 
economic development, increasing China’s comprehensive national strength, 
and improving the living standards of the Chinese people. Consequently, the 
major task of China’s diplomacy moved to creating an international environ-
ment of lasting peace and a favorable climate in China’s periphery for domestic 
economic development.
An international seminar is held in Beijing in June 2004 to mark the 50th anniversary of the 
birth of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. Attending the seminar were more than 
100 statesmen and scholars of 13 countries from ﬁ ve continents.

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
71
In light of China’s current foreign-policy goal, it is of special signiﬁ cance 
to maintain a stable relationship with the developed countries. From the 
 perspective of keeping China’s economic development, major developed coun-
tries, namely, the United States, European Union, and Japan, are China’s major 
trade partners. According to Chinese statistics, China’s trade with these three 
economies accounted for more than 40 percent of China’s total trade volume 
in the last few years, and their investment in China amounted to a quarter of 
China’s total foreign investment. In addition, they are also the major sources 
of China’s high-tech imports and the major destinations of Chinese students 
going abroad to further their education. Maintaining a stable relationship with 
developed countries has been one of China’s successful diplomatic stories since 
its reform and opening up, and also a precondition for China to continue its 
sustained economic development domestically.
From a political and security perspective, China has a political system, 
value system, and lifestyle that are diﬀ erent from those of the developed coun-
tries, and many of the political and security problems that China faces today 
have something, more or less, to do with them. Moreover, the bilateral relations 
between China and these countries can impact China’s relations with other 
countries, and in the long run will determine whether China will be able to 
attain its diplomatic goal. For all these reasons, the Chinese government pays 
great importance to its relations with developed countries.
Sino-American relations 
China’s relations with the United States is the most crucial one among China’s 
relations with all the Western powers. China is the biggest developing country, 
and the US the biggest developed country. Therefore, Sino-US relations are 
important not only for the two countries but for the world as a whole. Having 
experienced 60 years of diﬃ  culties and hardships, including confrontations and 
frictions as well as cooperation and coordination, the two sides have formed a 
highly interdependent relationship through enhanced communication.
In retrospect, the 60 years of Sino-US relations can be divided into three 
20-year periods. The first 20 years after New China’s founding witnessed 
 Sino-US rivalry, confrontation, and conflicts. The US refused to recognize 
the government of the PRC, and pursued a China policy of political  isolation, 
 economic embargo, and military containment. To safeguard its hard-won 
 sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity, the Chinese government 
had to engage in full-scale struggles with the US.
The second 20-year period was one of Sino-US strategic cooperation. 
The changing balance of power between the US and the Soviet Union in 
the late 1960s not only changed international structure, but helped bring 

72 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
about the Sino-US rapprochement. China and the US released the Shanghai 
 Communiqué during President Nixon’s visit to China in 1972, which not only 
opened the door for Sino-US diplomatic normalization but also started the 
process of bilateral strategic cooperation. Th e realization of bilateral diplomatic 
relations in 1979 ushered China and the US into a new era of cooperation in 
areas such as strategy, economy and trade, education, and culture.
Sino-US relations entered their third 20-year period of turmoil, adjust-
ment, and adaptation aft er the end of the Cold War. Th e turmoil started when 
the US imposed sanctions on China in 1989. Th e US government, disregard-
ing its commitments on reducing arms sales to Taiwan, made a decision to sell 
Taiwan ﬁ ghter planes worth US$6 billion in 1992. It again contradicted itself 
by allowing Lee Teng-hui, then Taiwan leader and an advocator of “Taiwan 
independence,” to visit the US in 1995. US-led NATO, while intervening in the 
internal affairs of former Yugoslavia, bombed the Chinese Embassy there in 
1999. In 2001, the US government increased its air surveillance on China, lead-
ing to a collision between an American spy plane and a Chinese ﬁ ghter plane 
near Chinese territory, resulting in the destruction of the Chinese plane and the 
death of its pilot. All these infringements upon Chinese sovereignty by the US 
caused strong opposition and protest from the Chinese people and the  Chinese 
government, and Sino-US relations suﬀ ered repeated setbacks.
Diﬀ erences do remain between China and the US under the current situa-
tion. However, their common interests have been on the rise and by far surpass 
their diﬀ erences. China and the US have common interests on a large array of 
issues, including maintaining world peace; settling global and regional issues, 
such as the prevention of weapons of mass destruction; settling the nuclear 
issue in Korean Peninsula and Iran; cracking down on transnational crimes; 
coping with climate change and natural disaster relief; and controlling the 
spread of infectious diseases. Enhanced communication and cooperation over 
these issues has become the new basis of bilateral strategic cooperation.
Chairman Mao Zedong and Premier Zhou Enlai talk with US President Richard Nixon and his 
National Security advisor Dr. Henry Kissinger in February 1972.

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
73
Fast-growing economic and trade relations have become a new catalyst 
for Sino-US relations. Th e volume of bilateral trade, which was US$2.4  billion 
in 1979 when the Sino-US diplomatic relations were normalized, exceeded 
US$300 billion in 2008. Th e two countries are now each other’s second-largest 
trading partner. In addition to economic and trade cooperation,  contacts and 
exchanges between China and the United States at diﬀ erent levels are becoming 
ever more frequent, and the two countries have put in place more than 60 dia-
logue and consultation mechanisms in six major categories,  covering political 
relations, economy, military, law enforcement, science and technology, educa-
tion, energy, environmental protection, aviation, and so on. Moreover, bilateral 
relations are no longer restricted to the relationship between the two states or 
the two governments. Rather they have expanded to bilateral relations between 
the two societies and the two peoples.
Chinese leader, Deng Xiaoping, at a welcoming ceremony at the White House hosted by US 
President Jimmy Carter in January 1979. Deng was the ﬁ rst Chinese leader to visit the United 
States since the founding of the People’s Republic of China in 1949.

74 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
For instance, people-to-people exchanges, which were scarce when the 
bilateral relations were ﬁ rst normalized, reached 2.1 million person/times every 
year. Th e two sides have 35 sister provinces/states and 145 sister cities. All these 
have bound China and the US together.
Diﬀ erences and frictions increased as bilateral ties were enhanced, and  Taiwan 
remains the most sensitive and crucial issue between China and the US. In spite of 
China’s consistent opposition, the US has insisted on selling weapons to Taiwan, 
and upgraded its substantial relations with Taiwan. These have all encroached 
upon China’s sovereignty, interfered with China’s internal aﬀ airs, and undermined 
China’s core national interests. Besides, the US has oft en made use of the Tibet, 
human rights, religious, and other issues that are purely domestic in nature to 
interfere in China’s internal aﬀ airs. Such US policies are detrimental to the overall 
Sino-US cooperation and are strongly opposed by the Chinese government.
China values the Sino-US relations and hopes that the relations develop 
stably and smoothly on the principles enshrined in the three  bilateral joint 
communiqués. Th e two countries agreed on a joint eﬀ ort to build  constructive 
and cooperative China-US relations during the ﬁ rst meeting between  Chinese 
President Hu Jintao and American President Barack Obama when they par-
ticipated in the G-20 financial summit held in London in April 2009. To 
implement this consensus, the two sides have launched a mechanism of Sino-
American Strategic and Economic Dialogue, which has become an important 
platform for the two sides to expand consensus, reduce differences, deepen 
mutual trust, and promote cooperation.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin and US President Bill Clinton at an event during President 
Jiang’s visit to the United States in October–November 1997.

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
75
Chinese President Hu Jintao meets with US President George Bush during the dialogue 
between G8 and developing countries held in Hokkaido, Japan in July 2008.
Chinese President Hu Jintao meets with US President Barak Obama during the G20 ﬁ nancial 
summit held in London in April 2009.

76 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
Sino-EU relations
China is the biggest developing country, while Europe is an area that has the 
most developed countries. European Union (EU) is the biggest economic 
group made up of developed countries. Sino-EU relations are one of the most 
important bilateral relations for China, and China’s consistent policy has been 
to develop close relations with the EU.
Constrained by the Cold War structure, France was the only Western 
 European country that had established diplomatic relations with China by 1964. 
The rest of Europe didn’t start diplomatic relations with China until the 1970s 
as the international situation relaxed, and China established formal ties with the 
EU (known as European Economic Community at that time) in 1975. At present, 
China maintains diplomatic relations with all European countries but the Vatican.
With its foreign policy adjusted in the early 1980s, China has advanced a 
policy of developing relations with other countries regardless of their political 
system or ideologies. Th is made it possible to develop relations with  Western 
Europe, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, who are complementary in 
Leaders of China and the European Union meet for their 6th summit in Beijing in October 
2003. Attending the meeting were Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao, European Council Chairman 
and Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, and the President of the Commission of European 
Union Romano Prodi.

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
77
 economic ﬁ elds, but with diﬀ erent political systems. High-level visits started, 
and trade volume increased quickly due to various forms of cooperation in dif-
ferent ﬁ elds. Under such favorable conditions, China reached agreements with 
Great Britain and Portugal, respectively, on the principles concerning China’s 
resumption of exercising sovereignty over Hong Kong and Macau.
Sino-EU relations experienced a setback in 1989, but returned to normal 
not long aft er. Th e British and Italian Prime Ministers paid consecutive visits to 
China in 1991, while Chinese President Jiang Zemin paid an oﬃ  cial state visit 
to France in 1994, during which he put forward China’s principles on develop-
ing relations with countries in Western Europe. And in the same year, the EU 
lift ed all but arms embargoes on China that were imposed in 1989. Rapid pro-
gresses have been made ever since. In 1998, China and EU agreed to establish 
a mechanism of annual summits. In 2001, the two sides agreed to establish a 
comprehensive partnership, which was promoted to a comprehensive strategic 
partnership in 2003. So far, China and the EU have established 50 mechanisms 
of consultation and dialogues covering such fields as politics, economic and 
trade, science, energy, and environmental protection.
Sino-EU relations are of global strategic significance. China has always 
valued the role and inﬂ uence of the EU in regional and international aﬀ airs, 
and welcomed the EU playing a constructive role in international affairs. 
China has always supported European integration. China’s EU Policy Paper, 
issued by the Chinese government in October 2003, elaborates on the EU’s 
position in China’s overall foreign relations, and reﬂ ected China’s determina-
tion to upgrade the Sino-EU relations to a long-term stable and comprehen-
sive partnership. The document also puts forward China’s EU policy goals, 
and details China’s concrete ideas on strengthening Sino-EU relations in the 
ﬁ eld of politics, economic, education, science, culture, social, legal, adminis-
tration, and the military.
The EU also attaches great importance to its relations with China and 
welcomes China’s opening up and development. It supports China to con-
tinue its road of peaceful development. Th e EU passed A Long Term Policy on 
 EU-China Relations in 1995, deﬁ ning the strategic framework of the  EU-China 
policy. Since then, the EU has consecutively issued the following policy 
papers to elaborate the guidelines, goals, and principles behind the EU-China 
policy: the EU’s New Strategy in Cooperation with China (1996), Building a 
 Comprehensive Partnership with China (1998), the EU’s China Strategy: the 
Implementation of 1998 Document and More Eﬀ ective Steps to Promote the 
EU’s Policy in the Future (2001), and A Maturing Partnership: Shared Interests 
and Challenges in EU-China relations (2003).
Sound Sino-EU political relations have paved the way for bilateral eco-
nomic relations. Th e EU became China’s largest trade partner in 2004, aft er its 

78 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
eastward expansion. Th e two-way trade reached US$425.6 billion in 2008, mak-
ing the EU not only China’s biggest trade partner, but China’s largest exporting 
market and largest source of technical imports, and the fourth largest source of 
foreign investments. Almost all the big enterprises in the EU have investments 
in China.
Th e progress in Sino-EU relations by no means implies that bilateral rela-
tions have not encountered diﬃ  culties. Among all the diﬀ erences and diﬃ  cul-
ties that pose the greatest harm to the bilateral relations are those that concern 
 China’s territorial and sovereignty integrity. For instance, the Netherlands 
government’s insistence on selling Taiwan submarines in 1982, despite China’s 
strong opposition, led to the degrading of Sino-Dutch relations. Th e French gov-
ernment’s decision to sell Taiwan Mirage-2000 ﬁ ghters in 1992 caused a major 
setback in their bilateral relations. Recent examples include the disturbances 
with the Beijing Olympic torch relay in its Europe leg, particularly the Paris leg, 
and the French leader’s insistence on meeting with the Dalai Lama. All reversed 
the development of Sino-EU relations. Furthermore, as bilateral relations 
deepen, economic frictions become common occurrences in bilateral relations.
China and the EU do not have conflict in their respective fundamental 
interests, nor does their comprehensive partnership demand that the two sides 
should agree on every issue. Th e two sides need to reduce diﬀ erences, deepen 
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao and President of the Commission of European Union José 
Manuel Barroso meet the press after their meeting in China in April 2008.

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
79
mutual trust, and broaden the scope of their cooperation on the basis of seek-
ing common ground while reserving diﬀ erences.
Relations with Japan
Japan and China are neighboring countries with a long history of friendship, 
separated only by a strip of water. Japan waged wars against China before 
the founding of the PRC and caused great sufferings to the Chinese people. 
 Referring to this unpleasant historical episode, the late Chinese Premier Zhou 
Enlai remarked: “(The Sino-Japanese relations are) 2,000 years of friend-
ship, punctuated by only 50 years of confrontation.” And he put forward the 
 following principle for developing bilateral relations: “Learning from history 
and  facing up to the future.”
Th anks to the shift s in the international structure in the 1970s, China and 
Japan put an end to their abnormal relations and established diplomatic ties 
in 1972. According to the provisions of the Sino-Japanese Joint Statement for 
normalizing bilateral relations, the two sides signed the Sino-Japanese Treaty of 
Peace and Friendship in 1978, which laid the political foundation for the good 
neighborly relationship between China and Japan.
Great progress has been achieved in Sino-Japanese relations since the 1980s. 
High-level visits have been frequent, and bilateral cooperative  mechanisms 
at different levels have been established, such as the Joint Cabinet Member 
Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai and Japanese Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka exchange signed 
copies of the China-Japan Joint Statement in Beijing in September 1972.

80 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
 Conference, the Sino-Japanese Friendship Committee of 21st Century formed 
by senior, junior, and young generation members from the two sides, the 
 Regular Consultation between the Two Foreign Ministries, and Sino-Japanese 
Security Consultation.
Sound development of political relations has created a favorable envi-
ronment for Sino-Japanese cooperation in economy, trade, and other areas. 
The Chinese government declared in the Sino-Japanese Joint Statement 
that: “in the interest of the friendship between the Chinese and the Japanese 
peoples, it (China) renounces its demand for war reparation from Japan.” On 
the  Japanese side, it has provided four packages of government yen loans to 
China amounting to 2.65 trillion Japanese yen from 1979 to 2000. Bilateral 
trade reached US$266.79 billion in 2008, making Japan China’s third-largest 
partner, second-largest foreign investor, and China Japan’s largest trade 
 partner. The fast-growing Chinese economy has brought about important 
opportunities for Japan, making China an important external driving force 
for Japan’s economic recovery.
Discordant notes remain in Sino-Japanese relations. The biggest distur-
bance concerns how the Japanese government views its history of aggression. 
In the Joint Statement that marked the normalization of bilateral relations, the 
The China-Japan Treaty of Peace and Friendship is signed in Beijing in August 1978.

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
81
Japanese side admitted that it “is keenly conscious of the responsibility for the 
serious damages that Japan caused in the past to the Chinese people through 
war, and deeply reproaches itself.” However, the Japanese government, since the 
1980s, has “examined and approved” some school history textbooks that dis-
torted and whitewashed the history of aggression, and has caused protests from 
China and Japan’s other Asian neighbors. In 1985, the Japanese Prime Minister 
paid homage in his official capacity to the Yasukuni Shrine where 14 class A 
World War II criminals were worshiped. Th is was protested by China and other 
Asian countries, and since then, Japanese leaders have stopped visiting the 
shrine. But at the beginning of the 21st century, the Japanese leader once again 
disregarded the opposition from Chinese and other Asian peoples and insisted 
on visiting the shrine in the name of prime minister, leading to the suspension 
of high-level visits between China and Japan.
Th e Taiwan question is another factor hindering Sino-Japanese relations. 
Taiwan was under Japanese colonial rule for 50 years and was returned to 
China in accordance with the relevant international documents. The Sino-
Japanese Joint Statement provides: “Th e government of the People’s Republic 
of China reiterates that Taiwan is an inalienable part of the territory of the 
People’s Republic of China. The government of Japan fully understands and 
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao holds a welcome ceremony at the Great Hall of the People for 
visiting Japanese Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda on December 28, 2007.

82 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
respects this stand of the government of the People’s Republic of China, and 
it firmly maintains its stand under Article 8 of the Potsdam Proclamation.” 
However, some Japanese politicians continued to interfere in the Taiwan issue. 
China has made its policy unambiguously clear that it does not oppose Japan 
having nonoﬃ  cial relations with Taiwan, but it is strongly against Japan hav-
ing any oﬃ  cial relations with Taiwan that would lead to “two Chinas” or “One 
China, One Taiwan” in any form.
In consideration of the concerns expressed by China and other countries 
that had been invaded by Japan in the past, the new Japanese leaders stopped 
paying homage to the Yasukuni Shrine in October 2006, removing the major 
obstacle in the Sino-Japanese relations. Prime Minister Shinzo Abe paid an 
oﬃ  cial visit to China, which was called an “icebreaking visit” in 2006. In April 
2007, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao returned an “ice-melting visit” to Japan, 
during which the two parties issued a Sino-Japanese Joint Communiqué that 
reaﬃ  rms the two sides’ eﬀ orts to develop a bilateral “strategic relationship of 
mutual beneﬁ t,” putting bilateral relations on the normal track. Japanese Prime 
Minister Yasuo Fukuda’s “meeting the spring” visit to China in May 2008 and 
Chinese President Hu Jintao’s “warm spring” visit to Japan demonstrated that 
 Sino-Japanese relations are now on a normal track.
Japanese Emperor Akihito holds a welcome ceremony at the Japanese Court for Chinese 
President Hu Jintao during his visit to Japan on May 7, 2008.

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
83
Good Sino-Japanese relations are beneficial to the two nations. China is 
ready to develop Sino-Japanese relations based on peaceful coexistence and 
mutual beneﬁ t and is committed to attaining common development for genera-
tions to come in accordance with the principles enshrined in the Sino-Japanese 
Joint Declaration and other political documents.
Strengthening Good Neighborly Relations
Th e Chinese idiom—Th e teeth will be exposed to the cold once the lips are 
gone—well demonstrates the history and summarizes the experiences of 
 China’s relations with its neighbors. “Neighbors are dearer than relatives 
from far away” is the ﬁ rsthand experiences in developing relations with its 
neighbors.
Many of China’s neighbors gained independence from Western colonial 
rule around the time when the PRC was founded, marking a new starting point 
for China’s relations with its neighbors. While settling the issues left  over from 
history with India, China put forward the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexis-
tence, and jointly proposed to the world these principles together with India 
and Burma. Based on the principle of equality and mutual beneﬁ t, China has 
settled boundary issues left  over from history consecutively with Burma, Nepal, 
Afghanistan, Mongolia, and Korea, making most parts of China’s borders 
friendly and peaceful.
Since its reform and opening up, China’s diplomacy has focused on creat-
ing a good peripheral environment for its domestic economic development, 
and China has made relentless efforts to develop good neighborly relations 
with its peripheral countries. China’s traditional friendships with its neighbors 
have been cemented, and its relations with ASEAN, Mongolia, Vietnam, India, 
and other neighbors have been gradually improved.
Aft er the end of the Cold War, China settled most of the boundary issues 
with its neighbors in the spirit of equal consultation, mutual understand-
ing and accommodation, or reached consensus to shelve them pending 
their final solution. China has successively reached agreements with India, 
 Pakistan, Nepal, and ASEAN to build bilateral partnerships of diﬀ erent kinds 
since 1996.
Th e progress and steady development in its relations with Russia, China’s 
biggest neighbor, is a model of China’s success in establishing good neighborly 
relations. Sino-Russian relations developed from the Sino-Soviet relations. Th e 
Soviet Union was the first country that recognized the PRC and established 

84 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
China and Burma conclude an agreement and a treaty on boundary issues in Beijing in 1960. 
This was the ﬁ rst time New China and a neighboring country solved their past border issues.
Chinese and Vietnamese ofﬁ cials sign an agreement on border trade. In November 1991, 
General Secretary Do Muoi of the Vietnamese Communist Party visited China and the two 
counties normalized their relations.
diplomatic ties with the PRC upon its founding, and Sino-Soviet relations 
 witnessed friendly alliance in the 1950s, deterioration and confrontation in the 
1960s and 1970s, and rapprochement and normalization in the 1980s.
The Soviet Union disintegrated on December 26, 1991, shortly after the 
normalization of Sino-Soviet relations in 1989. As Russia inherited the legal 

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
85
status of the Soviet Union on the international stage, Sino-Soviet relations 
gave way smoothly to peaceful Sino-Russian relations. Th e two sides agreed in 
December 1992 to deepen their bilateral relations on the basis of the UN Char-
ter, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, and other recognized principles 
of international laws. The leaders of the two countries frequently exchange 
views on international or regional issues of common concern in their regular 
visits to each other’s countries, in the UN, and at the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (Shanghai Five) summits, promoting their bilateral relations from 
“constructive partnership” to “constructive strategic partnership” and finally 
to “partnership of strategic coordination based on equality and mutual beneﬁ t 
and oriented toward the 21st century.” Th e two heads of state signed in 2001 
the Treaty of Good Neighborliness and Friendly Cooperation between the Peo-
ple’s Republic of China and the Russian Federation, which reiterated that the 
two sides would continue to develop their good-neighborly, friendly, strategic 
partnership of cooperation based on equality and mutual trust. Th e treaty also 
codiﬁ es the idea that the two countries and the two peoples will carry on the 
“friendly relations from generation to generation, and never become enemies.”
China has advanced the concept of creating a secure, amicable, and pros-
perous neighborhood, and tried to build a good neighborly relationship and 
Chinese President Hu Jintao meets with visiting Russian President Vladimir Putin in 
October 2004.

86 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
partnership with its neighbors in the 21st century. China has helped resolve 
hot spots, and participated in or facilitated the formation of the regional 
 multilateral mechanism. These foreign policy efforts have helped create a 
 win-win peripheral environment based on peace, stability, equality and mutual 
trust, and cooperation.
The good peripheral neighborly relations are manifested first in China’s 
relations with Southeast Asian countries. The Chinese government’s policy 
during the Asian financial crisis in 1997 and its stand toward the remaining 
boundary disputes with certain countries brought about a change in the per-
ception of Southeast countries toward China. In the political realm, China has 
enhanced mutual trust with ASEAN members by actively participating in the 
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), and has reached agreements through multi-
lateral dialogue and cooperation, including the Declaration on the Conduct of 
Parties in the South China Sea, the Joint Declaration of ASEAN and China on 
Cooperation in the Field of Non-Traditional Security Issues, and the Treaty of 
Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia in 2003.
In the economic realm, bilateral trade and economic relations between 
China and ASEAN members have been forcefully strengthened through the 
Chinese President Hu Jintao and Russian President Dmitry A. Medvedev sign a Joint 
Statement of the People’s Republic of China and the Russian Federation on Major 
International Issues in Beijing on May 23, 2008.

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
87
Chinese President Jiang Zemin attends the informal meeting of leaders of ASEAN plus China, 
Japan, and the Republic of Korea in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia in December 1997.
A summit commemorating the 15th anniversary of ASEAN-China dialogue relations is held in 
Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region in November 2006.

88 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
cooperative framework of ASEAN plus China, Japan, and South Korea (10+3), 
and ASEAN plus China (10+1). China and ASEAN signed the Framework 
Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN 
and the People’s Republic of China in 2002, laying out plans for establish-
ing a China-ASEAN trade zone by 2010. After the implementation of Trade 
in Goods Agreement between China and ASEAN in 2005, more than 7,000 
kinds of goods began to enjoy tariﬀ  reduction, and this has further boosted the 
 bilateral trade.
Second are China’s relations with Northwestern neighbors. The heads 
of state from China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan met in 
Shanghai and Moscow in 1996 and 1997, respectively, reaching agreements 
on strengthening mutual conﬁ dence in the military ﬁ elds and disarmament 
in the border regions. Th ese meetings launched the annual meeting mecha-
nism of the Shanghai Five, which not only facilitated the peaceful settlement 
of outstanding boundary issues between them, but also increased mutual 
trust among member states. In addition, the sphere of mutual benefit and 
cooperation was expanded to include security, politics, diplomacy, economy, 
and culture.
Th e fruitful cooperation among the Shanghai Five led to the establishment 
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) in 2001. Since its inception, 
the SCO has pursued the Shanghai spirit of mutual trust, mutual beneﬁ t, and 
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao and Indian Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee exchange 
signed copies of the Declaration on Principles for Relations and Comprehensive Cooperation 
between the People’s Republic of China and the Republic of India during Prime Minister 
Vajpayee’s ofﬁ cial visit to China in June 2003.

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
89
equality, as well as respecting the diversity of civilizations and seeking com-
mon development. China and the SCO members have followed the principle 
of  nonalignment, inclusiveness, and not targeting other countries or regions. 
Due to its growing, the SCO, which originally consisted of China, Russia, 
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan, has admitted Mongo-
lia, Pakistan, Iran, and India as observers, and Sri Lanka and Belo Russia as 
dialogue partners. SCO has become an important platform for maintaining 
regional security in China’s northwestern border and increasing mutual trust 
among its members.
Th ird are its relations with southwestern neighbors. Th e frequent visits 
between Chinese and Indian and Pakistani leaders have led to improved 
Sino-Indian relations and the consolidated traditional friendship between 
China and Pakistan. The leaders of China and India confirmed in 2000 
the forging of a strategic partnership in the 21st century, and the two 
sides  further signed the Joint Declaration on Principles for Relations and 
 Comprehensive Cooperation in 2003, agreeing to maintain the status quo 
pending the ﬁ nal resolution of Sino-Indian boundary issue. At the same time, 
the two sides agreed to designate their respective representatives to explore 
the framework for the ﬁ nal settlement of the boundary issues. Sino-Indian 
relations have shown a good momentum as bilateral political trust deepens, 
and cooperation has expanded in the ﬁ eld of trade and economy, defense, as 
Chinese President Hu Jintao and Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf are to sign the Joint 
Declaration of the People’s Republic of China and the Islamic Republic of Pakistan on the 
Directions of Bilateral Cooperation in Beijing in November 2003.

90 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
well as humanitarian areas. At the same time, the Sino-Pakistani traditional 
friendship has also been consolidated through proactive mutual beneficial 
cooperation between the two sides. China’s sound relations with both India 
and Pakistan, two important developing countries with regional influence, 
have relaxed the tensions in the sub-Asian continent and improved China’s 
northwestern border security.
Last are China’s relations with its northeastern neighbors. After the 
Korean nuclear issue escalated into a crisis, China engaged in a shuttle 
 diplomacy by dispatching its envoys to countries concerned, enabling the six 
parties— the DPRC, the US, the ROK, Japan, Russia, and China—to come to 
the  negotiation table. During this process, China hosted each round of talks, 
provided facilities, chaired each session, and motivated the parties to set the 
ultimate goal of denuclearizing the Korean Peninsula. China insisted that the 
North Korean nuclear issue should be settled through dialogue and peaceful 
means to prevent the issue getting out of control. China’s diplomatic eﬀ orts 
not only contributed to regional peace, but were conducive to the security of 
Northeast Asia.
Chinese President Hu Jintao meets with ROK President Lee Myung-bak and Japanese Prime 
Minister Yukio Hatoyama before the second China-Japan-ROK trilateral leaders’ meeting held 
in Beijing on October 10, 2009.

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
91
Enhancing Solidarity and Cooperation with 
Other Developing Countries
Developing countries mainly concentrate in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, 
and most of them have similar historical suﬀ erings, situations, and desires to 
China, which provide a solid basis for good bilateral relations between China 
and other developing countries.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
• In 1994, Constructive Partnership with Russia
• In 1996, Constructive Partnership Oriented to the 21st Century 
with India
• In 1996, Comprehensive Partnership Oriented to the 21st 
 Century with Pakistan
• In 1996, Partnership for Generations Oriented to the 21st 
 Century with Nepal
• In 1997, Good-Neighborly Partnership of Mutual Trust Oriented 
to the 21st Century with ASEAN
• In 1998, Partnership of Friendship and Cooperation for Peace 
and Development with Japan
• In 1998, Cooperative Partnership Oriented to the 21st Century 
with ROK
• In 2003, China Strategic Partnership for Peace and Prosperity 
with ASEAN
• In 2003, Good-Neighborly Partnership of Mutual Trust with Mongolia
• In 2005, Peace- and Prosperity-Oriented Strategic Cooperative 
Partnership with India
• In 2005, Strategic Partnership with Indonesia
• In 2005, Strategic Partnership with Kazakhstan
• In 2006, Strategic Partnership of Mutual Benefi t with Japan
• In 2008, Strategic Cooperative Partnership with ROK
PARTNERSHIPS CHINA HAS ESTABLISHED 
WITH ITS NEIGHBORS SINCE THE 1990S

92 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
China’s relations with African and Arab countries
China’s relations with African and Arab countries started from the ﬁ rst Asian-
African Conference held in Bandung, Indonesia in 1955. Chinese Premier 
Zhou Enlai put forward at this conference the principle of seeking common 
ground while putting aside differences, which eliminated the worries and 
misunderstandings of some developing countries about China. China estab-
lished diplomatic ties with Egypt in 1956, a signiﬁ cant start in its relations with 
 African and Arab countries. To date, China has established diplomatic ties with 
all Arab countries and 48 of the 53 African countries.
China and the majority of the African and Arab countries have been sup-
portive of each other all along. China has ﬁ rmly supported their desire to uphold 
national independence and pursue national economic development. During his 
visit to 10 Asian and African countries from December 1963 to February 1964, 
Premier Zhou Enlai put forward ﬁ ve principles for guiding China’s relations with 
African and Arab countries and eight principles on China’s aid to African countries. 
Th e Tanzara Railway constructed with a 988-million-yuan, interest-free loan from 
the Chinese government is a monument of friendship between China and Africa.
African countries had ﬁ rmly supported China in its bid to restore its  lawful 
seat in the UN. Twenty-six of the 76 countries that voted in the 26th session 
Malian President Modibo Kaita greets Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai at the airport of Mali in 
January 1964. From October 1963 to February 1964 Premier Zhou and Vice-Premier Chen 
Yi visited 13 countries in Asia and Africa. The 13-nation tour was a landmark in China’s 
friendly relations with Asia-African countries.

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
93
The Tanzania-Zambia Railway, a well-known project in China’s program of foreign assistance. 
Construction of the 1,860-km railway started in October 1970 and was completed in July 1976.
of the UN General Assembly in 1971 for the resolution to restore China’s 
legitimate rights in the UN were from Africa. Th e late Chairman Mao Zedong 
noted that: “it is our African friends who have brought us back to the United 
Nations.”
Since China has had its legitimate rights in the UN restored, it has stood 
ﬁ rmly by the side of developing countries. For instance, China voted 16 times 
in succession in order for the candidate Salim Ahmed Salim, Tanzanian 
 Foreign Minister, to be elected UN Secretary-General in 1982. Although Salim 
failed to be elected as anticipated, the new Secretary-General, Javier Perez de 
Cuellar, was also from a developing country. In 1991, China worked energeti-
cally to support African countries in the election of the UN Secretary-General, 
leading to the election of Boutros-Ghali, Egyptian vice Prime Minister, as the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
China has made it the cornerstone and starting point of its foreign  relations 
to strengthen solidarity and cooperation with other developing countries 
since its reform and opening up, and has endeavored to explore new ways and 
means to promote mutually beneﬁ cial bilateral cooperation with other devel-
oping countries. China has supported and actively participated in  South-South 

94 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
cooperation, and advanced four principles on expanding  economic and trade 
ties with developing countries, namely, equality and mutual benefit, stress 
on practical results, diversity in form, and attainment of common progress. 
As an important part of China’s opening-up policy, the cooperation between 
China and other developing countries has been substantiated in content and 
expanded in scale, forming a situation of win-win cooperation.
Further progress has been made in Sino-African relations since the end of 
the Cold War. Nine heads of state from sub-Saharan African countries visited 
China in 1989 alone. During his visit to six African countries in 1996, Chinese 
President Jiang Zemin put forward a ﬁ ve-point proposal for the development 
of a 21st century-oriented, long-term, stable China-Africa relationship of all-
around cooperation: to treat each other as equals, develop sincere friendship, 
strengthen solidarity and cooperation, and seek common development.
To jointly meet the challenges in the new century, China, motivated 
by some African countries, proposed the establishment of the Forum on 
 China-Africa Cooperation, which has become a new platform to strengthen 
Chinese Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing and Secretary General Amre Moussa of the League of 
Arab States announce the establishment of the Forum on China-Arab Cooperation at a press 
conference in Cairo, Egypt, on January 13, 2004.

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
95
Sino-Africa consultation and cooperation. At the ﬁ rst Ministerial  Conference 
of the Forum held in October 2001, China announced the cancellation of 
10 billion yuan of debts owed by the heavily indebted poor countries and 
least developed countries in Africa, and to provide special funds to support 
and encourage Chinese enterprises to carry out mutually beneficial coop-
eration in Africa. The Forum on China-Africa Cooperation-Addis Ababa 
Action Plan (2004–2006,) issued at the second Ministerial Conference of 
the Forum in 2003, and the Declaration of the Beijing Summit of the Forum 
on China-Africa Cooperation and the Beijing Action Plan of the Forum on 
China-Africa Cooperation (2007–2009), adopted at the third Ministerial 
Conference and the first summit held in Beijing in 2006, all promoted and 
deepened China-Africa cooperation. After the eight commitments on aid-
ing African countries proposed at the Beijing summit in 2006 had been fully 
implemented, the  Chinese government made another eight promises on aid-
ing Africa at the fourth ministerial conference of the forum held in Egypt in 
November 2009. China’s policies have won extensive acclaim from African 
countries and praise from the international community.
Chinese President Hu Jintao, Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi, and Egyptian President 
Hosni Mubarak jointly read out the Declaration of the Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-
Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) held in Beijing in November 2006.

96 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
Mutually beneficial and win-win economic cooperation between China 
and Africa has witnessed steady growth in the 21st century. China-Africa trade 
volume enjoyed a robust boost from over US$10 million in 1950 to US$106.8 
billion in 2008, making China the third-largest trade partner of Africa. China’s 
investments in Africa covered 49 African countries, injecting strong impetus to 
local economic development.
The Chinese government issued China’s African Policy Paper in 2006, 
which called for the establishment of a new type of strategic partnership 
between China and Africa, featuring political equality and mutual trust, win-
win economic cooperation, and cultural exchanges. Th e paper also elaborated 
on the aims and means of China’s African policy, and laid out plans for bilateral 
cooperation in various ﬁ elds in the future.
The Sino-Arabic Forum was founded in 2004 following the success of 
the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation. The forum has become a new 
mechanism to strengthen Sino-Arabic dialogue and cooperation. Under 
this mechanism, China and Arab countries adopted vigorous measures to 
promote bilateral exchanges and cooperation in such fields as economy 
and trade, investment, energy, education, culture, science and technology, 
public health, and environment, so as to attain common development of 
the two sides.
Chinese Primer Wen Jiabao addresses the 4th Ministerial Conference of the Forum on 
China-Africa Cooperation held in Sharm el-Sheikh in November 2009.

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
97
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
EIGHT MEASURES TO STRENGTHEN CHINA-
AFRICA COOPERATION ANNOUNCED BY THE 
CHINESE GOVERNMENT IN 2009
1. Establishing a China-Africa partnership to address climate 
change and build 100 clean energy projects for Africa.
2. Enhancing cooperation in science and technology by launching 
a China-Africa science and technology partnership, under which 
China will carry out 100 joint projects with Africa and receive 
100 African post-doctoral fellows.
3. Helping Africa build up fi nancing capacity, providing US$10 
billion in concessional loans to African countries.
4. Further opening up its market to African products by 
implementing, in phases, zero-tariff on 95 percent of the 
products from the least developed African countries and 
starting with 60 percent of the products within 2010.
5. Further enhancing cooperation with Africa in agriculture, 
increasing the number of its agricultural technology 
demonstration centers in Africa to 20, and training 2,000 
agricultural technology personnel for Africa.
6. Deepening cooperation in medical care and health, providing 
medical equipment and anti-malaria materials worth 500 million 
yuan (US$73.2 million), and training 3,000 doctors and nurses 
for Africa.
7. Enhancing cooperation in human resources development 
and education, building 50 schools and training 1,500 school 
principals and teachers for African countries, increasing the 
number of Chinese government scholarships to Africa to 5,500 
and training 20,000 professionals for Africa by 2012.
8. Expanding people-to-people and cultural exchanges by 
launching a China-Africa joint research and exchange program 
to increase exchanges and cooperation.

98 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
China’s relations with Latin American countries
China and Latin American countries are all developing countries. Due to the 
long distance between them and the differences in their natural conditions, 
social systems, and cultural traditions, New China started developing its rela-
tions with Latin American countries later than with other regions. However, the 
relations have developed very fast thus far, and now have become an important 
part of China’s external relations.
Latin America has traditionally been referred to as the “backyard” of the 
US. Except for Sino-Cuban diplomatic relations, which were normalized in 
1960, no breakthrough was made in China’s relations with the rest of the Latin 
American countries until Sino-US relations were normalized in the early 1970s 
when 11 Latin American countries established diplomatic relations with China 
consecutively.
Strengthening solidarity and cooperation with other developing countries, 
including Latin American countries, has been the cornerstone of China’s for-
eign relations since its reform and opening up. Th e head of the Chinese gov-
ernment paid a ﬁ rst visit to Latin America in 1985, proposing four guidelines 
for China’s relations with Latin America, namely, peace and friendship, mutual 
support, equality and mutual benefit, and attainment of common progress. 
During this visit, as many as 15 agreements, cooperating on politics, economy, 
trade, science and technology, culture, and financial issues, were concluded 
between China and Columbia, Brazil, Argentina, and Venezuela, laying a solid 
foundation for China’s friendly relations with Latin American countries in vari-
ous ﬁ elds. Since then, Sino-Latin American relations have entered a new period 
of comprehensive development that include both inter-governmental and peo-
ple-to-people cooperation.
Acceleration of globalization since the end of the Cold War has shortened 
the distance between China and Latin American countries, and Sino-Latin 
American relations were further strengthened. Chinese President Jiang Zemin 
paid a visit to Mexico in 1997, and six countries—Chile, Argentina, Uruguay, 
Cuba, Venezuela, and Brazil—in 2001. From 1996 to 2004, eight presidents, 
three governors, and three premiers from Latin America paid friendly visits 
to China. Visits of top leaders from the two sides have greatly consolidated 
 bilateral cooperation between China and Latin American countries.
The 21st century has witnessed the new development in the relations 
between China and Latin America, featuring continuous exchanges of high-
level visits, strengthened political ties, and new progress in economic and trade 
cooperation. President Hu Jintao paid visits to Brazil, Argentina, Chile, and 
Cuba in 2004 and Costa Rica, Cuba, and Peru in 2008. The Chinese Foreign 
Ministry issued China’s Policy Paper on Latin America and the Caribbean in 

 
Chapter 4 Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence 
99
2008, which elaborated the goal and ﬁ elds of cooperation in China’s relations 
with Latin America, put forward the guiding principle for Sino-Latin American 
cooperation, and laid a more solid foundation for the comprehensive develop-
ment of Sino-Latin American relations.
At present, China has maintained diplomatic ties with 21 of the 33 Latin 
American countries. Since its establishment of a “strategic partnership” with 
Brazil in 1993, China has set up a “strategic partnership for future common 
development” with Venezuela, a “strategic partnership” with Mexico,  Argentina, 
and Peru, and a “strategic partnership of common development” with Chile. 
The political consultation between China and Latin American countries 
has been further institutionalized and the dialogue mechanisms have been 
improved.
China has also worked together with Latin America in the multilateral 
arena. It became an observer in Inter-America Development Bank and in Latin 
American Integration Association in 1991 and 1993, respectively. Thereafter, 
China became an observer in the Organization of American States and the UN 
Economic Commission for Latin America, successively, in 2000 and 2004. In 
addition, China has also launched dialogue mechanisms with the Rio Group, 
Southern African Development Community (SADC), and the Andean Group, 
and established foreign ministerial consultation mechanisms with major Latin 
American countries.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin delivers a speech on China-Latin America friendship and 
cooperation at the UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) 
during his tour of six Latin American countries in April 2001.

100 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
Strong political relations create favorable conditions for economic and 
trade cooperation between China and major Latin American countries. China 
has signed agreements on economic and/or technological cooperation with 16 
Latin American countries, and has reached agreements on investment promo-
tion and mutual investment protection with 11 countries. Treaties on avoiding 
double taxation were also concluded between China and ﬁ ve Latin American 
countries. All of these instruments have facilitated the remarkable progress in 
Sino-Latin American economic and trade cooperation. For instance, the trade 
volume between China and Latin American countries was only US$1 billion 
in 1979. That volume reached US$143.3 billion in 2008, making China the 
 third-largest trade partner of Latin America.
Sino-Latin American economic and trade cooperation continues to 
develop in various ﬁ elds on an increasingly solid foundation. Th e role of Latin 
American countries in China’s foreign relations is on the rise and will become 
more and more important in the future.
Chinese President Hu Jintao delivers a speech “Building Comprehensive Cooperative 
Partnership between China and Latin America in the New Era” at the Peruvian Congress in 
November 2008.



5 
103
5 
Globalization is a comprehensive and multilevel process. In the economic 
sphere, almost all countries have chosen the market economy as their mode 
of economic development regardless of their different social systems and 
 development status. International trade and global investment have expanded 
at an unprecedented rate in both geographical distribution and scale, making 
the world an intertwined global market. 
In the process of economic globalization, new means of  communication 
based on high technology has not only shortened the distance between 
 countries and regions, but also provided the material foundation for the 
 globalization of production and market, and brought about information 
 globalization. Meanwhile, the extensive employment of modern transportation 
has made long-distance travel possible within a short time, and cross-border 
migration is on the rise. Th e world we live in has become a global village. 
Globalization has intimately connected countries and made them 
 interdependent. It has not only changed the relationship between  internal 
and external affairs, and blurred their boundaries, but also changed the 
 environment, issues, methods, and means, and even the content and concept of 
diplomacy. Diplomatic agendas are becoming increasingly pluralized, expand-
ing from the conventional political and military realms to that of economy and 
culture. Th e subjects of diplomacy have expanded from sovereign state actors 
to encompass international organizations, transnational corporations, as well 
as political parties, parliaments, and nongovernmental organizations. Changes 
are also taking place with diplomatic means and channels. 
China regards globalization neither as “a panacea for all development 
 problems” or “a scourge inevitably leading to disaster.” Instead, it is “a trend of 
Adapting to Globalization, 
and Promoting 
Comprehensive Diplomacy
Chapter 5 

104 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
world economic development independent of man’s will, and no country can 
bypass it.” No nation would be able to develop its economy in isolation. In light 
of its national conditions, China has put forward a scientiﬁ c outlook  featuring 
people-oriented, all-around, coordinated and sustainable development. In 
foreign aﬀ airs, China has unswervingly adhered to the opening-up policy and 
actively participated in international economic cooperation and competition 
in conformity with the development of globalization. It has brought forth the 
concept of “grand diplomacy” or “comprehensive diplomacy” in foreign aﬀ airs, 
which covers multiple areas, levels, and channels. 
Broadened Diplomatic Arena 
Promoting Economic Diplomacy 
Th e third plenary session of the 11th CPC Central Committee in 1978 decided 
to shift  the focus of domestic work to economic development. Th ereaft er, the 
relationship between internal and external aﬀ airs reversed the original concept 
that domestic affairs serve foreign policy goals, making foreign policy serve 
domestic affairs by creating a sound international and neighboring environ-
ment for domestic economic development. With regard to the relationship 
China ofﬁ cially joins the World Trade Organization (WTO) in December 2001. This is a sign 
that China has formally become an important part of the international economic system. 

 Chapter 5  Adapting to Globalization, and Promoting Comprehensive Diplomacy 
105
between politics and economics, “politics in command” gave way to the idea 
that politics should serve the economy and equal importance is given to poli-
tics and economy. Th e signiﬁ cance of China’s economic diplomacy emerged.  
As the reform and opening up gathered momentum, China made eﬀ orts 
to promote foreign trade, expand international cooperation, and revise domes-
tic laws to encourage foreign investment and introduce advanced technology. 
China’s seats in the World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) were 
restored; it joined the Asian Development Bank, and it began to apply for the 
restoration of its seat in General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). 
These economic activities increased China’s openness and strengthened its 
closer ties with the world, which signiﬁ cantly boosted  the country’s economic 
growth and strength. China’s economic diplomacy has resulted in remarkable 
achievement. 
Economic globalization continued to surge ahead aft er the end of the Cold 
War, presenting China with unprecedented challenges and opportunities in its 
cause of reform and opening up as well as its modernization drive. Th e  Chinese 
government realized that prosperity could be sought only if it followed the 
trend through vigorous participation in the international community. China 
stepped up the process to integrate into the international economic system, 
The 3rd annual meeting of the New Champions of the World Economic Forum is held in 
Dalian, Liaoning Province in September 2009. 

106 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
joined APEC, and applied to enter the WTO and other international multi-
lateral economic organizations. Th e idea of economic diplomacy has become 
more explicit. 
Th e signiﬁ cance of economic diplomacy was further upgraded in China’s 
overall foreign relations since the turn of the 21st century and has drawn much 
attention from decision-makers. Economic diplomacy has been incorporated 
into the overall strategy of national economic and social development and 
embodied in China’s omnidirectional foreign relations structure. It has become 
an effective way to promote China’s national interests and an important 
 platform to enhance China’s relations with diﬀ erent countries. 
First of all, promoting economic diplomacy has been done by cement-
ing China’s economic ties, seeking cooperation and avoiding confrontation, 
and stabilizing the bilateral relations with Western countries so as to ensure 
the necessary market for China’s economic development. Mutually beneﬁ cial 
cooperation on an equal footing in the economic ﬁ eld and rising bilateral trade 
volumes have become the hallmark of China’s relations with the EU, the United 
States, and Japan. 
Secondly, economic diplomacy has become the important means by which 
China has strengthened its relations with other developing countries. The 
 Chinese government held a national conference on China’s economic diplo-
macy toward developing countries in 2004. The conference emphasized that 
China should “combine friendly relations and mutual trust in the political ﬁ eld 
with cooperation and exchanges in the economic field to promote economic 
ties through political means, and coordinate economic and political rela-
tions.” It also emphasized that  “economic cooperation should be carried out 
in a diverse  manner with a focus on practical eﬀ ect, and combine trade with 
investment, and foreign aid funds with credit funds, as well as the strategy of  
‘going out’ with ‘inviting in.’” With adjusted policies and new means to enhance 
 bilateral relations, the basis of China’s relations with other developing coun-
tries has shifted from cooperation in anti-imperialism, anti-colonialism, and 
 striving for and safeguarding national independence, to mutually beneficial 
economic cooperation. 
Th irdly, another major aspect of China’s economic diplomacy has been its 
integration with the global economic mechanisms and participation in global 
economic cooperation. China submitted its application for the restoration of 
its GATT contracting status in 1986 and it took the country  17 years of con-
stant eﬀ ort before it obtained ﬁ nal accession to WTO in October 2001. During 
the process, China speeded up domestic reforms on the one hand and insisted 
on the principle of balancing rights and obligations in its negotiation with 
the WTO China group on the other hand. Since its accession to WTO, China 
has taken a series of measures to further open up to the outside world within 

 Chapter 5  Adapting to Globalization, and Promoting Comprehensive Diplomacy 
107
the WTO framework, such as further reducing tariff and non-tariff  barriers, 
 promoting liberalization, facilitating trade and investment, strengthening 
openness in service trade, enhancing transparency in trade, protecting intellec-
tual property rights, and deepening reform in exchange rate formation mecha-
nisms to strengthen the elasticity of the RMB exchange rate. In addition to 
active participation in the WTO, China has also actively joined other regional 
and bilateral trade arrangements to create a favorable external environment for 
the sustained and rapid growth of its economy. 
Fourth, China has been vigorously engaged in multilateral economic 
 dialogues and developing free-trade zones with other countries. Chinese 
 leaders have exchanged views with leaders of other countries and personages 
from the business circle to reach a better understanding, and have facilitated 
some important cooperative projects through active participation in such inter-
national conferences as APEC meetings and World Economic Forum. China 
has concluded six agreements on establishing free-trade zones with ASEAN 
and other countries and regions, and is in the process of negotiation with more 
countries and regions on similar agreements. The number of countries that 
have recognized China’s full-market economy status has climbed to 77. In light 
of the agreement reached by China and the ASEAN in 2002, the China-ASEAN 
area will become the world’s third-largest free trade area only next to NAFTA 
and the European Union. Furthermore, since its first participation in the G8 
dialogue meeting with major developing countries in 2003, China has kept 
in close touch with the G8. China has elaborated its views on such important 
issues as energy and the environment, and played a constructive role in solving 
global economic problems. 
Fifth, in conformity with the ever-changing situation of the world econ-
omy, international cooperation in such fields as energy, climate change, and 
environment has become the new focus in China’s economic diplomacy. Th e 
Chinese government has attached great importance to global climate change 
facing mankind. Th e Chinese government has set up a national working group 
to tackle the problem of climate change, energy saving, and pollution reduc-
tion, and has formulated the National Program on Tackling Climate Change. 
On the international platform, China has been working harder to promote 
international cooperation on climate change and has called on developed coun-
tries to extend ﬁ nancial and technological support to developing countries in 
their eﬀ ort to address climate change. 
On the energy issue, China has proposed that cooperation should take 
the place of competition, and advocated full cooperation among countries 
in the spirit of mutual benefit to create a win-win or all-win scenario. The 
 Eleventh Five-Year Plan (2007 –2012) of China’s economic and social develop-
ment approved in 2006 states explicitly that China will increase its overseas 

108 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
 cooperation in oil and gas exploitation on the basis of equality and mutual 
beneﬁ t. China should ensure a safe supply of energy by actively engaging in the 
international energy system and making full use of the international market. 
Building on the experiences of other countries, China has followed a mode 
that prioritizes friendly political relations and emphasizes economic and trade 
relations. It has also supplied economic aid and other means to guarantee a 
stable and viable energy supply for China’s domestic economic progress by 
establishing comprehensive cooperative partnership with energy-producing 
countries. 
Since its reform and opening up, China has used economic diplomacy to 
maintain stable relations with big powers; substantiate China’s relations with 
other developing countries; ensure the resources, markets, and capitals for 
China’s domestic economic development; and efficiently promote sustained 
fast growth within China’s economy. China’s economic diplomacy will further 
expand in content, and will play an increasingly crucial role in the country’s 
overall diplomacy structure with the changing situation. 
Carrying out Cultural Diplomacy 
Among all ancient civilizations of the world, the Chinese civilization has 
 experienced no major interruption. External cultural exchanges have been a 
long tradition in Chinese history. Examples like Zhang Qian’s (?–114) epic jour-
ney to the Western Regions in the Han Dynasty, Xuan Zang’s (602–664) travel 
to India, Jian Zhen’s (688–763) sailing to Japan, and Zheng He’s  (1371–1433) 
voyages to the West Seas were all of great historical signiﬁ cance. 
Cultural diplomacy refers to conducting diplomatic civilities by sover-
eign states to further national cultural interests or to achieve national foreign 
strategy by virtue of cultural exchanges under the guidance of certain cultural 
policies. The emergence of this concept reflects that international cultural 
exchanges have moved from the conventional realm of low politics to that of 
high politics under globalization. 
Th e purpose of diplomacy is to further national interests, ﬁ rst and foremost 
to safeguard national sovereignty, territorial integrity, and national security. 
In this regard, the primary purpose of cultural diplomacy is also to safeguard 
national security. But the major and more concrete goal is to put external cul-
tural exchanges in the framework of government policy to form a favorable 
national image conducive to the country’s overall national foreign policy. 
Foreign cultural exchanges play a key part in China’s foreign relations. 
Constrained by the Cold War structure, China’s external cultural interaction 
was once mainly conﬁ ned to socialist countries led by the Soviet Union and 

 Chapter 5  Adapting to Globalization, and Promoting Comprehensive Diplomacy 
109
countries friendly to China in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. China and 
France established diplomatic ties in 1964 and in 1965 the two  governments 
signed a cultural exchange program for the period 1965–1966. This was 
China’s first intergovernmental cultural exchange program with a Western 
European country. It was stipulated in the Constitution, approved by the ﬁ ft h 
session of the Fifth NPC in 1982, to conduct cultural exchanges with other 
countries, providing a legal assurance for ever-expanding cultural interactions. 
The strategy of cultural development has been included in China’s national 
development strategies and cultural diplomacy has been recognized as being 
as important as political diplomacy and economic diplomacy since the turn of 
the 21st century. 
It is important to maintain Chinese cultural security in the context of 
globalization by consolidating the root of its traditional culture through the 
revival of Chinese culture and the protection of cultural heritage. In recent 
years, the Chinese government has taken measures to support public cul-
tural projects, construct cultural facilities, and carry out various types of 
public cultural activities. Measures have also been taken in the restoration, 
preservation, and innovation of traditional culture, especially national folk 
culture. 
The rejuvenation and development of Chinese culture could not be 
achieved without beneﬁ ting from all that is best in human civilization. In the 
process of opening up, China has been open-minded to absorb all the fine 
achievements of other cultures through drawing on others’ strengths and vir-
tues. China’s cultural opening-up has been well indicated by the duration of 
foreign language fever in China, and the increasing popularity among Chinese 
people of Italian opera, Broadway musicals, the Russian ballet and circus, Ger-
man symphony, and French painting exhibitions. 
Domestic cultural preservation and revitalization pave the way for the 
promotion of cultural diplomacy. Th e ideas and theories of China’s contempo-
rary diplomacy result mainly from Chinese traditional culture. China strives 
to uphold coexistence among various civilizations instead of conﬂ ict, dialogue 
instead of confrontation, interaction instead of isolation, and inclusion instead 
of exclusion. China also strives to learn from others for common prosperity, all 
of which are deeply rooted in such thoughts of Chinese traditional culture as 
“Harmony is the most precious,”  “Th e gentleman aims at harmony, but not at 
uniformity, while the mean man seeks uniformity rather than harmony,”  “Mean 
what you say and honor your words with real action,” and “Don’t do unto oth-
ers what you don’t want others to do unto you.” 
External cultural exchanges are the most direct channel and means of 
cultural diplomacy. In recent years, China’s cultural diplomacy has been 

110 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
 highlighted by numerous foreign cultural interactions led by the Chinese gov-
ernment. By June 2009, China had set up 96 cultural oﬃ  ces in embassies and 
consulates in 82 countries, concluded intergovernmental agreements on cul-
tural cooperation and nearly 800 annual cultural exchange programs with 145 
countries, and maintained close contact with hundreds of international cultural 
organizations. Recently China has cooperated with many countries in holding 
Culture Weeks, Culture Tours, Culture Festivals, and Culture Years on a recip-
rocal terms to present the charms of profound Chinese culture. 
Language is the carrier of culture. Chinese has become one of the world’s 
important languages with the advancement in China’s status. Currently, there 
are more than 30 million people studying Chinese abroad at diﬀ erent levels in 
various educational institutions that oﬀ er Chinese language courses in approxi-
mately 100 countries. At present, more than 330 higher education institutions 
in China oﬀ er courses that teach Chinese as a foreign language. 
An effective way to help the world understand China is by delivering 
 Chinese culture through the establishment of the Confucius Institute. By 2008, 
China had funded 256 Confucius Institutes and 58 Confucius classrooms in 
81countries since the ﬁ rst Confucius Institute overseas was founded in Seoul, 
South Korea in 2004. In addition, more than 150 schools and institutions in 
more than 40 countries have applied to set up a Confucius Institute to date. 
More and more people in the world are now having the chance to learn and 
A Chinese Culture Festival held in Washington D.C., US in September 2008.

 Chapter 5  Adapting to Globalization, and Promoting Comprehensive Diplomacy 
111
understand Chinese culture by attending Confucius Institutes and Confucius 
classrooms. 
The 2008 Olympic Games provided an excellent platform for displaying 
Chinese culture to the world. Th e opening and closing ceremonies that caught 
worldwide attention, as well as various cultural activities during the Olympic 
Games, have been good opportunities for other peoples to know and under-
stand Chinese culture. The 2010 World Expo in Shanghai will be another 
occasion for China to conduct cultural diplomacy and seek exchanges and 
cooperation with the rest of the world. 
Th e Chinese government has been keen on creating conditions to facilitate 
nongovernmental cultural exchanges and encouraging cultural enterprises to 
go global. Sustained and in-depth cultural diplomacy has increased mutual 
trust between China and its neighbors, strengthened mutual understanding 
between China and Western developed countries, stabilized and consolidated 
the traditional friendships between China and developing countries, and 
enhanced the relationship between China and the countries with whom China 
does not have diplomatic relations. 
The founding ceremony of Confucius Institute at George Mason University. 

112 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
Conducting Diplomacy for the People and Protecting 
the Lawful Rights and Interests of Chinese Nationals and 
Corporations Overseas 
Conducting diplomacy for the people and protecting the lawful rights and 
interests of Chinese nationals and corporations overseas are an important part 
of China’s diplomacy. Protecting the lawful interests and rights of Chinese 
nationals abroad is an important task of China’s diplomatic departments as 
well as an important component of China’s diplomatic works, which is profes-
sionally referred to as consular protection. Th e Chinese government puts great 
importance on developing consular relations with other countries. It stands 
for properly addressing the problems that may arise in bilateral consular rela-
tions through equal dialogue and friendly consultations with due consideration 
accorded to the concerns of each side so as to protect the legitimate rights and 
interests of their citizens and state, and promote consular relations affairs as 
well as friendships among countries. 
Th e rise in cross-border movement of people and migration is an impor-
tant manifestation of globalization. With China’s further involvement in the 
international community, more and more Chinese citizens go abroad for 
various purposes, ranging from travel, business investment, study, and labor 
export. In 2008, more than 40 million outbound visits were made by Chinese 
people and more than 10,000 overseas Chinese-funded organizations were set 
up in more than 160 countries and regions. Th e complex international security 
situation and the growing nontraditional security threats put Chinese nationals 
and Chinese-funded organizations overseas under great risks, leading to more 
frequent cases of  consular protection. 
China’s diplomacy takes it as its responsibility to protect the interests 
of Chinese nationals and corporations overseas. The Chinese government 
uses nationality as a condition of consular protection, and holds that each 
country should protect the lawful rights and interests of its own country and 
citizens in accordance with international law, bilateral treaties, and laws of 
the country concerned; foreign nationals residing in its territory and those 
foreign nationals who have violated the local laws should enjoy the rights 
stipulated by the above laws and treaties regardless of their nationality, race, 
religion, or political or economic reasons. No countries should shield their 
nationals who commit oﬀ ences. China is ready to cooperate in the area of 
consular protection with countries with which it does not have diplomatic 
relations. 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has applied modern technology to 
 disseminate early warnings in consular protection. New columns were added 
to the oﬃ  cial website of the Foreign Ministry to report recent cases  occurring 

 Chapter 5  Adapting to Globalization, and Promoting Comprehensive Diplomacy 
113
in consular protection. Along with the issuance of Guidelines on Proper 
Behavior for  Chinese Citizens in Outbound Travel and Guidelines on Chinese 
Overseas Consular Protection and Service, the website has also updated its 
travel advice, and provided tips on traveling to speciﬁ c countries and regions, 
especially unsafe areas. 
To ensure the smooth undertaking of consular protection, the Chinese 
government has upgraded and expanded its consular department. Early in 
1955, the Department of Consular Aﬀ airs was set up under the Chinese For-
eign Ministry to take charge of consular protection. With the ever-increasing 
work of consular protection, the Consular Protection Division of the Depart-
ment of Consular Affairs was upgraded to Consular Protection Center in 
2007. More resources and staff were deployed. As a result, China has more 
than 240 foreign-service institutions overseas, among which 70 or so special-
ize in consular aﬀ airs, focusing on the protection of the interests of Chinese 
citizens overseas. 
To meet the needs of the changing situation, China’s foreign aﬀ airs depart-
ments have also set up cross-sector coordination mechanisms and emergency 
response mechanisms. When Chinese citizens or corporations fall victim to 
accidents and suﬀ er great losses overseas, an emergency response team will be 
established immediately to formulate work plans, set up hotlines, and collect 
information. Nowadays, China’s foreign-service departments handle more than 
30,000 cases of consular protection cases each year. 
Developing Military Diplomacy 
It is said that diplomacy starts where war ends, indicating that military and 
diplomatic activities lie not in one sack. But in practice, the military is always 
associated with diplomacy, and military exchanges make up one major means 
of enhancing mutual conﬁ dence and maintaining peace in times of peace. 
China’s military diplomacy was featured by  “lean to one side,” the 
 diplomatic strategy of the PRC in the wake of its founding, with its external 
relations conﬁ ned to those with the Soviet Union and other socialist countries 
in Eastern Europe. During the 1960s and 1970s, the principal means of China’s 
military diplomacy were providing military assistance or training to countries 
in the Third World in support of their national independence and national 
 liberation movement. 
As China’s relations with the West have improved since the 1980s, the 
Chinese armed forces have enhanced and expanded its relations with more 
countries. Th e White Paper on China’s National Defense, issued by the  Chinese 
government in 1998, put forward the policy of developing omnidirectional 
and multilevel military diplomacy. The foreign relations of the PLA have 

114 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
 experienced historic shift s from the dominance of friendly contacts at the high 
level to one of pragmatic cooperation in multilevel and wide-ranging  patterns, 
from the dominance of bilateral contacts to equal stress on both bilateral 
 contacts and multilateral contacts, and from contacts between military profes-
sionals to omnidirectional foreign contacts. 
Implementing the nation’s independent foreign policy of peace and its 
national defense policy that is purely defensive in nature, China’s military 
diplomacy comprises military exchanges with other countries on the Five 
 Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, with the purpose of broadening military 
relations and deepening military cooperation with other countries. It includes 
the following major aspects. 
First, institutionalizing the mechanism of military communication. By 
2008, China had established military ties with more than 150 countries, and 
had military attache offices in 109 countries. A total of 98 countries have 
 military attache oﬃ  ces in China. 
Second, developing high-level military exchanges. Exchange of military 
visits at the high level is a major form of military diplomacy. From 2007 to 
2008, senior PLA delegations visited more than 40 countries, and the defense 
ministers and chiefs of the general staﬀ  from more than 60 countries visited 
China during the same period. 
Th ird, conducting military cooperation and exchanges in personnel develop-
ment. From 2007 to 2008, China sent more than 900 military students to more 
The generals from the Chinese navy and American navy chat over a banquet. The Chinese 
navy ﬂ eet visited Pearl Harbor, Hawaii in September 2006. 

 Chapter 5  Adapting to Globalization, and Promoting Comprehensive Diplomacy 
115
than 30 countries, while 20 military educational institutions in China have estab-
lished and maintained inter-collegiate exchange relations with their counterparts 
in more than 20 countries, including the United States, Russia, Japan, and  Pakistan. 
Meanwhile, some 4,000 military personnel from more than 130  countries have 
come to China to study at Chinese military educational institutions. 
Fourth, establishing mechanisms of diﬀ erent types in security cooperative 
dialogue. China has placed great emphasis on defense consultation and secu-
rity dialogue with other countries. Today, China has established consultation 
mechanisms on defense and security with such countries as the United States, 
Russia, Japan, Australia, Britain, and France. And China has also developed 
military ties for security with such neighboring countries as Pakistan, India, 
Mongolia, Th ailand, Vietnam, and the Philippines. 
Fift h, promoting and participating in regional security cooperation. China, 
in 1997, participated in the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), the only official 
security and cooperation forum in the Asian-Paciﬁ c region. China hosted the 
ﬁ rst security policy meeting of the ARF in 2004, ﬁ lling a gap in the dialogue 
of senior defense officers within the framework of ARF. In recent years, the 
 Chinese armed forces have participated in such dialogue mechanisms as the 
West Pacific Naval Forum and Shangri-la dialogue session, and conducted 
effective exchanges and cooperation in the fields of antiterrorism, disaster 
relief, peacekeeping, maritime security, and joint patrols in border areas. 
The Chinese navy ﬂ eet leaves for the Gulf of Aden and the Somalia Sea area for escorting 
merchant ships in 2008. 

116 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
Sixth, promoting military transparency. China has issued a white paper 
on China’s national defense every other year since 1995, and had issued six 
by 2009, introducing China’s national defense policy and the status of China’s 
defense and armed forces. Additionally, China has taken part in the UN’s trans-
parency system for military expenditures, and issued white papers on issues 
concerning security such as arms control and nonproliferation and space policy. 
Seventh, holding joint military exercises with other countries. In October 
2002, China and Kyrgyzstan took a joint anti-terrorist military exercise in their 
border area, which was China’s ﬁ rst joint military exercise with foreign armed 
forces. By 2008, China had had 28 major joint military exercises with armed 
forces of the countries concerned. In addition China had invited foreign mili-
tary delegations in China and observers of other countries to observe PLA’s 
military drills. 
Eighth, participating actively in international peacekeeping operations and 
international relief and rescue activities. Since the PLA dispatched its military 
observers to the UN’s peacekeeping operations for the ﬁ rst time in 1990, China 
has sent more than 10,000 person-times of military personnel and police to 24 
UN peacekeeping operations by June 2008. In addition, China International 
Search and Rescue Team, composed mainly of Chinese servicemen, provided 
disaster relief services to people stricken by the Indian Ocean tsunami, the Katrina 
hurricane in US, South Asian earthquakes, and mudslides in the Philippines. 
Ninth, participating in international escorting missions in the high seas. 
The Chinese naval fleet has paid more than 30 visits to more than 40 coun-
tries. Th e Chinese naval ﬂ eet headed for the Gulf of Aden and the Somali sea 
area for escorting missions in December 2008, which signiﬁ ed a major step for 
the  Chinese navy in international military cooperation and maintenance of 
 security in international sea areas. 
Multilevel Foreign Relations 
Summit Diplomacy 
Summit diplomacy refers to the diplomatic activities of the heads of the state 
or government. Its traditional forms include such activities as visits by heads 
of state or government, summit meetings, correspondence and phone calls 
between heads of state or government, dispatching envoys or personal repre-
sentatives abroad, or delivering foreign policy pronouncements in person. 
On October 1, 1949, Mao Zedong proclaimed in the Notice of Central 
People’s Government of the People’s Republic of China that “our government 
is the sole legal government representing the people of the People’s Republic 

 Chapter 5  Adapting to Globalization, and Promoting Comprehensive Diplomacy 
117
of China. It is ready to establish diplomatic relations with all foreign govern-
ments that are willing to abide by the principles of equality, mutual beneﬁ t, and 
mutual respect for each other’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.” Th is could 
be regarded as PRC’s ﬁ rst summit diplomacy. 
However, summit diplomacy was not quite active for various reasons. New 
China’s summit diplomacy during the Cold War was limited to only a few forms, 
including the issuance of statements and conversations, or visits to other coun-
tries made by Chinese heads of state or government or receiving visits by their 
counterparts. During the 1950s and the 1960s, China’s summit diplomacy was 
restricted to its relations with those countries in Asia, Africa, and Europe that 
had diplomatic relations with China. For instance, as the chairman of both the 
Central People’s Government and the Communist Party of China, Mao Zedong 
only made two foreign visits in his lifetime and both were to the Soviet Union. 
Since the 1980s, the rapid process of globalization has made summit diplo-
macy more prominent in international aﬀ airs due to these facts: Th e globaliza-
tion of international challenges requires leaders from different countries to 
engage in direct discussions on measures to address them; the media in an age 
of information globalization has rendered summit diplomacy, especially the 
summit visits, the focuses or hotspots of the world; summit diplomacy could 
enable the supreme leaders of countries to engage in face-to-face negotiation so 
as to eﬃ  ciently settle the problems they face. 
China and the Soviet Union sign the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Alliance, and Mutual 
Assistance during Chairman Mao Zedong’s visit to the Soviet Union in February 1950. 

118 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping meets with Mikhail Gorbachev, Chairman of the Presidium of the 
Supreme Soviet and General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in May 1989. 
The changing international situation has led to proactive summit 
 diplomacy in China. Hotlines have been frequently used for communica-
tion between Chinese heads of government and state with their counterparts. 
Bilateral and multilateral summit conferences have become highlights in the 
diplomatic arena. Envoy visits have become very popular diplomatic  activities. 
Furthermore, the number of China’s summit visits abroad has boomed, 
 covering countries in Asia, Africa, Europe, Oceania, North America, and Latin 
America. For instance, Jiang Zemin paid visits to more than 70 counties during 
his term in oﬃ  ce from 1989 to 2002 as General Secretary of the CCP and as the 
president of PRC. 
Summit diplomacy has been the major way for China to settle important 
problems with related countries, and summits have usually been landmark 
events in China’s diplomatic history. At the end of 1949, soon aft er New China 

 Chapter 5  Adapting to Globalization, and Promoting Comprehensive Diplomacy 
119
was founded, Chairman Mao Zedong paid a visit to the Soviet Union, and at 
the beginning of the following year, Premier Zhou Enlai also visited the Soviet 
Union. Th ese visits were indications of New China’s diplomatic strategy of  “lean 
to one side.” During Mao’s visit, China and the Soviet Union signed the Sino-
Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Alliance, and Mutual Assistance, which was of 
strategic signiﬁ cance for the PRC. Th irty years later, the normalization of Sino-
Soviet relations was only realized after the meeting between Chinese leader 
Deng Xiaoping and Soviet leader Gorbachev. After the disintegration of the 
Soviet Union, summit diplomacy helped the bilateral relations experience a 
successful transition from Sino-Soviet relations to Sino-Russian relations.
Summit diplomacy also demonstrates the status of China’s relations with 
different countries. Chinese leaders visited the United States only after the 
establishment of Sino-US diplomatic relations. Th e exchanged visits of heads 
of state and government between China and the US in the mid-1980s mani-
fest the stable bilateral relationship. To the contrary, after the US president 
imposed sanctions against China in 1989, the exchange of visits at the highest 
level between the two countries was suspended for nine years. The frequent 
exchanges of visits by leaders of the two countries reveal the sound Sino-US 
relations today. For example, President Hu Jintao and President Bush had four 
Chinese President Hu Jintao meets with American President Barak Obama in Beijing in 
November 2009. 

120 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
meetings and four telephone conversations, and exchanged correspondences 
10 times in 2008. Summit diplomacy is not only the symbol of the stable devel-
opment of Sino-US relations but also provides opportunities to enhance and 
advance Sino-US relations. 
And the same applies to the Sino-Japanese relationship. From 1979 to 1991, 
the Chinese heads of state and government made ﬁ ve visits to Japan.  However, 
because of the mistaken stance by the Japanese leader at the beginning of the 
21st century, China suspended the exchange visits between the two countries, 
and then the bilateral relationship was trapped in a coexistence of “frosty 
 diplomatic ties and hot economic ties.” Th e exchange visits were not resumed 
until the new leader of Japan changed the mistaken stance. Such visits as the 
 “ice-breaking journey” by the Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe to China in 
April 2006, the  “ice-melting trip” by the Chinese premier Wen Jiabao to Japan 
in 2007, the  “early spring journey” by the Japanese premier Yasuo Fukuda to 
China in December 2007, and the “warm spring journey” by the Chinese presi-
dent Hu Jintao to Japan in May 2008, indicated that the Sino-Japanese relation-
ship had returned to the right track, and were in the process of being promoted. 
Summit diplomacy has functioned as a signiﬁ cant driving force in bilateral 
relations. Th e most eye-catching summit visits or meetings are good examples. 
Each summit visit was accompanied by large political, economic, cultural, and 
other delegations, which would sign cooperation agreements with their coun-
terparts during the summit visit in the fields of politics, security, trade and 
Japanese Emperor Akihito hosts a ceremony welcoming Chinese President Jiang Zemin in 
November 1998. During this ﬁ rst visit to Japan by China’s head of state, the two sides issued 
the China-Japan Joint Declaration. 

 Chapter 5  Adapting to Globalization, and Promoting Comprehensive Diplomacy 
121
economy, energy, education, healthcare, culture, and tourism. The execution 
of these agreements would become the follow-up harvest of the summit visit, 
and deﬁ nitely further promote and substantiate bilateral cooperation. Further-
more, the interpersonal relations between the leaders established during these 
summit visits would become important ties helping cement bilateral relations, 
develop long-term bilateral relations, and enhance mutual understanding. 
Multilateral summit diplomacy has become a high-profile form of sum-
mit diplomacy in today’s world and this is also true of China’s summit 
 diplomacy. In order to settle such global problems as economic development 
and  environment, China has participated in the global summits conferences 
held under the framework of the UN. Th e extended G8 summit with leaders 
of leading developing countries, and the G20 summit conferences have been 
frequently held to discuss global economic problems and address economic 
crises. Many other summit meetings with some regional and trans-regional 
 multilateral  organizations have also been held, such as the Shanghai Coopera-
tion  Organization, ASEAN-China, East Asian Summit among Japan and South 
Korea, Asian and Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), and Asian-Europe 
Meeting (ASEM). As leaders of the biggest developing country, China’s heads 
of state and  government have taken an active part in these multilateral summit 
conferences to elaborate China’s views and put forward constructive proposals 
for the settlement of the relevant problems under discussion. 
Parliamentary Diplomacy 
Parliament is the legislative branch of a state, which occupies an important 
position in a country’s social and political activities. Th e external relations of 
the legislative body are an important component of the country’s overall for-
eign relations, playing an exceptional  role in enhancing mutual understanding 
and friendship with other peoples and pushing forward the development of 
diplomatic relations. 
Th e National People’s Congress (NPC) works as the legislative body of the 
People’s Republic of China. Th e foreign relations of the NPC and its standing 
committee have always played important roles in each phase of China’s social 
evolution. Since the reform and opening up were initiated, as one important 
component of China’s overall diplomacy, the relations of the NPC with the par-
liaments of developing countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America have been 
deepened, and its relations with the parliaments of Western countries have 
improved remarkably. China has become increasingly active in multilateral 
activities of parliament diplomacy and the foreign relations of the NPC have 
become omnidirectional and multilevel, making NPC an important compo-
nent of China’s overall diplomacy. 

122 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
The 5th Asia-Europe Parliamentary Partnership Meeting is held in Beijing in June 2008.
Wu Bangguo, the Chairman of the Standing Committee of China’s National People’s 
Congress meets with Theo-Ben Gurirab, the president of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) 
in Beijing in August 2009. 

 Chapter 5  Adapting to Globalization, and Promoting Comprehensive Diplomacy 
123
Th e foreign relations of the China’s NPC have made continuous advance-
ments in recent years. First, the exchanges of visits between the Chinese NPC 
with its foreign counterparts at diﬀ erent levels have seen a gradual increase. For 
instance, chairman of the Standing Committee of the NPC, Wu Bangguo, made 
10 foreign visits, and members of the meeting of chairmen made 58 foreign 
visits from 2003 to 2008, covering ﬁ ve continents. During the same period, 109 
speakers and vice speakers of foreign parliaments visited China upon invitation. 
Second, China’s NPC has established quite a few mechanisms of exchanges 
with foreign parliaments. From 1981, when the first exchange mechanism 
between NPC and the European Parliament was established, to 2008, the NPC 
had established exchanges with more than 10 countries’ parliaments, including 
the US House of Representatives and Senate, the Russian Federal Committee and 
State Duma, Japan’s Senate and Diet, South Korea’s National Assembly, Indian 
parliament, the House of Representatives of Australia, Canadian parliament, 
British parliament, Germany’s Bundestag, the French senate, the House of Rep-
resentatives of Italy, South Africa’s National Assembly, the People’s Assembly of 
Egypt, and the House of Representatives of Brazil. In addition, the NPC has set 
up inter-parliamentary relations with 178 countries, and founded 98 Friendship 
Groups under the framework of parliament based on the principle of reciprocity. 
Th ird, NPC has actively cooperated with and participated in multilateral 
affairs of regional or global inter-parliamentary organizations. Up to 2008, 
NPC had joined 12 international parliament organizations, such as the World 
Conference of Speakers of Parliaments, Inter-Parliamentary Union, Asian 
Parliamentary Assembly, the Asian-Paciﬁ c Parliamentary Forum, Parlamento 
Latinoamericano, ASEAN Inter-Parliamentary Organization, and Speakers 
Conference of Parliaments of Paciﬁ c Islands Forum. China is also an observer 
of three regional parliamentary organizations. China hosted the 12th annual 
meeting of the Asian-Pacific Parliamentary Forum in Beijing in 2004, and 
China’s NPC hosted the fifth annual Asia-Europe Parliamentary Partnership 
Meeting in 2008. 
Party Diplomacy 
Th e Communist Party of China is the ruling party of China and its foreign rela-
tions are an important part of China’s overall foreign relations, and are of great 
signiﬁ cance in promoting China’s foreign relations with other countries as well 
as in maintaining world peace. 
Th e foreign relations of the CCP started before the founding of New China, 
but they were limited to relations with other Communist parties or worker’s 
parties of the socialist countries in the wake of the PRC’s founding due to the 
international situation. 

124 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
Having drawn experiences and lessons from the history of the party’s 
foreign relations, the 12th CCP National Congress in 1982 began to plan its 
foreign relations, while separating party-to-party relations from inter-state 
relations, and put forward the principles of  “independence, complete equality, 
mutual respect, and noninterference in each other’s internal aﬀ airs” in develop-
ing relations with foreign parties. 
Th ereaft er the CCP started extensive contacts and exchanges with diﬀ erent 
foreign parties. Th e CCP had established relations with more than 270 foreign 
parties in more than 110 countries by the end of the Cold War. 
Political forces in the world underwent reshuffles and realignments after 
the end of the Cold War, and parties with different political stances and 
thoughts were becoming ever more active. In keeping with the developments 
in the international situation, the CCP has established relations with more 
foreign parties, with the level of exchanges increased, the content of exchanges 
substantiated, and areas of the exchanges expanded. By 2008, the CCP had 
established and maintained friendly relations with 528 parties and political 
organizations in 166 countries and regions in the world. The CCP conducts 
dozens of exchanges and visits with its foreign counterparts every year, and 
these have become important ties to enhance mutual understanding. 
Additionally, the CCP has also taken an active part in multilateral 
 activities of international parties. Having participated in the ﬁ rst and second 
The 3rd International Conference of Asian Political Parties is held in Beijing in April 2004. 

 Chapter 5  Adapting to Globalization, and Promoting Comprehensive Diplomacy 
125
 International Conference of Asian Political Parties, the CCP hosted in Beijing 
in 2008 the third International Conference of Asian Political Parties, which was 
attended by leaders and delegates of 81 political parties from 35 countries. Th e 
conference has greatly enhanced the mutual understanding between the CCP 
and other political parties from other Asian countries. 
Th e foreign relations of the CCP have consolidated and enhanced the rela-
tionship between the CCP and the ruling parties of socialist countries, enriched 
the form and substance of its relations with the political parties from developing 
countries, strengthened its relations with major parties in developed countries, 
and promoted mutual understanding with the parties of those countries that 
have not established diplomatic relations with China, creating a favorable situa-
tion for the normalization of diplomatic ties between China and these countries. 
Enhanced Mutual Understanding by Civil Diplomacy 
Civil diplomacy is the conducting of international relations in civil terms, 
which is diﬀ erent from the diplomacy by government. Put plainly, civil diplo-
macy is the diplomacy of making friends, which is also referred to as people-
to-people diplomacy. It focuses on enhancing trust and understanding between 
peoples, attaches great importance to communication, and emphasizes estab-
lishing friendships that go beyond concrete political and economic interests.
Civil diplomacy has been an important channel to enhance mutual con-
tacts and understanding between countries, and its importance has become 
prominent against the background of globalization. 
China has always put great emphasis on civil diplomacy, and has put forward 
the ideas of “relying on the people and placing hope on them” in  diplomatic 
practice. In order to enhance the mutual understanding between China and the 
outside world, the Chinese People’s Congress of Defending World Peace, which 
was merged with the Chinese People’s Association for Friendship with Foreign 
Countries in 1972, and Chinese People’s Institute of Foreign Aﬀ airs were created 
in the wake of the founding of New China. China Council for the Promotion 
of International Trade was founded in 1952 to promote China’s trade and eco-
nomic cooperation with foreign countries. In 1954, these organizations joined 
hands with more than 10 other nongovernmental organizations, including All 
China Federation of Trade Unions and All China Women’s Federation, to form 
the  Chinese People’s Association for Foreign  Culture, which was renamed the 
Chinese People’s Association for Friendship with Foreign Countries in 1969. Th e 
tradition of civil diplomacy in China has taken shape. 
Under the special international circumstances aft er the founding of New 
China, civil diplomacy has enhanced mutual understanding between the 
 Chinese people and Japanese people and improved Sino-Japanese relationship 
by means of “economic ties promoting political ties, and civil ties  promoting 

126 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
official ties.” Civil diplomacy, which has played an indispensable role in 
 facilitating the normalization of Sino-Japanese diplomatic ties, occupies an 
important position in the history of China’s foreign relations. 
Since China’s reform and opening up, especially in the 21st century, the 
Chinese People’s Association for Friendship with Foreign Countries, the top 
organization of civil diplomacy in China, has considered the overall situa-
tion both home and abroad and set the following guiding policy in developing 
civil diplomacy: Giving priority to developing civil cooperative relations with 
great powers—including US, Russia, Japan, and the European Union (group of 
powers) —and China’s neighbors; carrying on civil relations with developing 
countries; expanding multilateral civil diplomacy with international nongov-
ernmental organizations; and striving to develop civil relations with countries 
that have not established diplomatic relations with China. The goal of this 
 policy is to create a favorable international and peripheral environment for 
China’s domestic economic development. For instance, when Sino-Japanese 
relations were trapped in a deadlock at the turn of the 21st century, the  Chinese 
People’s Association for Friendship with Foreign Countries and 17 other 
friendship groups from both China and Japan gathered in Beijing in 2001 to 
issue the Declaration of Sino-Japanese Civil Friendship in the New Century. In 
2005, the Chinese People’s Association for Friendship with Foreign  Countries 
hosted another gathering in Tokyo, Japan with participation of 60 friendship 
groups from the two countries and issued the Appeal for Peace and Good-
neighborly Friendship. Th e civil diplomacy between China and Japan helped 
Declaration on Promoting Sino-Japanese People’s Friendship in the New Century is issued in 
Beijing in January 2001.

 Chapter 5  Adapting to Globalization, and Promoting Comprehensive Diplomacy 
127
stabilize bilateral relations, even as exchanges of official visits at the highest 
level were suspended between the two countries. 
The activities between international friendship cities have been another 
channel and form of civil diplomacy. With the rapid development of China’s 
economy, urbanization in China has been booming. The foreign relations 
of Chinese cities and other local governments with their foreign counter-
parts have become an important channel for China’s integration with the 
 international community. Since Tianjin of China took the lead in forging a 
relationship of sister cities with Kobe, Japan in 1973, China had developed 
1,500 relationships of sister cities or provinces with 120 countries by 2008. In 
1992, the Chinese People’s Association for Friendship with Foreign Countries 
created the China International Friendship Cities Association, which joined 
the International Union of Local Authorities in 1999. In 2008, China hosted 
the Congress of International Friendship Cities, attended by more than 500 
people from more than 70 provinces and states of over 30 foreign countries 
as well as more than 50 Chinese cities. Th e intercity cooperation is  growing 
from bilateral form to multilateral form, and is gradually moving from 
 people-to-people cooperation to covering all the fields, including politics, 
economy, culture, and society. 
Promoting bilateral friendships by setting up bilateral friendship associa-
tions is another important form of China’s civil diplomacy. In  October 1949, 
Chinese Vice President Xi Jinping addresses China International Friendship Cities Conference 
held in Beijing in November 2008.

128 
CHINA’S DIPLOMACY
China set up the first bilateral friendship association, All China  Congress 
of Sino-Soviet Friendship Association (renamed Sino-Russian  Friendship 
 Association in 1992). The Sino-Japanese Friendship Association was 
founded in 1963. Both of them have played important roles in promoting the 
 Sino-Soviet relationship (Russian) and the Sino-Japanese relationship. Up to 
2008, China had established 42 transnational friendship associations, includ-
ing China-EU Friendship Association, China-Arabian Countries Friendship 
 Association, China-ASEAN Friendship Association, China-Central Asia 
Friendship  Association, and China-US Friendship Association. In addition, 
China had established friendly cooperation with 458 NGOs in 148 countries, 
forming a unique network of civil diplomacy that further adds vigor to China’s 
civil diplomacy. Having played an irreplaceable role in the diplomatic history 
of the PRC, civil diplomacy will continue to enhance the friendship between 
the Chinese people and the peoples around the world, promoting China’s eco-
nomic and cultural exchanges and cooperation with foreign countries. 
Globalization has posed unprecedented challenges for diplomacy today. 
While coping with these challenges, China has put forward the concept of 
comprehensive diplomacy, calling for attention to the overall situation while 
managing foreign affairs. Its main purpose is still to create a favorable inter-
national environment for China’s domestic economic development, maintain 
world peace, promote common development, and build a harmonious world of 
peace and prosperity. 
Increase of Friendship Cities between China and Other Countries 
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
1973
1978
1983
1988
1993
1998
2003
2008
2
6
115
327
521
882
1,184
1,586

129
INDEX
A
Anti-Secession Law, 28
Arms control, 8, 47, 50, 116
ASEAN, 43, 83, 86–88, 91, 107, 115, 121, 
123, 128
Asian-African (Bandung) Conference, 
68, 92
Basic Law, 30, 32
B
Bo’ao Forum, 44, 57
Border disputes, 15, 20, 42, 83–84, 88–90, 103, 
112, 115–116
C
Cairo Declaration, 24
Chinese Communist Party, 3, 23
 Central Committee of, 18, 104
Chinese People’s Political Consultative 
Conference, 4, 15
Civil diplomacy, 125–128
Climate change, 57–58, 72, 97, 107
Cold War, 7, 15, 20, 30, 40, 50, 58, 76, 83, 94, 
105, 124, 177
Common development, 8, 21, 33, 83, 89, 94, 96, 
99, 128
Common Program, 4, 15
Comprehensive diplomacy, 103–128
Confucius Institute, 110–111
Consular protection, 112–113
Cultural diplomacy, 108–111
Culture festivals, 110
Culture years, 110
D
Dalai Lama, 34–35, 78
Deng Xiaoping, 7, 18, 22, 29, 73, 118–119
Diplomacy of humiliation, 14–15
Disarmament, 8, 40, 47–50, 88
E
East Turkistan Islamic Movement, 21, 
34–35
Escorting missions, 116
F
Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, 
6, 67–70, 83, 85, 114
Free-trade zones, 107
Friendship cities, 127–128
G
G20, 43, 121
Globalization, 8, 22, 42–43, 53, 98, 103–128
Global war on terrorism, 55–57
Good neighborly relations, 5, 79, 83–100
H
Harmonious world, 3–9, 46, 128
Hu Jintao, 5, 9, 41, 46, 51–52, 74–75, 82, 85–86, 
89–90, 95, 98, 100, 119–120
Human rights, 8, 20, 34–35, 45, 47, 50–52, 74
I
Independent foreign policy o f peace, 21–24, 
114
Intergovernmental international organiza-
tions, 28
Iran nuclear issue, 64–65
Issue of Afghanistan, 60–61
Issue of Darfur, 61–63
J
Joint communiqué, 25–26, 68–69, 74, 82
K
Korean War, 15, 17, 24, 40

130 
INDEX
L
Lawful interests and rights of Chinese 
nationals, protection of, 112
Leaning to one side, 14–15, 17
M
Mao Zedong, 15–18, 29, 72, 93, 
116–117, 119
Measures to Strengthen China-Africa 
Cooperation, 94–95
Middle East issue, 59–60
Military diplomacy, 113–116
Multilateral diplomacy, 5, 37–65
Multipolarization, 5
N
National People’s Congress (NPC), 28, 30, 
32–33, 109, 121–123
National unity and territorial integrity, 
24–28
Nixon, Richard, 17, 25, 69, 72
North Korean nuclear issue, 63–64, 90
O
Obama, Barack, 74–75, 119
Omnidirectional diplomacy, 67–100
One Country, Two Systems, 26, 28–32
P
Parliamentary diplomacy, 121–123
Party diplomacy, 123–128
Peaceful development, 3, 6, 9, 28, 77
Peacekeeping operations, 47–48, 116
Ping-pong diplomacy, 20
Principle of China’s foreign policy, 4
R
Regional hot issues, 5, 58–65
Relations with African and Arab countries, 
92–96
Relations with Japan, 79–83
Relations with Latin American countries, 
98–100
S
September 11 Incident, 35, 60
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, 35, 38, 
43–44, 56, 85, 88, 121
Shanghai Five, 35, 85, 88
Sino-American relations, 71–75
Sino-EU relations, 76–79
Sino-Japanese Joint Statement, 79–81
Sino-Soviet treaty, 15, 117, 119
Socialist camp, 15
Sovereignty over Hong Kong and Macau, 24, 
29–32, 77
Subprime crisis, 54
Summit diplomacy, 116–121
T
Taiwan question, 24–28, 32, 81
Tanzania-Zambia Railway, 93
Th ird plenary session, 104
Tibet, 21, 33–34, 51, 68, 74
U
UN Charter, 6, 20, 46–48, 55, 85
UN reform, 52–53
UN Security Council, 35, 45, 48, 53, 56
US sale of weapon to Taiwan, 27
W
Wen Jiabao, 42, 76, 78, 81–82, 88, 96, 120
World Trade organization (WTO), 28, 54, 104, 
106–107
 China’s joining, 104
X
Xinjiang, 33–34, 55, 57
Y
Yasukuni Shrine, 81–82
Z
Zhou Enlai, 4, 17–18, 20, 40, 67–69, 72, 
79, 92, 119

