
Th e Sinopedia Series
China’s 
Ethnic Groups 
and Religions
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Th e Sinopedia Series
Editorial Board
Chief Advisor: Wang Chen
Chief Conceptualiser: Wang Zhongwei
Executive Producer: Guo Changjian
Publisher: Li Xiangping
Chief Editor: Wu Wei

Th e Sinopedia Series
China’s 
Ethnic Groups 
and Religions
ZHENG QIAN
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

© 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd 
Original Chinese edition © 2010 China Intercontinental Press
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the 
copyright herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored or used 
in any form or by any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, 
including but not limited to photocopying, recording, scanning, 
digitalizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, or 
information storage and retrieval systems, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.
China’s Ethnic Groups and 
Religions
Zheng Qian
Publishing Director: 
Paul Tan
Editorial Manager: 
Yang Liping
Associate Development Editor: 
Joe Ng
Associate Development Editor: 
Tanmayee Bhatwadekar
Senior Product Director: 
Janet Lim
Product Managers: 
Kevin Joo
Lee Hong Tan
Assistant Publishing Manager: 
Pauline Lim
Production Executive: 
Cindy Chai
Translators: 
Hou Xiaocui
Rong Xueqin
Huang Ying
Copy Editor: 
Deborah Tham
Cover Designer: 
Ong Lay Keng
Compositor: 
Pvt. Ltd.
Printed in Singapore
1 2 3 4 5 12 11 10
For permission to use material from this 
text or product, submit all requests online at 
www.cengageasia.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be emailed to
asia.permissionrequest@cengage.com
ISBN-13: 978-981-4319-76-8
ISBN-10: 981-4319-76-7
Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd
5 Shenton Way #01-01
UIC Building
Singapore 068808
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized  learning 
 solutions with oﬃ  ce locations around the globe, including 
 Singapore, the United Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. 
Locate your local oﬃ  ce at: www.cengage.com/global
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by 
Nelson Education, Ltd.
For product information, visit www.cengageasia.com
Integra Software Services,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v
Table of Contents
Preface 
vii
Chapter 1. Nationality or Ethnic Group? 3
Chapter 2. Diversity in a Unifi ed Chinese Nation 13
Chapter 3. An Overview of China’s Ethnic Minority 
   Populations 31
Chapter 4. Policies of Regional Ethnic Autonomy in China 49
Chapter 5. Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority
   Culture 69
Chapter 6. Economies of Ethnic Minorities in China 105
Chapter 7. Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 125
Index 157
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Preface
As a journalist who has worked on ethnic minority news reports for over 20 
years, I am deeply grateful for the opportunities to cover historical events on 
ethnic groups and religions in China and to interact with people who pro-
mote these events. In this process, I realize, perhaps more deeply than others, 
that those who really speak about history are the ones who are truly likely to 
understand its signifi cance. Th erefore, I believe it would be helpful to narrate 
a story here.
In 1950, the victorious troops of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army 
(PLA) stopped at the foot of the A-Wa Mountain in Yunnan Province. The 
troops had received an order from the Southwestern Bureau of the Central 
Committee of the Chinese Communist Party to suspend the march until they 
had determined the situation in the ethnic region and won the support of the 
ethnic minority people residing there.
A small community comprising the Va minority lived on A-Wa Mountain. 
La Meng was a remarkable and respected headman who had led his people 
against both the British troops and the Japanese invaders. He was a man with 
great self esteem. 
La Meng closely observed the PLA who was camped near A-Wa Moun-
tain. He had expected gunshots, but an ethnic minority work team came and 
invited him to participate in a delegation to watch the National Day Parade 
in Beijing.
Th is proud headman told his guests frankly: “We fought the British when 
they invaded our land. We fought the Japanese when they invaded us. We also 
fought the Kuomintang. Now, the PLA is here and I am not sure of your inten-
tions yet.”
He was not lying. In the past hundred years, wars on A-Wa Mountain had 
always been caused by outsiders, which included the British, the Japanese, 
and Kuomintang troops who had looted their mineral resources and occupied 
their land.
To celebrate the fi rst anniversary of the founding of the People’s Repub-
lic of China, the central government decided to invite representatives from 
various ethnic groups to watch the parade in Beijing. At that time, the total 
number of ethnic groups in China was uncertain, but the central govern-
ment demanded that “every single ethnic group or representative should be 
invited.”
vii
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

viii 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
In other parts of China, it was a great honor to receive an invitation to 
visit Beijing. But on A-Wa Mountain, none of the 18 headmen wanted to go to      
Beijing.
After much persuasion from the ethnic minority work team, La Meng 
changed his attitude. He decided to use the traditional Va divination rite of 
Dajigua to make the final decision for this matter. Dajigua is a folk practice 
whereby many small bamboo sticks are dropped inside a tiny hole of a chicken 
bone, and the different patterns displayed by these sticks would indicate the 
various omens.
Th e Dajigua always divined bad omens till one day, La Meng received 
an auspicious sign. From then on, he made up his mind to go to Beijing. But 
the moment he stepped out of his house, he saw a bird fl ying in the opposite 
direction. He stopped immediately and exclaimed: “Th e bird is conveying 
the gods’ message to us that this journey is extremely ominous and I should 
not go!”
La Meng then closed his door. However, the ethnic minority work team 
waited for him patiently bearing in mind the saying, “where there’s a will, 
there’s a way.” At last, La Meng agreed to go. Th e sacred wooden drums of the 
Va minority was beaten as a send-off for La Meng. But what rhythm should 
these drums play—for a campaign, a warning, or a festival? Th e rhythm that 
was played was ambiguous and unclear. Th is had never happened before. Who 
could tell whether La Meng should leave?
Initially, La Meng set off  on foot, followed by riding a horse. Next, he sat 
in a truck and fi nally on a plane. While onboard the plane, he became dizzy 
and sick. When he fi nally arrived in Beijing, he thought he had fallen ill. Th en, 
came the invitation from  Premier Zhou Enlai for all ethnic minority represen-
tatives to have dinner with him!
Immediately, as if energized by a mysterious force, La Meng did not feel ill 
any more. “I will go, I will go!” he said to himself. 
That night, he met Premier Zhou. Premier Zhou paid great respects to 
every ethnic minority representative present. La Meng had never met a “high-
level” offi  cial who was so aff able and kind.
The National Day Parade started punctually on October 1, 1950. In the 
ethnic minority delegation watching the parade, 34 were headmen from vari-
ous ethnic groups in Yunnan Province. What a splendid and exciting scene 
the parade was! Th e army marched pass followed by the contingent of sailors. 
When a loud roar came from the sky, La Meng looked up and saw the fi ghter 
jets of the PLA.
He was shocked. Th is once poor and disunited country was revitalized. He 
burst into tears. Standing on the platform, La Meng suddenly felt that he also 
had a stake in this nation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Th e day came when ethnic groups met Chairman Mao. Aft er paying their 
tributes, each ethnic representative went onto the platform and shook hands 
with Chairman Mao.
“  Chairman Mao’s hand is so large and fi rm!” La Meng thought to himself. 
Th is handshake left  a deep impression in the mind of La Meng.
After bidding Beijing farewell, La Meng visited Shanghai, Wuhan, and 
Chongqing, along with other members of the ethnic minority delegation, then 
returned to Yunnan.
However, instead of heading home, La Meng attended a delegation 
 conference of ethnic solidarity held in Pu’er. At the conference, together with 
another headman Li Bao, they made a joint proposal: in order to achieve last-
ing solidarity among all ethnic groups, we should always follow the lead of the 
Communist Party of China. According to the ancient Va minority customs, 
they would take an oath.
Oath-taking is a folk tradition with a long history. Used as a form of guar-
antee between any parties involved in a negotiation, oath-taking sets up a 
system of self-discipline in theism. When facing important events or serious 
disputes, people tend to build a solid relation of mutual trust by taking oaths 
before the gods.
All the delegates from the southern Yunnan Province received this proposal 
warmly and decided that the oath ceremony be held in Pu’er City. Th e oath cer-
emony of the Va minority is one in which an ox is slaughtered and sacrifi ced 
in a very grand, solemn, and mysterious manner. La Meng was unanimously 
elected by all the delegates to take on the role of sacrifi cing the ox.
Th e oath ceremony was held on December 26, 1950. All the delegates from 
26 ethnic communities—including subgroups—from 15 counties of Pu’er gath-
ered at the Red Square. 
According to the ancient Va tradition, there is an auspicious omen if the 
ox collapses to the south aft er being killed. But if it collapses to the north, it is 
an undesirable omen indicating failure. In that case, the ceremony should not 
proceed and all agreements should be canceled.
To the accompaniment of wooden drums, La Meng, although already in 
his sixties, displayed consummate skills. He stabbed the ox right between the 
eyes on his fi rst try.
All the people watched as the ox stumbled a few steps, keeping the crowd 
in suspense. Finally, the ox fell to the south as it was hoped and the crowd burst 
into thunderous applause.
Aft erward, La Meng and other delegates wrote an “oath of solidarity” on 
a sheet of red paper with everyone signing it. Then a “Monument of Ethnic 
 Solidarity” was set up. 
 
Preface 
ix

x 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Th e inscription on the monument is still very clear aft er more than half a 
century. It says:
On behalf of all the ethnic minorities in Pu’er, we, the delegates from 26 ethnic groups, 
hereby took an oath by stabbing an ox and drinking the sacred water, to unite together 
under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, and will devote ourselves to build-
ing a great nation of equality, freedom, and happiness.
Back home, La Meng told his fellow villagers: “Ximeng [a county in Yun-
nan] is a tiny place compared with the vast lands of China. Only by follow-
ing the government and the Communist Party of China can we have a bright 
future.”
Th e story above shows how the new government won the trust of ethnic 
minorities with her sincerity, respect, and equal treatment 60 years ago, and 
thus inspired their hope for a bright future aft er almost a century of colonial 
invasions, wars, social chaos, and poverty.
In Chinese history, ethnic groups have always taken national unity as the 
highest political ideal and strongly value its pursuit. Th e People’s Republic of 
China has reclaimed this historical value and won herself a bright future.
This story can be a starting point for readers to understand the current 
 status of China’s ethnic groups and her religions. A more in-depth discussion 
of this topic awaits you in the main text.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


3
1
A Historical Deviation
For a country with a 5,000-year-old civilization, the 1848 Opium War can be 
described as a gigantic axe that brutally split Chinese history and culture. As 
the waves of Western modernity pounded China from then on, China also 
wrote her own modern history. Everything in the country began to change at 
the start of this period.
A major part of modern Chinese history has seen the assimilation of West-
ern culture, either consciously or subconsciously. In the late nineteenth cen-
tury, the Chinese people hastily accepted a variety of Western concepts, among 
which was the term “nation” or “nationality.” A study of the introduction of 
this Western terminology allows us to learn how the Chinese combine Western 
modernity with their own traditions amid misconceptions and deviations.
Th e word natio is of Latin origin, meaning birthplace or biological descent. 
In the eighteenth century, when the European bourgeoisie began to rise quickly, 
this emerging class upgraded the ancient Latin word to nation with the meaning 
of “a common language, region, economic life (common tariff ), and culture.” It 
was used as a powerful weapon against the feudal system. In 1789, the French 
missionary Augustine Barlow, fi rst used the word nationalism to refer to a social 
force “that overthrows the feudal monarchial regime.” Under the slogan of “One 
Nation, One State,” the emerging bourgeoisie successfully launched a series of 
social revolutions. When the bourgeois revolutions in Europe ended in 1871, a 
group of mono-ethnic states had been founded. Hence, the words nation and 
state fi nally merged into a single concept in modern European history.
Nationality or Ethnic 
Group?
Chapter 1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
When referring to the “nation-state” theory of the modern West, it should 
be noted that its core concept of nation has the meaning of a state.
European capitalism subsequently began colonial conquests around the 
world and thus spread the nation-state theory beyond Europe. However, China 
had already been a unified multi-ethnic country for 2,000 years when this 
notion reached her shores. What sort of deviation would occur if the concept 
of nation and the nation-state theory, born in the modern West, was trans-
planted into China’s historical and cultural background?
In fact, China’s bourgeois revolution tried to use Western theories and 
ideas of nationalism to launch a popular movement for national salvation. But 
the Chinese bourgeoisie encountered the problem of the minzu (literally ethnic 
group).
The main enemy of the bourgeois revolution in modern China was the 
government under the rule of the Manchu nobility during the Qing Dynasty 
(1616–1911). In the early twentieth century, overthrowing the centralized 
dictatorship was equivalent to toppling the rule of the Manchu nobility. As 
a result, in order to drive the Qing government off  the historical stage, there 
was no better slogan than “National Revolution.” In 1905, when Sun Yat-Sen, 
the pioneer of China’s Bourgeois Revolution (1866–1925), founded the United 
League (Tongmenghui) with various bourgeois political parties, the objectives 
he put forth in the oath were: expelling the Manchus, restoring Han Chinese 
rule, founding a republic, and ownership of equal divisions of land.
China has been a uniﬁ ed multi-ethnic country since ancient times, and thus far, 56 ethnic 
groups have been identiﬁ ed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Chapter 1 Nationality or Ethnic Group?  
5
However, these fresh bourgeois revolutionaries soon became aware of the 
following practical problem: besides the Han Chinese, China also had a large 
number of other ethnic groups that have been living in the territory of the uni-
fied country ever since ancient times, contributing to China’s 5,000-year-old 
history and culture. Th erefore, a question was raised: is the newly-established 
Republic of China going to include these ethnic groups?
If not, the decision would have been clearly and evidently inconsistent with 
Chinese history and the unique Chinese cultural tradition that had been in 
existence for thousands of years.
Liang Qichao (1873–1929), a famous Chinese bourgeoisie thinker, put 
forth his own doctrine of nationalism in earlier times: in order to fi ght against 
colonial conquest by imperialism, China must unite the ethnic groups of Han 
Chinese, Manchu, Hui, Miao, and Tibetan to form a single great ethnic group. 
In his inaugural address in 1912, Sun Yat-Sen, the Provisional President of the 
Republic of China, announced to the world: “The foundation of the country 
lies in the people; and the unifi cation of lands inhabited by the Han Chinese, 
Manchu, Mongol, Hui, and Tibetan people into one country, means the unifi -
cation of the Han Chinese, Manchu, Mongol, Hui, and Tibetan ethnic groups. 
This is national unification.” He further pointed out that all ethnic groups 
belong to this unifi ed Republic of China, where one ethnic group should not 
dominate over another, nor should there be any hostility against the Manchus.
During this period, Tsarist Russia instigated the then-Jebtsundamba 
Khutuktu in Outer Mongolia to declare independence. At that time, the princes 
of 10 banners of Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, also known as the Jirem 
League, convened two conferences in eastern Mongolia consecutively, to dis-
cuss how to stop Outer Mongolia’s “independence.” In early 1913, the princes of 
34 banners in 22 parts of western Mongolia also held a conference and decided 
to team up with the eastern Mongolian princes to oppose independence. Th ey 
issued a joint statement: “Mongolian territory and the Chinese mainland are 
interdependent, and the Han Chinese and Mongolians have been a family for 
centuries. We Mongolians also belong to the Chinese nation, and therefore, 
should contribute to maintaining the unity of the Republic.”
It was a solemn political proclamation which showed that even in mod-
ern times, when the Western nation-state theory was widespread and put into 
practice around the world, China’s destiny and each ethnic group’s choice were 
still determined by China’s unique tradition, as well as the mentality formed 
during her long history and culture.
Th e Manifesto of the First National Congress of the Kuomintang, issued in 
1924, further elaborated China’s nationalism. Kuomintang’s nationalism had 
two meanings: fi rstly, the Chinese nation seeks liberation independently; sec-
ondly, ethnic groups within China are all equal.

6 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Although in modern times, the Chinese people used terms such as nation 
and nationalism introduced from the West, they interpreted them based on 
the reality of Chinese history and culture. Indeed, cultural integrity, solidarity, 
and indivisibility formed over 5,000 years are the very components of Chinese 
history and culture that cannot be ignored or transcended. It is also why the 
Chinese people have had to face their own history and incorporate the modern 
nation-state theory into China’s reality when introducing it to the West.
It is intriguing that from the mid-to-late twentieth century, the terms nation 
and nationality gradually lost their unique designation as a modern Western 
term in academic and news publications in China, and instead were widely used 
as a generic term that indicated all concepts concerning ethnic groups, including 
ethnic minorities both in Chinese history and in reality. For nearly more than 
half a century, the words nation and nationality used by China, had nothing to 
do with the nation-state theory implied in Western societies. Only in Western 
circumstances would Chinese ethnologists consider using the word nationality 
to indicate ethnic groups in ancient China, for example, when writing books in 
English. Likewise, some organizations related to ethnic minorities also used the 
word nationality when translating their own names.
Th e reform and opening up that started in the late 1970s enabled the Chi-
nese people to better understand Western history and culture. Now, many 
Chinese government agencies, cultural organizations, and scholars related to 
ethnic minorities use the words nation, nationality, ethnic group or minority 
in English translations to refer to minzu, depending on the context. Th ere are 
scholars who have made the following suggestions: to use “Chinese nation” to 
refer to zhonghua minzu; while the terms ethnic group or ethnic minorities 
should refer to the 56 minzu in China. It shows that contemporary Chinese 
people have fi nally  discovered this huge deviation and have adjusted the mean-
ing to suit the reality of China.
Nationalism in Modern Europe and 
Culturalism in Ancient China
If the concept of nation in the modern West diverges from its Chinese interpre-
tation, then what are the forms and meanings of minzu in ancient China? Both 
Chinese historians and Western sinologists have discovered a concept known 
as “culturalism” in the study of Chinese history. Culturalism can be called the 
nationality of ancient China, in correspondence to nationalism in the mod-
ern West.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Chapter 1 Nationality or Ethnic Group?  
7
Professor John King Fairbank (1907–1991), a prominent American aca-
demic and historian, was also given the nickname of “America’s Number One 
Expert on China.” He once said: “No doubt, the viewpoint that the doctrines of 
Confucius and Mencius apply to everything implies that Chinese culture (life-
style) is more fundamental than nationalism . . . As long as a person is familiar 
with Confucian classics and behaves accordingly, his skin color or language no 
longer matters.” According to Fairbank, this was the defi nition of “culturalism” 
in ancient China.
Ancient China used culture to govern the country and did not divide peo-
ple by ethnicity. Descent was not the most important criterion used to classify 
ethnic groups, nor was appearance, skin color, or even language. The Spring 
and Autumn Annals compiled by Confucius (551–479 B.C.) pronounced: “Vas-
sals are barbarians if they adopt barbaric etiquette; barbarians are Chinese if 
they adopt Chinese etiquette.” Th is meant that if vassals adopted barbaric eti-
quette, they would merely be regarded as barbarians; and if barbarians adopted 
local etiquette when visiting the Central Plains (a term used to refer to ancient 
China), then they would also be regarded as people of the Central Plains. Th is 
was a very liberal attitude!
A performance during the Ethnic Minorities Arts Festival.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
China’s territory is geographically special: it is surrounded by natural bar-
riers, and there is a complete system of geographic features within. Before the 
Spring-Autumn Period (770–476 B.C.) and Warring States Period (475–256 
B.C.), the Chinese people had formed a distinct national outlook, that is, her 
people believed that being surrounded by seas on all four sides made China the 
Tianxia (literally world)—comprising the Central Plains and Siyi (barbarians 
living at the four directions). Th erefore, Tianxia is also referred to as a place 
“within the four seas.”
Generally speaking, the Huaxia (another term used for the Han Chinese) 
living at the Central Plains were considered to be more civilized while people 
living in the surrounding areas were considered to be the Siyi—Dongyi (liter-
ally barbarians at the East), Nanman (literally barbarians at the South), Xirong 
(literally barbarians at the West), and Beidi (literally barbarians at the North). 
In the eyes of the Huaxia, the Siyi were signifi cantly diff erent from the people 
of the Central Plains because of their relatively lower level of civilization. Dur-
ing the Xia Dynasty (2070–1600 B.C.), Shang Dynasty (1600–1046 B.C.), and 
Western Zhou Dynasty (1046–256 B.C.), the Huaxia already had frequent con-
tacts and exchanges in various ways with the Siyi. During the Spring-Autumn 
Period and Warring States Period, the geographical pattern became clearer; the 
Han Chinese were located in the center (therefore called Zhongguo, the Middle 
Kingdom) with barbarians of Dongyi, Nanman, Xirong, and Beidi in the east, 
south, west, and north, respectively.
In fact, Fairbank insisted that the extent of ethnic diff erences within China 
might be even greater than all the ethnic diff erences combined in Europe and 
College students from various ethnic groups watching the 
ﬂ ag-raising ceremony at Tiananmen Square.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Chapter 1 Nationality or Ethnic Group?  
9
America. At the very least, Chinese culture is highly diversifi ed in terms of eth-
nic groups, ethnic communities, languages, and religions, all of which consti-
tute the cultural diversity of China. With such great cultural diversity, how was 
China able to maintain her unity for thousands of years?
Ancient Chinese had an unparalleled admiration for the “rites and music 
culture,” and were also optimistic about its distribution and mutual under-
standing among communities. They claimed: “the Chinese will degrade into 
barbarians if they are evil, and barbarians will upgrade into Chinese if they are 
virtuous.” Th e standard did not only apply to the Siyi, but also to the inhabit-
ants of the Central Plains who were in a privileged position. Therefore, the 
door that divided diff erent groups of people was not eternally open or closed; 
it opened in both directions, providing free access to everyone. When the Siyi 
entered this “door,” they became the Huaxia; by the same token, Huaxia was 
not an unchangeable tag either, because when the Huaxia stepped out this 
“door,” they too became the Siyi.
Th e debate over Huaxia and Siyi did not always rely on ethnicity but also 
on the level of civilization a society had achieved. Th ere was always a greater 
fl exibility and dialectics behind the sense of privilege felt by the people of the 
Central Plains over barbarians. That said, the people of the Central Plains 
believed that barbarians could become civilized people through “enlighten-
ment.” Based on the ethnic-community viewpoint that “everyone is entitled to 
be educated,” Chinese cultural tradition held that the mission of the Middle 
Kingdom in the Central Plains was to turn barbarians into “people of the 
Celestial Empire” through enlightenment rather than military occupation; so 
as to achieve “Great Harmony.”
As a matter of fact, the system of enlightenment by the “rites and music 
culture” was not created solely by the Huaxia communities in the Central 
Plains, but was rather an outcome of communication and integration between 
people from diff erent areas. For example, the emperors of the Shang Dynasty 
were from Dongyi, the emperors of the Zhou Dynasty were from western areas, 
and even the Huaxia in the Central Plains themselves had originated from pio-
neer communities, but had over time made progress in history through com-
munication and integration. This is why the fundamental concept in ancient 
Chinese culture states: “There are Siyi in Huaxia people and there are also 
Huaxia in Siyi people.” Based on this notion, a consensus sunk its roots deep 
within Chinese culture and tradition: people around the world are all equal in 
terms of origin.
In this way, the standards, which allowed alteration in different contexts, 
left  great historical possibility with the Siyi. Owing to the nature of this cultur-
alism, when the Siyi had the opportunity to move to the Central Plains, they 
did not have the motive of occupying the land or destroying the Central Plains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
 culture. On the contrary, their biggest hope was to become the orthodox “rites 
and music culture” of the Central Plains themselves. Therefore, culturalism 
became a highly inclusive historical receptacle, making the culture of the Cen-
tral Plains a historical heritage to be inherited and passed down instead of being 
open to attack by later dynastic changes.
Compared with other ancient civilizations in the world, this sense of cul-
turalism can be viewed as fl exible and unique to Chinese culture. Its ability to 
open and close passageways arguably makes it more dynamic and inclusive 
than other forms of culturalism, while at the same time, allowing for the pos-
sibility of achieving integrity, solidarity, and indivisibility in Chinese culture.
The Chinese people offer culturalism as one explanation to Westerners 
who cannot understand why Chinese civilization has been able to develop 
uninterrupted for 5,000 years. It also serves to explain why China has been able 
to maintain a unifi ed multi-ethnic country for more than 2,000 years.



13
2
Ethnic Identifi cation: How Many Ethnic Groups 
Are There in China?
Th e People’s Republic of China (PRC) was founded on October 1, 1949, and the 
fi rst visiting delegation to ethnic communities sent by the central  government 
started in June of 1950. Considering the heavy and complex issues awaiting the 
newly established country, it can be argued that ethnic minority affairs were 
also considered a top priority for China.
From 1950 to 1953, the Chinese government sent four delegations simul-
taneously to ethnic communities in the southwest, northwest, south, and 
northeast. These large-scale delegations had long journeys before them; the 
delegation to the southwest, with as many as 120 members, traveled to Sich-
uan, Yunnan, and Guizhou provinces and stayed for as long as seven months. 
The delegations’ mission was to inform ethnic minorities around the coun-
try of the new government’s basic policies: the PRC will ensure full equality 
among all ethnic groups within her territory, respect religious beliefs and 
folklore customs of all ethnic groups, and develop the economy and culture of 
ethnic minorities  vigorously.
Equality among ethnic groups is the cornerstone of China’s ethnic policy. 
In China, the definition of full equality among ethnic groups includes three 
aspects: firstly, regardless of the population size, history, area of residence, 
level of economic development, diff erences in spoken and written languages, 
religious beliefs, folkways and customs, every ethnic group has equal political 
Diversity in a Unified 
Chinese Nation
Chapter 2

14 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
status. Secondly, all ethnic groups in China not only have political and legal 
equality, but also economic, cultural, and social equality. Th irdly, citizens of all 
ethnic groups are equal before the law, enjoying the same rights and perform-
ing the same duties.
New ethnic policies have encouraged self-acknowledgement of ethnic 
groups and active expression of their own wishes and rights. Th is can be seen 
from the results of the fi rst census conducted in 1953—more than 400 ethnic 
group names were registered, with over 260 names in Yunnan Province alone.
Among these 400 names, some used different names within the same 
 ethnic group, some were names of diff erent branches of an ethnic group, some 
were ethnic group names based on residence, and some were even different 
Chinese transliterations of the same name of an ethnic group. Th is prompted a 
closer examination of ethnic groups in China, and immediately the task of eth-
nic identifi cation was set.
Many renowned ethnologists and sociologists in China traveled to several 
communities, where people were waiting to confi rm their ethnic identities. A 
large number of historians and linguists also participated in this event which 
was particularly important for the country.
The process of ethnic identification proved to be a very arduous one. It 
took more than 20 years from 1953, when the State Ethnic Aff airs Commission 
dispatched the fi rst investigative team, to 1979, when the Jino ethnic group was 
the last one to be identifi ed. Considering the length of time, scale of work, and 
An autumn scene in the Altay region of northern Xinjiang. The ethnic minorities in Xinjiang 
account for nearly 60% of the total local population.

 
Chapter 2 Diversity in a Unifi ed Chinese Nation 
15
the amount of manpower the Chinese government had used, scholars agreed 
with the following statement: ethnic identifi cation in the twentieth century is 
the largest and an unprecedented one in Chinese history; it is pioneering work 
for China and is seldom seen outside of China.
Th ere are three goals of ethnic identifi cation: to identify whether a com-
munity belongs to the Han Chinese ethnic group or to the ethnic minorities; 
to identify whether this ethnic community is a separate ethnic group or part of 
another ethnic group; and to confi rm the ethnic identity and the name of the 
ethnic group.
In 1953, the identifi cation team for the She minority in Zhejiang and Fujian 
provinces was the fi rst investigative agency that had been set up to identify ethnic 
groups. Th e team leader Shi Lianzhu, later became the most famous scholar in the 
study of the She minority who also wrote the Identifi cation of Ethnicity in China.
Most ethnic communities inhabited areas where transportation was 
inconvenient, where investigators had to climb mountains and cross rivers 
on foot. The She minority that Shi and his team were trying to identify had 
been regarded as part of the Han Chinese ethnic group, or a branch of the Yao 
minority. Aft er the investigation, however, it was found to be a separate ethnic 
minority.
What were the criteria of ethnic identifi cation in China? Iosif Vissarionov-
ich Stalin (1897–1953) off ered a simple and clear defi nition of ethnic groups in 
his book Marxism and the National Question: “A nation is a historically consti-
tuted, stable community of people, formed on the basis of a common language, 
A small Tibetan  community on the Tibetan Plateau.

16 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
territory, economic life, and psychological make-up manifested in a common 
culture.” This passage provided great inspiration for people working on eth-
nic affairs in China at that time. Although this definition was put forth for 
 nationalities in modern Western countries, Chinese ethnologists thought it had a 
universal signifi cance. Th erefore, a common language, territory, economic life, 
and psychological make-up became the four major criteria for ethnic identifi ca-
tion in China.
Nevertheless, China’s national circumstances at that time must be taken into 
account. China’s ethnic identifi cation incorporated the actual situations of her 
ethnic minorities, and apart from Stalin’s defi nition, “ethnic willingness,” “his-
torical basis,” and “proximity identifi cation” became three important principles.
“Ethnic willingness” meant that ethnic identities and names could not be 
imposed; the local and state governments could not decide the ethnic identities 
for people; people who wish to be identifi ed as an ethnic group could actively 
make their wishes heard and had the right to fully negotiate with the govern-
ment. “Historical basis” meant that apart from fi eld investigation into an ethnic 
group’s daily life, cultural heritage such as voluminous documents, old scrip-
tures, records and stone tablets as well as mythologies and songs, must be fully 
investigated. “Proximity identification” expressed the following idea: similar 
ethnic communities, for example, adjacent ethnic communities that basically 
had the same language, close economic ties, and mutual acknowledgement, 
should be combined and identified as one ethnic group, so long as this was 
benefi cial to the ethnic groups’ own development.
The Hulunbeir Grassland in Inner Mongolia is the cradle of the northern 
nomadic ethnic groups.

 
Chapter 2 Diversity in a Unifi ed Chinese Nation 
17
During the decade after 1953, ethnic identification gradually entered its 
climax. Out of all the regions, ethnic identifi cation in Yunnan Province posed 
the most diffi  culties. In 1954, the State Ethnic Aff air Commission sent an ethnic 
identifi cation team to Yunnan Province whereby linguists played a pivotal role in 
the identifi cation process. Th e phonological system and grammatical structure 
of language served as a measurable and objective basis for ethnic identifi cation. 
Over three million people in Yunnan Province spoke the Yi language but used 
diff erent names for their ethnicity. Th ey were, however, all identifi ed as branches 
of the Yi minority rather than a separate one, based on the fact that they shared 
common linguistic characteristics and of course, common cultural traditions 
such as the Torch Festival, the Native Chieft ain System, the taboo that marriage 
between people bearing the same surname was forbidden, as well as cremation 
sites, ancestor posts, witchcraft , and so on. In the end, over 260 diff erent ethnic 
communities in Yunnan Province were consolidated into 22 ethnic groups.
The identification of the Tujia minority was particularly tortuous. The 
Tujia minority had no written language of their own but spoke Chinese preva-
lently, sparked a great academic controversy in its identifi cation as a separate 
ethnic group. Pan Guangdan (1899–1967), a main figure in this process, 
firmly believed that the Tujia minority did not belong to the Miao or Yao 
minorities in the area, and that it was a dependent ethnic minority originating 
from ancient Ba people. Although Pan suff ered from severe myopia, he made 
Guizhou is home to numerous ethnic minorities. This picture shows a village 
of the Dong minority.

18 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Terraced paddy ﬁ elds of the Hani minority in Yuanyang, Yunnan Province.
more than 1,300 notes related to the Tujia minority and ancient Ba people. 
Even with an injured leg, he traveled across the vast lands of the Tujia minor-
ity on crutches. Eventually in January 1957, the Tujia minority was offi  cially 
recognized as a unique ethnic group.

 
Chapter 2 Diversity in a Unifi ed Chinese Nation 
19
When the Cultural Revolution started in 1966, the last ethnic minority that 
had been identifi ed was the Lhoba minority living in the Shannan and Linzhi 
regions of Tibet. Until then, 54 ethnic minorities in China had been identifi ed, 
leaving only a few unidentifi ed ones.
During the Cultural Revolution, ethnic identification came to a halt. In 
1978, with the reform and opening up of China, ethnic identification was 
started again. In Yunnan Province, an ethnologist named Du Yuting took on 
the academic debate from over a decade ago: were the Jino people inhabiting 
collectively on Jino Mountain in Jinghong County, Yunnan Province, truly a 
branch of the Yi minority? Du returned to Jino Mountain and began to col-
lect more evidence and conduct further research. In the same year, a research 
group of 30 to 40 people, which included historians, linguists, and ethnologists, 
also went to Jino Mountain. Th e result of their collective study was that the Jino 
people were indeed a separate ethnic group.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
FIFTY-FIVE ETHNIC MINORITIES IN CHINA
Ethnicity
Main Habitats
Population (people)
Mongol
Inner-Mongolia, Liaoning, 
Jilin, Hebei, Heilongjiang, 
Xinjiang
5,813,947
Hui
Ningxia, Gansu, Henan, 
Xinjiang, Qinghai, Yunnan, 
Hebei, Shandong, 
Anhui, Liaoning, Beijing, 
Inner Mongolia, Tianjin, 
Heilongjiang, Shaanxi, 
Guizhou, Jilin, Jiangsu, 
Sichuan
9,816,805
Tibetan
Tibet, Sichuan, Qinghai, 
Gansu, Yunnan
5,416,021
Uygur
Xinjiang
8,399,393
Miao
Guizhou, Hunan, Yunnan, 
Guangxi, Chongqing, Hubei, 
Sichuan
8,940,116

20 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Ethnicity
Main Habitats
Population (people)
Yi
Yunnan, Sichuan, Guizhou 
7,762,272
Zhuang
Guangxi, Yunnan, 
Guangdong
16,178,811
Bouyei
Guizhou
2,971,460
Korean
Jilin, Heilongjiang, Liaoning
1,923,842
Manchu
Liaoning, Hebei, 
Heilongjiang, Jilin, Inner 
Mongolia, Beijing
10,682,262
Dong
Guizhou, Hunan, Guangxi
2,960,293
Yao
Guangxi, Hunan, Yunnan, 
Guangdong
2,637,421
Bai
Yunnan, Guizhou, Hunan
1,858,063
Tujia
Hunan, Hubei, Chongqing, 
Guizhou
8,028,133
Hani
Yunnan
1,439,673
Kazak
Xinjiang
1,250,458
Dai
Yunnan
1,158,989
Li
Hainan
1,247,814
Lisu
Yunnan, Sichuan
634,912
Va
Yunnan
396,610
She
Fujian, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, 
Guangdong
709,592
Gaoshan
*
Taiwan, Fujian
4,461
Lahu
Yunnan
453,705
Sui
Guizhou, Guangxi
406,902
Dongxiang
Gansu, Xinjiang
513,805
Naxi
Yunnan
308,839

 
Chapter 2 Diversity in a Unifi ed Chinese Nation 
21
Ethnicity
Main Habitats
Population (people)
Jingpo
Yunnan
132,143
Kirgiz
Xinjiang
160,823
Tu
Qinghai, Gansu
241,198
Daur
Inner Mongolia, 
Heilongjiang
132,394
Mulam
Guangxi
207,352
Qiang
Sichuan
306,072
Blang
Yunnan
91,882
Salar
Qinghai
104,503
Maonan
Guangxi
107,166
Gelao
Guizhou
579,357
Xibe
Liaoning, Xinjiang
188,824
Achang
Yunnan
33,936
Pumi
Yunnan
33,600
Tajik
Xinjiang
41,028
Nu
Yunnan
28,759
Ozbek
Xinjiang
12,370
Russian
Xinjiang, Heilongjiang
15,609
Ewenki
Inner Mongolia
30,505
De’ang
Yunnan
17,935
Bonan
Gansu
16,505
Yugur
Gansu
13,719
Jing
Guangxi
22,517
Tatar
Xinjiang
4,890

22 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
On June 6, 1979, the Jino minority of slightly over 20,000 people offi  cially 
became the last ethnic minority identifi ed in China during the twentieth century.
Thus far, 55 ethnic minorities in China had been officially identified. In 
eff ect, there are still a few remaining ethnic communities that are waiting to be 
identifi ed, and therefore, this work has yet to completely end.
Diversity in a Unifi ed Chinese Nation
Neither visiting delegations to ethnic regions, shortly aft er the establishment of 
the PRC, nor ethnic identifi cation starting from 1953, had made the Chinese 
government believe her understanding of ethnic minorities was suffi  cient. In 
1956, a larger scale investigation on the sociological history of ethnic minori-
ties began around the country.
This investigation was proposed by Mao Zedong (1893–1976), and was 
implemented by the National People’s Congress’ Ethnic Aff airs Committee. Th e 
plan was to obtain a clearer picture of the situation of major ethnic minorities 
in China in the following four to seven years.
More than 1,000 scholars took part in this massive undertaking.  According 
to incomplete statistics, the investigation comprised: over 340 investigative 
reports, which included written works with a total of 29 million words—of 
which 15  million words were derived from a collection of over 100 archives and 
Ethnicity
Main Habitats
Population (people)
Derung
Yunnan
7,426
Oroqen
Heilongjiang, Inner 
Mongolia
8,196
Hezhen
Heilongjiang
4,640
Monba
Tibet
8,923
Lhoba
Tibet
2,965
Jino
Yunnan
20,899
SOURCE: Population data taken from the 2000 Census.
*The population of the Gaoshan minority does not include Taiwan Province.

 
Chapter 2 Diversity in a Unifi ed Chinese Nation 
23
excerpts—and over 10 documentaries. By 1966, the scholars involved in the 
investigation submitted primary research fi ndings on China’s ethnic  minorities, 
which resulted in 57 draft  manuscripts collectively titled as Concise History, Brief 
Records, and History and Brief Records. Th is was an important event for the Chi-
nese people in attaining a sensible understanding of the ethnic minorities of China.
Th e famous Chinese sociologist Fei Xiaotong (1910–2005), was the major 
organizer and participant of the investigation on the sociological history of eth-
nic minorities. Furthermore, he was also a key person in a series of important 
historical events related to ethnic minorities in the 1950s, and accompanied 
many of the visiting delegations that traveled to several ethnic communities. 
It was after his close contacts with ethnic minorities that resulted in several 
crucial historical questions formed in his mind: in China, how had the socio-
logical histories of the Han Chinese and ethnic minorities influenced each 
another? What were the ethnic minorities’ eff ects on the formation of the Han 
Chinese ethnic group? How should the “Chinese nation,” which includes the 
Han  Chinese ethnic group and 55 other ethnic minorities be understood?
He dwelt on these questions for as long as 30 years. In 1989, Fei fi rst pre-
sented his work Diversity in a Unifi ed Chinese Nation at the Chinese University 
of Hong Kong. His work immediately received strong attention from academia. 
Aft er many intense academic debates, his ideas were gradually improved upon, 
and they have since become the basis of a mainstream theory explaining the 
origin, formation, and development of the Chinese nation.
Fei’s Diversity in a Unified Chinese Nation is regarded as the theory that 
explains the formation of the Chinese nation, including her 55 ethnic minori-
ties. It states that: “Th e Chinese nation’s mainstream shows a pattern of diversity 
in unity, which was formed by communicating, mixing, allaying, and integrat-
ing as well as splitting and declining; all components interact and integrate with 
each other, but also maintain their own characteristics.” Th e paper talks about 
the formation process: “As early as 3,000 years ago, a core community, called 
Huaxia, formed by several ethnic groups converging and integrating, came into 
being in the middle reaches of the Yellow River, and started to snowball and 
affi  liate with other surrounding ethnic groups. When they occupied the plains 
in the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River and Yellow River in East 
Asia, others called them the Han Chinese. The Han Chinese absorbed parts 
of other ethnic groups and enlarged itself continuously. It also migrated to 
other ethnic groups’ compact communities and formed a network that played 
a unifying and connecting role. It laid the foundation for an indivisible united 
community consisting of many ethnic groups in this region, became an ethnic 
entity, and eventually identifi ed themselves as Chinese people.”
The Huaxia ethnic community—the precursor to the Han Chinese—
had diverse origins. It began with the interaction and integration of  diff erent 

24 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
 cultures in the middle and lower reaches of the Yellow River. During the 
Western Zhou Dynasty, cultures in various regions still maintained their own 
characteristics. However, due to massive population fl uxes and regional shift s 
which occurred during the 500 years of Spring-Autumn Period and Warring 
States Period, several cultures were forced to engage and interact with one 
another, driving Chinese history into its first climax when the Han Chinese 
began maturing into an ethnic entity.
Th e term Han became an ethnic group identifi er at the initial stage of the 
Southern and Northern Dynasties (420–589). A large number of nomadic 
people such as Xianbei, Hun, Di, Qiang, and Jie entered the Central Plains one 
aft er another in the fourth and fi ft h century during the integration of the Han 
Chinese and non-Han vassals. Thus, the Han became known as the original 
residents of the Central Plains. During the Southern and Northern Dynasties, 
ethnic groups were living among one another and interacting. It was during 
this dynamic period when diverse Han ethnic communities gradually became 
unifi ed. By the end of this dynasty, all these nomadic people traveling in the 
Central Plains integrated themselves into one ethnic group which eventually 
became known as the Han. Their own ethnic group names disappeared one 
by one; their cultures were absorbed by the Han culture and also became part 
of it. Th is was a result of intermarriages, which were very common at the time 
between ethnic groups that were living in the same area. Furthermore, the 
development of the Han during this period is historically signifi cant as it also 
gave rise to China’s traditional “culturalism.”
With the demise of the Southern and Northern Dynasties, this brought 
about the unifi cation of the Sui (581–618) and Tang (618–907) dynasties. 
Th e ruling classes in both dynasties had non-Han origins themselves. Th e 
royal court of the Sui Dynasty was full of Xianbei statesmen, and even King 
Wen of Sui Dynasty, the founder of the dynasty, married a Xianbei. Th e sub-
sequent Tang Dynasty inherited this practice and Li Yuan (618–626), the 
founder of the Tang Dynasty, was born to a Xianbei mother and married a 
Xianbei to be his queen. In early Tang Dynasty, Xianbei nobles who were 
willing to be converted by the Han Chinese culture played a pivotal role 
and were serving in important positions from the very beginning. In other 
words, the Tang Dynasty that the Chinese are so proud of is actually one 
great dynasty that was created by many ethnic groups. Th ough it was ruled 
by the Han Chinese in name, all ethnic groups had in fact participated in 
the administration.
Ethnic group names such as Xianbei, Di, and Jie disappeared at the end of 
the Sui and Tang dynasties. For nearly 500 years from the Southern and North-
ern Dynasties to the Tang Dynasty, the Central Plains became a melting pot of 
ethnic groups, with the Han Chinese serving as the core ethnic group.

 
Chapter 2 Diversity in a Unifi ed Chinese Nation 
25
Th ereaft er, the Northern Song (960–1127) and Southern Song (1127–1279) 
dynasties continued to interact actively with emerging nomadic people in the 
north. Th e Qidan ethnic group set up a strong Liao Kingdom, but when the name 
Qidan spread to Europe as a byword of China, the Qidan ethnic group itself had 
already disappeared from the lands of the Central Plains. Th e bulk of the Qidan 
ethnic group had been conquered and destroyed by other northern nomadic 
people called Nvzhen, leaving the remaining Qidan minority to gradually become 
members of the Han people. Th e Dangxiang people, who established the Xixia 
Kingdom in northwest China, dating back to the Northern Song Dynasty, also 
vanished after a 200-year-long era of prosperity when they were devastated 
by Mongolian military forces. Again, those remaining Dangxiang people later 
 peacefully integrated themselves to become Han Chinese.
Th e historical evolution of the Chinese shows that the Han Chinese is by 
no means an ethnic group with only one origin. At the same time, during all 
periods in Chinese history, there were always trends that moved in the opposite 
direction too. In other regions, the Han Chinese also fused with other ethnic 
groups.
Many Han Chinese moved to the Siyi areas due to factors such as wars, 
natural disasters, and military settlement. For example, the war at the end of 
the Eastern Han Dynasty prompted more than 100,000 households to flee 
to areas where the Wuhuan ethnic group lived. Th ese Han Chinese who had 
moved to border ethnic regions had to change their lifestyle and folklore in 
order to adapt to the new local environment and social life surrounding them, 
and subsequently they became a part of local ethnic groups.
The Gaochang Kingdom was set up by the Qu ethnic group in Turfan, 
 Xinjiang, in 499. It was originally a state consisting mostly of settled soldiers 
during the Han-Wei Period and fl eeing Han Chinese during the Jin Dynasty, 
but they discarded the Han Chinese way of  dressing and linguistic traditions. 
In the end, it was assimilated into the Uygur minority.
Such a phenomenon was very common. Th e Han Chinese that migrated to 
Yunnan Province during the thousands of years before the Ming Dynasty also 
mostly integrated into local ethnic groups. Th e Bai ethnic group is an example of 
yet another ethnic group that incorporated people of Han Chinese origin.
As for the formation of the Tibetan minority, Gelek Lobsang, the first 
Tibetan scholar who earned a Ph.D. in China, drew the following conclu-
sion based on his long-term research: “Th e ancient Tibetan culture does not 
fall from the sky, but instead it was formed on the basis of the original culture 
in the southern valley of Tibet, by absorbing and integrating the primitive 
nomadic culture in the northern grassland and nomadic people belonging to 
the Hu ethnic strain, as well as Yangshao culture in the Central Plains and eth-
nic groups belonging to the Di and Qiang ethnic strains.”

26 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
The Potala Palace in the city center of Lhasa, the symbol of Tibetan history and culture.
Speaking further on the subject, Fei also mentioned in Diversity in a 
 Unifi ed Chinese Nation: “Speaking from the viewpoint of biological basis, or so-
called ‘lineage,’ mixing and blending oft en occur in the ‘unity’ of the  Chinese 
nation, so there is not a single ethnic group that is ‘purebred’ in terms of 
 lineage.”
Diversity and unity are two indivisible and interdependent trends that eth-
nic groups in China have demonstrated over her long history. Aft er the Opium 
War in 1840, in the fi ght against the invasion of Western imperialism and Japa-
nese militarism, people from all ethnic groups formed a self-conscious ethnic 
entity, which later proved to stand together through times of thick and thin.
Th us, the diversity in the unifi ed Chinese nation, formed in this manner, has 
the following aspects, according to the Diversity in a Unifi ed Chinese Nation:
“Firstly, the Chinese nation is an ethnic entity that includes 56 ethnic 
groups in China, rather than a generic name for 56 ethnic groups simply added 
together. Fift y-six ethnic groups have already formed an interdependent and 
indivisible unity, in which all the components have already obtained a higher 
level of ethnic recognition, for example, to share weal and woe, to live or die 
together, to share glory and shame, and to share a common destiny. Secondly, 
diversity in unity must go through a process where scattered components 
gradually unite together. There needs to be a core that plays a unifying role. 

 
Chapter 2 Diversity in a Unifi ed Chinese Nation 
27
The Han Chinese is one of the many basic components that has unified all 
the  components, but this unity is no longer the Han Chinese but the Chinese 
nation—an ethnic group of higher recognition. Th ird, high-level recognition 
does not necessarily replace or reject lower level recognition. Diff erent levels 
can coexist, even make good use of their original strengths based on this pat-
tern, and form a unity of multiple languages and cultures.”
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
THE DEVELOPMENT OF “GREAT UNITY” IN 
ANCIENT CHINA
As early as the time before the Qin Dynasty, the concepts of “coun-
try” and “unifi cation” had taken shape in the minds of the Chinese 
people. In 221 B.C., the Qin Dynasty unifi ed the country for the fi rst 
time. It put the regions, including today’s Guangxi Zhuang Autono-
mous Region and Yunnan Province, where the ethnic minorities 
were concentrated, under her jurisdiction. The subsequent Han 
Dynasty (206 B.C. – A.D. 220) further consolidated the country’s 
unifi cation. It set up the Protectorate of the Western Regions in 
today’s Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, and added 17 prefec-
tures to govern all ethnic groups. The Qin and Han dynasties cre-
ated the fundamental framework of China as a unifi ed multi-ethnic 
country.
The Tang Dynasty (618–907) established the Anxi Protector-
General’s Offi ce and Beiting Protector-General’s Offi ce to manage 
administrative affairs in the Western Regions, including today’s Xin-
jiang, and set up the administrative levels of Dao, Fu, and Zhou (equiv-
alent to today’s province, prefecture, and county) to govern ethnic 
groups in southern and southwestern China. The Yuan Dynasty 
(1206–1368), established by the Mongols, appointed aboriginal offi -
cials or tuguan (literally hereditary posts of local administrators fi lled 
by chiefs of ethnic minorities) in the Fu and Zhou of the southern 
regions where ethnic groups lived in compact communities. The cen-
tral government set up the Commission for Buddhist and Tibetan 
Affairs to administer Tibet.

28 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
The Yuan Dynasty also saw the founding of the Penghu Military 
Inspectorate for the administration of the Penghu Islands and Tai-
wan. Most of modern China’s ethnic groups were subjects of the 
Yuan Dynasty. The Qing Dynasty (1644–1911), founded by the 
Manchus, set up the Ili Generalship and Xinjiang Province in the 
Western Regions, appointed the Grand Resident Minister in Tibet 
and established the system of conferring honorifi c titles on two Liv-
ing Buddhas—the Dalai and Panchen—by the central government. 
In addition, the Qing court carried out a series of political reforms 
in southwestern China, by replacing the governing power of local 
hereditary aboriginal chieftains with a system of appointment of 
local administrators by the central government in the ethnic com-
munities. Since then, China’s territory has remained the same as we 
know today.



31
3
The Population of Ethnic Groups in China
China is the world’s most populous country, with her population of Han 
 Chinese ranked the largest of all ethnic groups in the world.
 
1
1 There are also 
other impressive fi gures on the ethnic populations within China: the Zhuang 
minority, the most populous ethnic minority in China, has a population 
of 16.18 million, equivalent to that of a medium-sized country in Europe. 
 Meanwhile, the Lhoba minority, the least populous ethnic group in China, 
has a mere population of 2,965 which is 5,550 times smaller than the Zhuang 
 ethnic group.
Since the establishment of the People’s Republic of China, the central gov-
ernment has carried out a series of fi ve large-scale censuses around the country. 
Th e fi rst was in 1953, and it ascertained that the population of ethnic groups 
was 34.0138 million. Th is was the fi rst time such a task had been completed in 
China’s history of over a thousand years. None of the previous dynasties had 
compiled any statistics regarding ethnic minority populations. Th erefore, until 
this census, the populations of the ethnic minorities had long been a “huge 
mystery.”
Th e most recent census taken in 2000 was also the largest one in Chinese 
history. Its results showed that the total population of China’s ethnic minori-
ties had reached 106.43 million. From 1953 to 2000, the ethnic minority 
1According to a census taken in 2000, there were 1.159 billion Han Chinese in mainland China.
An Overview of China’s 
Chapter 3
Ethnic Minority Populations

32 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
population in China had increased by 2.07 times. During the same period, 
the total  population for mainland China had increased by 1.15 times; while 
the population of the Han Chinese in mainland China had increased by 
1.10 times.
Th e results showed that for 50 years between the fi rst and the fi ft h census, 
the growth rate of China’s ethnic minority population was much higher than 
that of the average total population growth and that of the average population 
growth of the Han Chinese. The results of the fifth census also showed that 
ethnic minority populations accounted for 8.41% of the total population in 
mainland China. In the third census held in 1982, ethnic minority populations 
accounted for 6.62% of the total population in mainland China; and in the 
fourth census in 1990, the proportion was 8.01%. Th is meant that the propor-
tion of ethnic minorities among the country’s total population was rising year 
aft er year.
In addition, the 2000 census also disclosed some other signifi cant details: 
among 55 ethnic minorities, the number of ethnic groups whose populations 
This picture shows a young lady 
from the Zhuang minority making 
a handicraft. The Zhuang is 
the largest ethnic minority in 
China and they mainly live in the 
Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous 
Region.

 
33
were larger than 10 million had increased from the Zhuang minority, to the 
Zhuang and Manchu minorities; while the Hui, Miao, and Uygur minorities 
were fast approaching this number. Th e number of ethnic groups whose popu-
lations were larger than one million had increased from 10 groups in 1953, to 
18 groups in 2000.
Th ere were 20 ethnic groups whose populations were smaller than 50,000, 
among which eight groups had populations smaller than 10,000. While the 
populations of most ethnic minorities were rising, their growth rates diff ered 
from one to another.
As many as 38 ethnic groups had a fast-growing or an extremely fast-
growing population, including the Gelao minority (8.80%), the Tujia  minority 
(7.78%), the Jing minority (4.66%), the Xibo minority (4.96%), the Qiang 
minority (4.64%), the Hezhen minority (5.26%), the Lhoba minority (5.72%), 
and the Maonan minority (4.40%). Eleven ethnic group populations were 
also growing relatively fast, including the Tibetan, Uygur, and Yi minorities 
whose populations were larger than one million. However, the population of 
the Korean minority was growing relatively slower. Meanwhile, three ethnic 
This picture shows a young man from the Lhoba minority. The Lhoba minority is the least 
populated ethnic group in China and they mainly live in southeast Tibet.
Chapter 3 An Overview of China’s Ethnic Minority Populations 

34 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
This picture shows a group of elderly people from the Hui minority. The Hui minority has the 
widest population distribution in China, and the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region is the largest 
region inhabited by the Hui people in compact communities.
Proportion of ethnic minorities in ﬁ ve censuses

 
35
groups that had seen their populations decrease: the Russian (–7.83%), Ozbek 
(–0.20%), and Tartar (–0.73%) minorities.
Population Policies toward Ethnic Minorities 
in China
China’s population policies toward ethnic minorities are made in accordance 
with practices adopted by the ethnic minorities from diff erent periods; social 
and economic development in ethnic regions; and the wishes of the ethnic 
minorities. Since 1950, population policies toward ethnic minorities have gone 
through three phases:
Policies to Boost the Population (1950–1970)
Policies in this period were made according to two main factors: fi rstly, at the 
birth of the People’s Republic of China, natural growth rates of some ethnic 
minority populations were low, and some groups even saw their populations 
decreasing. They were on the verge of “extinction” as their populations con-
tinued to drop. Secondly, most ethnic minorities were still using a traditional 
economic model in which social development relied directly on the increase of 
their labor force.
Based on these causes, the Chinese government employed a policy aimed 
at boosting the ethnic minorities’ populations.
During the first half of the twentieth century, the populations of some 
ethnic minorities plummeted deeply. According to official statistics, up till 
1951, when serfdom was still in place in Tibet, the death rate was as high as 
28 per 1,000 people and the infant mortality rate was as high as 430 per 1,000 
people—that is to say, nearly half of every 1,000 infants died at birth, or shortly 
thereaft er.
The Oroqen minority is an ethnic group living in northeastern China. 
Reportedly, her population in 1917 was around 4,000 people, about 3,000 in 
1938, and declined to 2,256 by 1953. Over the last 36 years, her population had 
decreased by 45.12%. Such slumps were rarely seen in history.
The government’s population policy yielded positive results soon after 
its implementation. In 1953, ethnic minority populations stopped declin-
ing and began to start increasing steadily. By the mid-1960s, ethnic minority 
populations started to rise rapidly. According to offi  cial statistics, China’s total 
Chapter 3 An Overview of China’s Ethnic Minority Populations 

36 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
 ethnic minority population increased from 34 million in 1953 to 39 million in 
1964. Th e population of the Oroqen minority also increased steadily. By 1990, 
her population reached 6,965 people, and by 2000, this number had already 
climbed to 8,196.
The Early Years of the Family Planning Policy (1971–1981)
In the 1970s, the Chinese government began carrying out the family planning 
policy in regions where the Han Chinese was living, encouraging couples to 
have only one child. But the government exempted all ethnic minorities from 
following this policy.
During this period, the government continued to encourage the popula-
tion growth of ethnic minorities. By 1980, the fertility rate of ethnic  minority 
women was 4.49, or 69.43% higher than that of the Han Chinese (2.65). 
From 1964 to 1982, the total ethnic minority population saw a net increase 
of 26 million, accounting for 78.06% of the total population of ethnic minor-
ities in 1953.
This picture shows hunters from the Oroqen minority. The Oroqen ethnic group lives mainly in 
Inner Mongolia and Heilongjiang.

 
37
A More Flexible Family Planning Policy (1982–present)
Population policies toward ethnic minorities in this period were made based 
on the fact that the populations of ethnic minorities were growing too fast that 
also brought about a series of challenges. In some regions, the  overpopulation 
of ethnic minorities has hindered economic development. Th e National  Family 
Planning Commission sent experts to ethnic regions such as Guangxi and 
 Yunnan for field tours several times and noted that the baby boom in these 
areas has caused problems to living standards. In order to meet the demand 
of larger populations, some ethnic minorities have had to cut down trees and 
reclaim wasteland, leading to various ecological disasters such as severe water 
loss, soil erosion, growing desertifi cation, and petrifaction.
Th e diffi  culties arising in such population growth has triggered a debate: 
should ethnic minorities be subjected to the family planning policy?
Meanwhile, the Han Chinese have reached a consensus over the  family 
planning policy. The phrase “have fewer children so that you can get rich 
faster” has become a popular sentiment among them. Th is has convinced some 
government officials and scholars from ethnic minorities to be in favor of 
implementing the family planning policy on ethnic minorities. However, there 
is a opposing viewpoint that population growth should be encouraged to make 
This picture shows herdsmen from the Mongol minority.
Chapter 3 An Overview of China’s Ethnic Minority Populations

38 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
up for the shortage of labor in China, since ethnic minority populations are 
still much smaller than that of the Han Chinese, and compact communities of 
ethnic minorities are sparsely populated.
The Chinese government investigated both viewpoints. The new ethnic 
minority population policy has fully considered the overall situation of eth-
nic minorities against different demographic backdrops in different regions, 
with its guiding principle as follows: the wishes of ethnic minorities should be 
respected and policies should be made according to local conditions; the gov-
ernments of ethnic autonomous regions have the right to decide whether or 
not, when, and how to implement the family planning policy on ethnic minori-
ties. Th erefore, the family planning policy was gradually implemented in ethnic 
regions. It was carried out in the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region in 1984; 
and in the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, and Inner Mongolia Autono-
mous Region in 1988.
Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region states that: workers, urban residents, 
and farmers are allowed to have two children if a couple or either the hus-
band or wife is from an ethnic minority. Ethnic minority farmers living in 
mountainous areas are allowed to have three children. Guangxi Zhuang 
Autonomous Region states that: if both the husband and wife are from ethnic 
A folk dance by the Uygur minority—the “Maxrap.”

 
39
minorities whose populations are smaller than 10 million, they are allowed to 
have two children.
Th e Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region states that: for urban residents 
of ethnic minorities, couples are allowed to have two children; for herdsmen 
and farmers of ethnic minorities, couples are allowed to have three to four 
 children, if they meet certain requirements; for people of ethnic minorities 
that have a population of less than 50,000, couples are allowed to have four 
children.
The Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region stipulates: for the Mongol 
 minority, couples are allowed to have two children; non-urban Mongolian cou-
ples are allowed to have three children; and no restrictions shall be placed upon 
 ethnic minorities with extremely low populations such as the Daur, Ewenki, 
and  Oroqen minorities; for other ethnic minorities, couples are allowed to have 
two children.
Yunnan, Guizhou, and Qinghai provinces respectively state that: ethnic 
minority couples can have two children; for ethnic minorities under special 
 circumstances, farmers and herdsmen can have three children with  government 
This picture shows women from the Gaoshan minority performing a dance. The Gaoshan 
minority inhabits Taiwan but more than 4,000 people from their total population of 400,000 
are living in mainland China.
Chapter 3 An Overview of China’s Ethnic Minority Populations 

40 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
approval; the family planning policy does not apply to ethnic minorities with 
populations lower than 100,000. Th ere is no quota for births too.
Tibet is an exception. Since the vast lands of Tibet are sparsely populated, 
the family planning policy only applies to government offi  cials, workers, and 
urban residents who account for 12% of the total population of the entire 
region. It does not apply to Tibetans in rural and pastoral areas who account 
for 88% of the total population in this region. Th ere is no quota for births. Th is 
policy for Tibet has remained unchanged since 1982.
Improvements of Demographic Indicators of 
the Ethnic Minorities with Respect to the Han 
Chinese
Zhang Tianlu is China’s foremost expert on demographic studies of ethnic 
minorities. In December 1989, Zhang published his book, Demographics of 
This picture shows the ﬁ shermen of the Jing minority who lives near the Northern Gulf in 
Guangxi Province. The Jing minority is the only coastal settlers among all the ethnic minorities 
in China.

 
41
Ethnic Minorities. It heralded the birth of ethnic minority demography as an 
 academic discipline in China.
Th e fourth census in 1990 provided a precious research opportunity for the 
new discipline. Zhang analyzed the results of the census immediately and drew 
some important conclusions.
His research made during this period centered on how the demographic 
indicators of the ethnic minorities had caught up and nearly reached the level 
of the Han Chinese. Th is had drawn great media attention. Th e research was 
based on the following premise: historically speaking, China’s ethnic minorities 
generally or signifi cantly lagged behind the Han Chinese in terms of culture, 
economy, and other areas. It has long been a commonly accepted view that 
ethnic minorities lagged behind the Han Chinese. Aft er the establishment of 
the People’s Republic of China, the government proposed that ethnic minori-
ties should catch up and move closer to the Han Chinese in all aspects. Th is 
viewpoint then begs the question: can ethnic minorities catch up with the Han 
Chinese? When will they do so?
Based on the data from the 1990 census, Zhang made a detailed analysis 
and drew the following conclusions: by 1990, a total of 26 ethnic  minorities 
had surpassed the Han Chinese in one or more of 22 indicators such as  natural 
population growth, women’s fertility rate, infant mortality, average life expec-
tancy, adult illiteracy rate, overall average educational level, urbanization 
level, tertiary industry, and quality of life. Among them, the Korean minority 
A Korean girl wearing the hanbok, the 
traditional dress of the Korean minority. The 
Korean minority lives mainly in the provinces of 
Heilongjiang, Jinlin, and Liaoning.
Chapter 3 An Overview of China’s Ethnic Minority Populations 

42 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
surpassed the Han Chinese in 20 demographic indicators; the  Manchu minor-
ity had surpassed 18 indicators; the Xibe minority had surpassed 14 indica-
tors, and the Russian minority had surpassed 13 indicators; both the Gaoshan 
and Ozbek minorities had surpassed 10 indicators; the Daur minority has 
surpassed nine indicators; the Mongol, Tatar, Hezhen, Yugur, and Ewenki 
minorities had surpassed eight indicators; the Jing and Hui minorities had 
surpassed seven indicators; the Kazak minority had surpassed five indica-
tors; both the Tujia and Mulam minorities has surpassed four indicators; the 
Maonan minority had surpassed three indicators; the Zhuang and She minori-
ties had surpassed two indicators; the Tibetan, Hani, Naxi, Gelao and Bouyei 
minorities had surpassed one indicator.
Zhang’s conclusions have punctured a persistent traditional viewpoint in 
Chinese society: ethnic minorities have always lagged behind the Han Chinese. 
With these objective demographic indicators, he delivered a strong message to 
the Chinese people: some ethnic minorities have demonstrated demographic 
advantages over the Han Chinese in some fi elds.
Important Demographic Research on the 
Tibetans
Tibetan population problems have received much attention from many local 
and international scholars due to its special, mysterious, and sensitive nature. It 
has become a research focus since the 1980s.
The research carried out has identified the following issues with the 
Tibetan population:
Th e fi rst issue is Tibet’s population size. Th ere is no agreement on Tibet’s 
largest population size, historically speaking. Some say the number is 945,000, 
some say six million, while others say it used to be as large as 10 million or 
even 33 million. Before the 1950s, there was no household registration sys-
tem or census in Tibet. However, the fi rst census carried out by China in 1953 
recorded the Tibetan population as one million, based on reports by the local 
Tibetan government led by the Dalai Lama.
The second issue concerns marriages, births, and deaths, which are con-
sidered to be serious enough to warrant action. According to the 1990 census, 
many of the problems stem from her elderly population (those born before 
1930). Of this demographic, the non-marriage rate among women aged from 
65 to 69 was reported at 10.8%; the prevalence of lifetime infertility among 
women aged from 60 to 64 was 17.7%, 16.3 percentage points higher than the 
national average; the fertility rate of Tibetan women at the childbearing age 

 
 
43
prior to the democratic reform in 1959 fl uctuated between 3.01 to 3.85, which 
was a striking contrast against the natural birth rate of more than 5.0 at home 
and abroad. In 1951, infant mortality in Tibet was as high as 430 per 1,000 
people and their average life expectancy was only 35 years.
Th e third issue is the complete absence of modern education. Before the 
1950s, there was not a single modern school in Tibet because Tibetan monastic 
education was the mainstream education. Th e adult illiteracy rate was as high 
as 90.6%, with 80% among men and 97.6% among women.
During the second half of the twentieth century, the Tibetan population, 
however, underwent several changes.
Firstly, the population growth of Tibet accelerated significantly. In the 
second census in 1964, the total population in Tibet was 1.251 million, among 
which 1.209 million were Tibetans. In the third census in 1982, the total popu-
lation in Tibet was 1.892 million, among which 1.786 million were Tibetans. 
In the fourth census in 1990, the total population in Tibet was 2.196 million, 
among which 2.096 million were Tibetans.
This picture shows Tibetan women on the streets of Lhasa, Tibet.
Chapter 3 An Overview of China’s Ethnic Minority Populations 

44 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Since 1970, the birth rate and natural population growth rate have both 
been higher than the national averages. From 1982 to 1990, the Tibetan popu-
lation in Tibet increased by 309,800, with a natural growth rate of 17.34 per 
1,000 people, 2.64 per 1,000 people higher than the average natural national 
growth over the same period.
At the same time, Tibetans have always accounted for an overwhelming 
majority of the total population in Tibet. In 1982, the Han Chinese and other 
ethnic minorities accounted for 4.85% and 0.75% of the total population in Tibet 
Autonomous Region, respectively. In 1982, the Han Chinese and other ethnic 
minorities accounted for 3.68% and 0.82%. In 1996, both numbers decreased 
to 2.9% and 0.8%, respectively.
Since the 1950s, the health care industry that includes Tibetan and  modern 
medicine has developed quickly. Tibet, the only region in mainland China 
where the entire population enjoys free medical services, has seen decreases in 
her death rate from 28% in 1951 to 11.6% in 1967, to 9.72% in 1981 and 7.4% 
in 1990. Meanwhile, the infant mortality rate decreased from 430 per 1,000 
people in 1951 to 155.2 per 1,000 people in 1981, 136.0 per 1,000 people in 
1987 and 97.4 per 1,000 people in 1990. Meanwhile, the death rate of pregnant 
women decreased from 50 per 1,000 people in 1951 to 14.3 per 1,000 people 
in 1985, to 5.7 per 1,000 people in 1994. Th e average life expectancy in Tibet 
increased from 35 in 1951, to 56.95 in 1987, and to 59.61 in 1990.
From 1982 to 1995, the proportion of college-educated people in Tibetan 
 population increased from 0.42% to 0.78%, but it was still much lower than the 
national average of 2.03%. Th e illiteracy rate of people more than 15 years of age 
dropped to 61.50%, but the fi gure was still 45 percentage points higher than the 
national average of 16.48%. Meanwhile, the mean value of the overall average 
educational level increased to 2.19, accounting for 34.76% of the national average. 
Th erefore, there is still a long way to go in improving the educational level in Tibet.
Latest Trends of Population Mobility
On September 18, 2002, two Luoba people from Tibet settled in the China Folk 
Culture Village in Shenzhen. Th is was not a minor event—before this, people 
from 54 ethnic minorities, totaling 220,000 people, were living in Shenzhen. 
But after this historic event, Shenzhen became the second city, apart from 
 Beijing, to have 55 ethnic minorities living together in one city.
Th is historic event merely took Shenzhen, the frontier city of reform and 
 opening up in China, 20 years. In 1982, there were 372 ethnic minority people 
in  Shenzhen; and over 225,000 in 2002, an increase of 600 times. At the same 
time, Shenzhen’s total population grew only by about 35 times.

 
45
Th e progress of reform and opening up also refl ects the migratory pattern of 
a large number of ethnic minority people moving to the urban and coastal areas 
of China. As such, there are many other cities similar to Shenzhen in this aspect.
While Beijing was the fi rst city to have people from 55 ethnic minorities 
living together; by 2008, there were people from 53 ethnic minorities living 
together in Shanghai, and 37 ethnic minorities in Changchun and Shenyang.
Ethnic minority populations are increasing dramatically in the coastal 
areas of China, which was not traditionally inhabited by ethnic minorities. 
Th e autonomous region of Guangxi has the largest ethnic minority population 
in China, and from 1990 to 2000, the ethnic minority population in Guangxi 
grew by 3.82%. Meanwhile, her neighboring province Guangdong—a coastal 
province that ranks high in China for its economic development—had its eth-
nic minority population increased by 246% over the same period. At the same 
time, the coastal provinces of Zhejiang and Jiangsu, which have a relatively 
higher level of economic development, also saw their ethnic minority popula-
tions grow by over 50%.
According to statistics released by China’s ethnic aff airs departments since 
the 1980s, there have been around nine million transient and permanent ethnic 
minority people living in the urban areas in China, forming compact commu-
nities of diff erent sizes.
All the facts mentioned above have added a new key phrase in China’s 
work on ethnic minorities aft er the reform and opening up: “Ethnic Work in 
Urban Areas.”
Protecting the rights of ethnic minorities has become the centerpiece 
of ethnic work in urban areas. Because of spatial distance as well as cultural 
This picture shows the representatives of 56 ethnic groups living in Shenzhen.
Chapter 3 An Overview of China’s Ethnic Minority Populations

46 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
and psychological diff erences, how migrant ethnic minority people and local 
residents adapt to one another is often a complicated process. This makes 
ethnic minority work in urban areas rather diffi  cult and particularly sensi-
tive in China. Hence, the country aims to guarantee the rights of migrant 
ethnic minority people in urban areas by formulating relevant laws and 
regulations.



49
4
China’s Ethnic Policy through the Eyes of 
Trudeau
Pierre Elliott Trudeau (1919–2000) was the most famous politician in Canada’s 
history. He also served two terms as the Prime Minister of Canada. In 1960, 
when he was living in the province of Quebec and working as a commentator 
on current aff airs, Trudeau and his friend Jacques Hebert (1923–2007) visited 
China at the invitation of the Chinese government. Trudeau and Hebert (who 
later became a Canadian senator) stayed in China for one month and toured the 
country from Changchun in the north to Guangzhou in the south. In Beijing, 
when asked what they wished to see in China, Trudeau replied: “Canadians are 
rather diff erent, we are very interested in the issues concerning China’s ethnic 
 minorities.”
At the time, Canada was gradually experiencing conflicts among ethnic 
groups, disputes over languages, and constitutional disagreements. Ethnic prob-
lems had become a political debate at the heart of the Canadian government.
The two guests were invited to visit the Central Academy of National 
Minorities. Aft er visiting the institution that was responsible for the education 
of ethnic minority intellectuals, they said: “No doubt, life is full of happiness 
in this small world.” Trudeau and Hebert later wrote down everything they 
observed in China in the book Two Innocents in Red China. Its fifth chapter 
“Ethnic Minorities in China” was devoted to their visit to the Central Academy 
of National Minorities.
Policies of Regional Ethnic 
Autonomy in China
Chapter 4

50 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Certainly, Trudeau and Hebert’s understanding of China’s ethnic policy did 
not come solely from their visit to the Central Academy of National Minorities. 
Th e two Canadian friends strived to understand more about China’s ethnic issues 
and policies. In their book, they wrote: “From the perspective of the Chinese gov-
ernment’s structure, ethnic minorities have more seats than they are supposed to 
have: the total population of 51 ethnic minorities  
1 was only 38 million, accounting 
for 6% of China’s total population. However, they have 14.5% representation in 
terms of the number of seats in the National People’s Congress. Th e powerful Chi-
nese government does not try to convert ethnic minorities but strives to preserve 
their ethnic minority features instead, especially their languages.”
“Shortly aft er China’s liberation, of the 51 ethnic minorities, only 21 had 
their own written languages. Linguists created 16 different languages and 
improved on three kinds. With China’s complicated linguistic problems, this 
practice makes us think that we should indeed seriously consider their policy, 
which does not take the path of cultural assimilation but strives to ensure that 
these new languages will be able to exist forever,” the two Canadians wrote.
The ethnic minority policy adopted by China in terms of language, 
 astonished and shocked both Trudeau and Hebert. At that time in Canada, the 
government was not able to bring the complicated dispute between the use of 
1In 1960, only 51 ethnic minorities had been identified in China as the census had not been 
completed then.
The Hui people living in Beijing voting for their National People’s Congress’ representatives.

 
Chapter 4 Policies of Regional Ethnic Autonomy in China 
51
English and French under control. However, the government in China went as 
far as to create languages for ethnic groups that did not have their own.
In the 1960s, China encountered a series of “misunderstandings” and “refusals 
to be understood” by the rest of the world due to the Cold War. But Trudeau and 
Hebert saw several things in this very country that made their stances objective.
“A small coincidence has enabled us to note a few conclusive signs. While 
studying ‘Th e National Agricultural Development Plan,’ the 24th clause stated 
that the family planning policy must be publicized in sparsely populated areas, 
except for ethnic minority regions,” they wrote. Th e two writers admitted that 
in China, ethnic minorities do lead a better life compared to those in Western 
countries where economic factors dictate every policy.
Th e last paragraph of the fi ft h chapter in Two Innocents in Red China reads: 
“People in Quebec will discover in the end that what Ottawa needs to learn 
from Beijing is more than a lesson.”
Why Did China Employed Regional Ethnic 
Autonomy Rather Than Federalism?
Readers familiar with the history of the Communist Party of China (CPC) may 
know that the CPC had proposed to establish a federal system of administration in 
the past. It was put forth at the Second National Congress of the CPC in 1922: “Based 
on the principle of free federalism, the Federal Republic of China, which includes 
Mongolia, Tibet, and Xinjiang, will be established.” It was also put forth in the Sev-
enth National Congress of the CPC in 1945: “Based on the principle of willingness 
and democracy, all ethnic groups in China shall establish the Federal Republic of 
China and organize the central government on the basis of this federal system.”
However, when the People’s Republic of China was founded, the Chinese 
government employed ethnic regional autonomy rather than federalism. Th e 
CPC proposed to adopt federalism in her early days due to Soviet socialist 
revolution’s great infl uence on China. Aft er the October Revolution, the Soviet 
government adopted a federal system to maintain the solidarity and unity of all 
its ethnic groups which used to be under the rule of the former Tsarist  Russia. 
Following the founding of the People’s Republic of China, the government’s 
decision to adopt regional ethnic autonomy was based on a more practical 
understanding and awareness of China’s national conditions during the long 
practice of social revolution.
The CPC had a deeper understanding of ethnic problems during the Long 
March from 1934 to 1936. Out of the 25,000 li (one li is equivalent to half a  kilometer) 
covered by the Chinese Red Army, a considerable portion of the distance was 

52 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
located in ethnic minority regions. According to offi  cial statistics, 13  ethnic minori-
ties were scattered around the places that the Chinese Red Army passed—the Miao, 
Yao, Zhuang, Dong, Bouyei, Tujia, Bai, Naxi, Yi, Qiang, Hui, Tibetan, and Yugur 
minorities. Because the Chinese Red Army treated ethnic minorities fairly and 
applied the principle of equality in their relationship, the Chinese Red Army received 
genuine help from the ethnic minorities during their diffi  cult journey. At the same 
time, the Chinese Red Army also helped the Yi and Tibetan minorities set up several 
ethnic minority regimes that were autonomous in nature.
A deeper problem of the ethnic minority debate became rooted during the 
War of Resistance against Japanese aggression. During her all-around invasion 
of China, Japan instigated the three northwestern provinces of Gansu, Qinghai, 
and Ningxia to establish a puppet regime called “Dahuihuiguo” (literally Great 
Hui State) in order to further occupy China’s territory. At that time, the CPC, 
which had set up a regional regime in the northwestern city of Yan’an, initiated 
timely research into the Mongol and Hui minorities in this region. A group of 
party members who began working on ethnic affairs had earlier drafted the 
Outline of Questions Concerning the Hui Minority and the Outline of Ques-
tions Concerning the Mongol Minority, aft er researching the minorities’ history, 
 politics, economy, and culture within a broad and thorough context. Th e two 
documents were the start of a series of research work into ethnic minority 
issues by the CPC. Subsequently in May 1941, the Shaanxi-Gansu-Ningxia 
Regional Government included the policy of ethnic regional autonomy in its 
newly-issued Administrative Program for that region. The program clearly 
stated: “Under the principle of equality among ethnic groups, the Mongol, Hui, 
and Han Chinese ethnic groups have equal political, economic, and cultural 
rights, and the Mongolian and Hui autonomous regions will be founded.”
This was the first attempt by the CPC to resolve domestic ethnic issues 
through the policy of ethnic regional autonomy.
The regional government also put its Administrative Program into prac-
tice. A number of regional and township regimes called the “Hui Autonomous 
Region” and the “Mongolian Autonomous Region” were set up. Th ese regimes 
enjoyed the following rights: they could form a local government mainly con-
sisting of their own ethnic representatives by voting; they could establish  ethnic 
minority anti-Japanese military forces with independent rights of military 
actions; there must be ethnic minority representatives in the regional, county, 
and township councils; economically, the regional government shall provide 
funds to assist autonomous regions in production, eliminating all burdens; 
in terms of culture and education, they could establish cultural agencies for 
autonomous ethnic groups, public primary schools for the Hui minority and 
provide free education.

 
Chapter 4 Policies of Regional Ethnic Autonomy in China 
53
The primary policy of ethnic autonomy included a large number of 
decrees concerning religious freedom, respect for ethnic folklores, and the 
use of  spoken and written ethnic languages. In order to meet the religious 
requirements of the Hui people, the regional government carefully chose a 
site and constructed a mosque. Th e stone tablet in front of the mosque bore 
the inscription of the mosque’s name written by Chairman Mao, and the inau-
guration ceremony was conducted in accordance with Muslim rituals and 
practices. On that day, the Imam in Yan’an hosted a solemn ritual and all Mus-
lims worshipped in the mosque. Important leaders of the CPC such as Zhu 
De (1886–1976), Xie Juezai (1884–1971), and Li Weihan (1896–1984) also 
attended the ceremony.
This picture shows the representatives of the ethnic minorities at a National People’s 
Congress.

54 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
In the 1940s, it became a prevalent practice in Yan’an to respect ethnic 
 history and tradition. By the banks of the Yanshui River, there is a unique build-
ing called the Genghis Khan Memorial. This was exclusively constructed for 
the Mongolians. Annual public memorial ceremonies dedicated to Genghis 
Khan (1162–1227), their Mongolian ancestor, are held there both in winter and 
summer. During this period, the most important result aft er the implementa-
tion of ethnic regional autonomy by the CPC was the establishment of the fi rst 
provincial ethnic autonomous region in 1947; the Inner Mongolia Autonomous 
Region.
Despite many practices of ethnic regional autonomy, at the critical 
point when the People’s Republic of China was founded, leaders of the 
CPC still raised this question solemnly: “will modern China adopt 
 federalism, or ethnic regional autonomy under the rule of a united 
republic?” After thorough research, the final conclusion was: China had a 
 different national condition as compared to the Soviet Union, thus should 
not adopt  federalism.
Firstly, the ethnic minority population of Soviet Union accounted for 47% 
of her total population, which is almost equal to the population of her main 
ethnic group. However, in China, the total population of ethnic minorities 
The Genghis Khan Memorial in Inner Mongolia, where Mongolian descendants gather to pay 
their respects to their ancestor.

 
Chapter 4 Policies of Regional Ethnic Autonomy in China 
55
only accounted for 6% of her total population. Furthermore, historically, the 
Han Chinese and ethnic minorities had been living together or were living 
adjacent to their compact communities for a long time, which was completely 
different from the Soviet Union. Secondly, after the February and October 
Revolutions, many non-Russian minorities split into diff erent countries, most 
of which became Soviet states after the civil wars, so the Bolsheviks had to 
adopt federalism as a transitory model to consolidate all Soviet states for out-
right unifi cation. However, in China, all ethnic groups teamed up and partici-
pated in democratic revolutions against imperialism and dictatorship until the 
People’s Republic was founded on the basis of equality. This was way before 
China had been a unifi ed country and at a time without any ethnic separation.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
MILESTONES IN CHINA’S ETHNIC REGIONAL 
AUTONOMY
In February 1952, the fi rst decree on ethnic regional autonomy—
Outline for the Implementation of Ethnic Regional Autonomy in the 
 People’s Republic of China was released. It symbolized that China’s 
ethnic regional autonomy had started its path of recognition under 
the jurisdiction of law.
In September 1954, ethnic regional autonomy was written into 
the fi rst Constitution of the People’s Republic of China, and “Ethnic 
Regional Autonomy” was named one of the basic political systems 
in China.
In May 1984, the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Ethnic 
Regional Autonomy was offi cially issued and legislated on October 1 
in the same year.
In September 1997, at the 15th National Congress of the CPC, 
ethnic regional autonomy together with the system of National 
 People’s Congress; the system of multi-party cooperation; and  political 
consultation led by the CPC formed the three fundamental political 
systems in China. This further acknowledged the important role that 
ethnic regional autonomy played in the national political system.
In February 2001, the 12th Session of the Ninth National  People’s 
Congress passed the amendments to the Law of the People’s Repub-
lic of China on Ethnic Regional Autonomy.

56 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Therefore, “the People’s Republic of China shall adopt ethnic regional 
autonomy rather than federalism,” which was submitted as a founding program 
to the First Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) held 
in  September 1949, to be discussed by all her members.
The First CPPCC, which was held before the founding of the People’s 
Republic of China, included discussions of extraordinary signifi cance. At the 
conference, a series of important issues that the country should follow were 
discussed and a consensus was reached by representatives elected by all parties, 
associations, and ethnic groups. Concerning the question of what structure 
modern China should adopt, representatives at the conference deliberated 
on the matter through a series of discussions before deciding to establish the 
 People’s Republic under a unitary system in China.
“Compact communities of ethnic minorities shall implement ethnic 
regional autonomy and set up (diff erent) kinds of ethnic autonomous  agencies 
respectively based on their populations and geographical sizes.” This was 
 discussed at the Common Program of the CPPCC and was adopted unani-
mously at the First CPPCC and served as the provisional constitution.
In 1954, ethnic regional autonomy was officially written into the first 
 constitution of the PRC as a basic political system.
Why Do the Chinese People Desire National 
Unity?
Many years later, some researchers noticed that the regional autonomy of ethnic 
minorities in a unifi ed country was not a random political choice in a particular 
time for a particular region. Th ey pointed to the fact that it was inherently deter-
mined by Chinese historical and cultural traditions over several millenniums.
In fact, national unity, which is deeply rooted in Chinese historical  tradition 
over several thousands of years, has been the unceasing common inspiration 
among the Chinese people. Since the Qin and Han dynasties, there had been con-
frontations and disputes among diff erent ethnic groups, and periods of separation 
and disunion, but national unity was still the mainstream of historical develop-
ment. Integrated in a unified nation, different ethnic groups developed close 
relationships of interdependence through political, economic, and cultural com-
munications. Moreover, a strong sense of national solidarity and common pursuit 
of national unity flourished. In modern times, to fight against imperialism, all 
the ethnic groups experienced failures and successes together, thus fostering an 
 inseparable relationship on the basis of existing cooperation. Furthermore, safe-
guarding the unity of the nation has since become an irreversible historical trend.

 
Chapter 4 Policies of Regional Ethnic Autonomy in China 
57
Ancient Chinese history taught us that national prosperity comes  naturally 
with national unity. During her strongest periods of Han, Tang, and Qing 
dynasties, national strength was always coupled with national unity. With such 
a national historical backdrop, national unity has become the ultimate pursuit 
of all the ethnic groups.
An intriguing phenomenon is that in spite of huge cultural gaps among 
diff erent ethnic groups, China stands as a single sovereignty in modern world 
history. Th e coexistence of diversity and consistency of Chinese culture is not 
dependent upon human factors. Instead, it is both a result of the choices made 
in Chinese history and decisions made during the long period of accumulation 
of Chinese culture.
Ethnic Autonomous Areas in China
In early 1952, Chairman Mao sent a message to Seypidin Azizi (1915–2003) 
who was far away in Xinjiang. It said: “Please off er your detailed proposal on 
the issue of regional autonomy of Xinjiang.”
In Azizi’s report, he wrote his ideas on the main tasks and constituents 
of the Xinjiang autonomous government. In particular, he suggested that 
r mqi is the capital of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region.
 U u

58 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
the name of the future government be called Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous 
 Government.
On October 1, 1955, Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region was established. 
Azizi was elected the Chairman of the People’s Committee and Secretary of 
Party Committee of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region.
Xinjiang is the fi rst provincial autonomous region aft er the establishment 
of the People’s Republic of China. In the next decade, three more autonomous 
regions were created: Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region on March 5, 1958, 
Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region on October 25, 1958, and the Tibet Autono-
mous Region on September 9, 1965.
Together with Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region founded in 1947 
(before the founding of the People’s Republic of China), there were fi ve provin-
cial autonomous regions in China. Th e hierarchy of these autonomous regions 
was arranged in the manner of a three-step stairway: autonomous region; 
autonomous prefecture; and autonomous county.
Th e fi rst autonomous prefecture founded by the People’s Republic of China 
was the Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture of Garze, which Sichuan established 
in November 1950. The Enshi Tujia and Miao Autonomous Prefecture in 
Hubei was established in December 1983, and is the youngest prefecture in the 
 country. Currently, the country has 30 autonomous prefectures.
In May 1950, the fi rst autonomous county—the Tianzhu Tibetan Autono-
mous County in Gansu Province was founded. Meanwhile, the Beichuan Qiang 
Autonomous County in Mianyang, Sichuan declared her establishment in July 
2003, becoming the youngest autonomous county in China. Currently, there 
are 120 autonomous counties in China.
From an objective point of view, the autonomous areas fall into the follow-
ing categories:
(1)  Autonomous areas are established in places where one ethnic minority lives 
in a compact community, such as the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region.
Yinchuan is the capital of the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region.

 
Chapter 4 Policies of Regional Ethnic Autonomy in China 
59
(2)  Autonomous areas are established in places where two ethnic minorities 
live in compact communities, such as in Hunan’s Xiangxi Tujia and Miao 
Autonomous Prefecture.
(3)  Autonomous areas are established in places where several ethnic minori-
ties live in compact communities, such as the Jishishan Bao’an, Dongxian 
and Salar Autonomous County in Linxia Hui Autonomous Prefecture, 
Gansu Province.
(4)  Autonomous areas are established within a larger autonomous area where 
people from an ethnic minority with a smaller population live in compact 
communities, such as the Ili Kazak Autonomous Prefecture in Xinjiang 
Uygur Autonomous Region; and the Qabqal Xibo Autonomous County in 
Ili Kazak Autonomous Prefecture.
(5)  Autonomous areas established for one ethnic minority which lives in com-
pact communities in diff erent places, such as the Hui minority in Ningxia 
Hui Autonomous Region, Linxia Hui Autonomous Prefecture in Gansu 
Province, and Dachang Hui Autonomous County in Hebei Province. 
Another example is the Miao minority, which establishes or co-establishes 
13 autonomous counties and six prefectures around the country.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
INTRODUCTION TO THE FIVE AUTONOMOUS 
REGIONS IN CHINA
1. Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region
A total of 49 ethnic groups live on a land area of 1.183 million square 
kilometers. The region boasts a population of 23.9235 million (as of 
2006), among which 4.2338 million are Mongolians. Three autonomous 
counties in this region are: Oroqen Autonomous County, Ewenke 
Autonomous County, and Morin Dawa Daur Autonomous County.
2. Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region
It covers an area of 16,649 square kilometers inhabited by 47 ethnic 
groups, among which 13 are natives. In 2006, it had a population 
of 20.5 million with 60.4% comprising ethnic minorities. It includes 
fi ve autonomous prefectures, six autonomous counties and 43 ethnic 
townships.

60 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Today in China, 44 out of 55 ethnic minorities have established autono-
mous areas. Th e population in autonomous areas account for 71% of the entire 
population of all ethnic minorities.
Th e ethnic township is another administrative organization with Chinese 
characteristics. As a supplement to autonomous areas, ethnic townships are 
established in places where ethnic minorities live in compact communities, and 
autonomous governments are not established because the areas and popula-
tions of the ethnic minorities are too small.
According to the Regulations on the Administrative Work of Ethnic 
Townships, the heads of the ethnic townships should be citizens from the 
 ethnic minorities exercising regional autonomy in the area concerned, and the 
appointment of other members of the people’s governments of these townships 
should include a signifi cant proportion of the seats for members of the ethnic 
group exercising regional autonomy.
In all, China has nine ethnic townships in places where autonomous 
 governments cannot be established because the areas and populations of the 
ethnic minorities are too small. Th ere are currently 1,100 ethnic townships in 
the country.
3. Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region
It covers an area of 236,700 square kilometers that is populated by 
the greatest number of ethnic groups, including a dozen native eth-
nic groups. Home to the largest proportion of the Yao and Mulam 
minorities, it is also the only region where the Jing minority lives.
4. Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region
It covers an area of 51,800 square kilometers inhabited by 35 ethnic 
groups. Among a population of 6.12 million people, 1.8625 million are 
from the Hui minority, accounting for 18.9% of all the Hui people in 
China (as of 2007). Two-thirds of the population in Ningxia is made 
up of the Han Chinese—the native inhabitants since ancient times.
5. Tibet Autonomous Region
It covers an area of 1.20223 million square kilometers with a population 
of 2.81 million and a density of 2.21 people per square kilometers (as of 
2006). Most of the population lives in the southern and eastern parts of 
the region. With the Tibetan minority as the largest group, Tibet is also 
the only region where the Monba and Lhoba minorities have settled.

 
Chapter 4 Policies of Regional Ethnic Autonomy in China 
61
Law of the People’s Republic of China on 
Ethnic Regional Autonomy: A Brief Summary
Th is law includes seven chapters and 74 articles. Its main principle refers to the 
autonomous rights of the autonomous areas, which is summarized as follows:
Organs of Autonomous Governments in Autonomous Areas
Th e organs of autonomous governments in autonomous areas are the people’s 
congresses and people’s governments of autonomous regions, autonomous pre-
fectures, and autonomous counties. Th e organs of autonomous governments in 
autonomous areas will follow the system of the National People’s Congress.
Th e people’s governments of autonomous areas shall implement the sys-
tem that gives overall responsibility to the chairman of an autonomous region, 
the governor of an autonomous prefecture, and the head of an autonomous 
county, who shall direct the work of the people’s governments at their respec-
tive levels.
This picture, taken on December 11, 2008, shows the 50th anniversary celebration of the 
establishment of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region.

62 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Th e chairman of an autonomous region, the governor of an autonomous 
prefecture, and the head of an autonomous county shall be a member of the 
ethnic group exercising regional autonomy in the area concerned.
Among the chairmen or vice-chairmen of the standing committee of the peo-
ple’s congress of an autonomous area, there shall be one or more members from 
the ethnic group or groups exercising regional autonomy in the area  concerned.
In the people’s congress of an autonomous region, autonomous prefecture 
or autonomous county, in addition to the representatives of the ethnic group 
exercising regional autonomy in the administrative area, other ethnic groups 
inhabiting the area are also entitled to proportional representation. Ethnic 
minorities with small populations will enjoy favorable policies in terms of the 
number and proportion of representatives.
Th e cadres in regional autonomous governments as well as their  subsidiary 
departments shall, whenever possible, include members from the ethnic 
minority group exercising regional autonomy in the area. Priority should be 
given to ethnic minority cadres who meet the basic requirements.
In autonomous areas where the populations of ethnic minorities reach or 
exceed half of the entire local population, the number of cadres shall be kept to 
an appropriate proportion; in autonomous areas where populations of ethnic 
minorities are less than half of the entire local population, there should be a 
higher proportion of cadres from ethnic minorities.
Power of Autonomous Governments in Ethnic Autonomous Areas
Legislative power Th e people’s congresses in autonomous areas have the right 
to formulate autonomous regulations and other separate regulations in light 
of the special political, economic, and cultural conditions of the ethnic group 
in that autonomous area. Autonomous regulations stipulate basic issues on 
regional autonomy; while separate regulations should deal mainly with issues 
on regional autonomy in a specifi c fi eld. Autonomous regulations and separate 
regulations may contain provisions which have been properly altered on the 
basis of existing laws or administrative regulations.
Flexible enforcement If a resolution, decision, an order or instruction of a state 
organ at a higher level does not suit the conditions in a national autonomous 
area, the organ of an autonomous government in the area may either imple-
ment certain modifi cations or cease implementation aft er having reported to 
and received the approval of the state organs at a higher level.
Independent economic development Autonomous organs in autonomous areas 
shall enjoy more independence in finance and economic matters, as well as 

 
Chapter 4 Policies of Regional Ethnic Autonomy in China 
63
preferential treatment by the state. They can also designate ports for foreign 
trade aft er obtaining approval from the State Council.
Autonomy in administering fi nance All revenues accruing to the ethnic autono-
mous area shall be managed and used by the organs of autonomous govern-
ments. If the expenditures of an ethnic autonomous area exceed its revenues, 
subsidies shall be granted by the fi nance department at a higher level. All eth-
nic autonomous areas enjoy diff erent kinds of special subsidies and provisional 
allowances granted by the state. While implementing tax laws of the state, the 
organs of autonomous governments in ethnic autonomous areas may grant tax 
exemptions or reductions for certain items that should be encouraged or given 
preferential consideration in taxation, except for items on which tax reduction 
or exemption require examination and approval by the state.
Autonomy in culture, spoken and written languages The organs of autono-
mous governments in ethnic autonomous areas shall enjoy certain cultural 
autonomy. Th is ensures the freedom of using and developing the spoken and 
written languages of every ethnic group in the concerned areas. While per-
forming its functions, the organ of the autonomous government in an ethnic 
autonomous area shall, in accordance with the regulations on the exercise of 
autonomy of the area, use one or several commonly used languages in the 
locality. When several common languages are used for the performance of 
such functions, the language of the ethnic group exercising regional autonomy 
may be used as the main language.
Autonomy in the set-up of local public security forces Th e organs of autonomous 
governments in autonomous areas may, in accordance with the military system 
of the state and practical local needs, organize local public security forces to 
maintain public order aft er getting the State Council’s approval.
Independent development of science and technology, education, and culture Th e 
organs of autonomous governments in ethnic autonomous areas have the right 
to make plans for educational development in these areas: to open various kinds 
of schools and determine their educational plans, systems, forms, curricula, 
languages used for teaching, and enrollment procedures. Th e organs of autono-
mous governments in ethnic autonomous areas shall independently develop 
literature, art, print publishing, fi lms, radio, television, and other ethnic cultural 
undertakings both in the forms and with characteristics unique to these ethnic 
minorities. Th ey shall further decide on plans for the development of science 
and technology and make independent decisions on plans for developing local 
medical and health care services. They shall also make their own decisions 
when it comes to the development of traditional ethnic sports activities, and 
shall protect local scenic spots, historical sites, and precious cultural relics.

64 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Power of Autonomous Government Organs: 
The Tibet Case Study
In accordance with the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Ethnic 
Regional Autonomy, Tibet enjoys regional autonomy including legislative 
power. Meanwhile, Tibet Autonomous Region is allowed to make flexible 
modifi cations when implementing existing laws or administrative regulations 
in light of local conditions.
Since its establishment, Tibet Autonomous Region has formulated over 
150 regulations, resolutions, decisions, and orders on the basis of historical, 
cultural, and natural features of Tibetan heritage.
Some examples are the autonomous area’s designated holidays, which 
include the Tibetan New Year, the Shoton (Yogurt) Festival and other tra-
ditional Tibetan festivals that are official regional holidays. In addition, in 
consideration of the unique natural and geographical features of Tibet, Tibet 
Autonomous Region has fi xed the work week at 35 hours, fi ve hours fewer than 
the national statutory work week.
Th ese stipulations and rules of Tibet Autonomous Region clarify that:
(1) Th e Tibetan language shall be the lingua franca of Tibet;
(2)  Although equal emphasis is to be paid to the Tibetan and Chinese 
 languages, the Tibetan language shall be the main language used;
(3)  All the resolutions and regulations by the people’s congresses at vari-
ous  levels in Tibet, formal documents and public announcements of the 
 governments at all levels in Tibet Autonomous Region have to be printed in 
both Tibetan and Chinese.
(4)  All newspapers, radios, and television programs in Tibet need to include 
both Tibetan and Chinese languages for their news and broadcasts.
(5)  All signs and logos for government agencies, roads, traffic sign posts, 
and public facilities should be written in both Tibetan and Chinese 
 languages.
(6)  In judicial lawsuits whereby Tibetans are involved, the Tibetan language is 
used both in the trial and in the writing of legal documents.
In Tibetan culture, there is a tradition of polyandrous and polygamous 
 marriages. In 1981, the Tibet Autonomous Region adopted the  “Accommodation 
Rules for the Implementation of the Marriage Law of the People’s Republic of 
China,” which stipulates that polyandrous and polygamous marriages formed 
before the promulgation of the “Accommodation Rules” shall be valid if none 
of the people involved takes the initiative to terminate the marriage. In accor-
dance with the “Accommodation Rules,” those who continue with the tradition of 

 
Chapter 4 Policies of Regional Ethnic Autonomy in China 
65
polyandrous and polygamous marriages will be persuaded to practice monogamy 
while penalties related to bigamy will not be imposed on the parties.
The “Accommodation Rules” also lower the statutory age of marriage by 
two years as provided by the Marriage Law according to Tibetan tradition. In 
Tibet, only males above 20 years old and females above 18 can legally wed.
Amendments to the Law of the People’s 
Republic of China on Ethnic Regional 
Autonomy
China’s market economy was initiated in the 1980s, and matured quickly in 
the 1990s. With such rapid economic development, amendments to the for-
mer Law of the People’s Republic of China on Ethnic Regional Autonomy were 
inevitably needed.
Calls for its revision revolved around the economic regulations stipulated 
under the planned economy. Meanwhile, faced with the waves of reform and 
A ﬂ ag-raising ceremony in Potala Palace Square in Lhasa, Tibet.

66 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
opening up, driven by the unprecedented aspiration for economic progress in 
the ethnic autonomous areas, ethnic minorities urgently demanded that the 
law represent their wishes for economic growth.
Th e 1990s witnessed the start of the amendment process, and aft er nearly 
a decade of research and investigation, the revised Law of the People’s Republic 
of China on Ethnic Regional Autonomy was fi nally promulgated in 2001.
A major change lies in the emphasis on the central government’s responsi-
bility to help ethnic minorities with local economic growth. Th e revised version 
clearly stipulates that developed areas should off er assistance to ethnic autono-
mous areas. Among the 31 amended articles, 23 revolved around the topics of 
social and economic development.
For example, the newly-added Article 56 stipulates: “the state shall, in accor-
dance with unified planning and market demand, give top priority to  ethnic 
autonomous areas when making rational arrangements for resource develop-
ment projects and infrastructure projects.” Meanwhile, Article 57 stipulates: 
“the state shall, taking into account the characteristics and needs of economic 
development in ethnic autonomous areas, make comprehensive use of the mon-
etary market and the capital market to increase its monetary support to the 
areas.” Finally, Article 69 stipulates: “the state and the people’s governments at 
This picture shows the celebrations of Naadam, a traditional Mongolian festival in Inner 
Mongolia.

 
Chapter 4 Policies of Regional Ethnic Autonomy in China 
67
higher levels shall provide better support for the poverty-stricken areas in ethnic 
autonomous regions in fi nancing, raw materials, technology and trained person-
nel so as to help the poor populations in the concerned areas escape poverty and 
reach their full potential sooner.”
Th e amendments also added that the state shall give economic compensa-
tions to ethnic autonomous regions that produce natural resources.
A Unique “Chinese Model”
Th e international community employs the term “Chinese model” to describe 
China’s practice of using ethnic regional autonomy to solve ethnic issues. Since 
the second half of the twentieth century, against the backdrop of worldwide 
ethnic confrontations, China’s regional ethnic autonomy has validated her 
special value in social harmony. As a unique “Chinese Model,” it has attracted 
increasing attention from the international community.
Many foreign scholars and politicians have stated that China’s ethnic 
regional autonomy not only shows the common agreement of protecting the 
interests of minorities, but also puts this into practice. China’s experiences 
proved her solutions to ethnic issues for other countries, and cast new light on 
the use of political activities in solving ethnic issues, providing an enormous 
contribution to the arena of international politics.


69
5
Cultural Self-Identity, Cultural Tolerance, 
Cultural Coexistence, and Common Prosperity
In December 1990, Japanese sociologists organized the International Con-
ference of East Asian Studies in Tokyo to celebrate the 80th birthday of Fei 
Xiaotong. In his keynote speech, “Research on Humans in China: Personal 
Experiences,” Fei proposed concepts such as “cultural self-identity, cultural tol-
erance, cultural coexistence, and common prosperity.”
It is not easy to translate his original Chinese phrases to another language 
because of its phonological and grammatical beauty, which can only be appre-
ciated by speakers of the Chinese language. However, the world should know 
its connotation.
“Cultural self-identity” indicates cultural self-acknowledgement: each cul-
ture has its own values, and should be acknowledged respectfully by another 
culture.
“Cultural tolerance” refers to the attitude toward a foreign culture: when 
faced with a foreign or exotic culture, each culture should be tolerant of each 
other’s cultural diff erences, and appreciate their beauty.
“Cultural coexistence and common prosperity” suggests the connection 
between various cultures, that is, to respect and coexist with one another in 
harmony despite having different values. Differences in harmony will bring 
vitality, and that diversity coexists with order, where unity is the ideal state of 
all societies.
Protection and Development 
of China’s Ethnic Minority 
Culture
Chapter 5

70 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
A Tibetan opera performance.
Farmers’ music and dance festival of the Korean minority in China.

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
71
“Cultural coexistence” originates from the traditional Chinese philosophy 
of “Harmony in Diversity.” Th is great thought is also a conclusion of long-term 
studies on ethnic relations by Fei Xiaotong. It is the golden rule of cultural 
coexistence. Likewise, it is also the best principle for the harmonious interac-
tion of civilizations.
“56 Ethnic Groups, 56 Flowers”
Th e late Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau believed that the Chi-
nese government holds a “cautious respect” in ethnic issues. Behind this lies the 
principle that “ethnic groups are all equal regardless of their size,” which is the 
basic attitude of the Chinese government toward the culture of ethnic minorities.
In the well-known Chinese song, 56 Ethnic Groups, 56 Flowers, all 56 eth-
nic groups in China are described as 56 fl owers. If we compare fl owers to eth-
nic culture, the song has a deeper meaning. In China, people tend to use the 
poetic phrase “let a hundred fl owers bloom” to refer to the harmonious coexis-
tence of diverse elements or members.
Liang Tingwang, who put forward the theory of “cultural plates,” holds 
that: Chinese culture is made up of four “plates”—agricultural civilization in 
the Central Plains; nomadic culture in the northern grasslands; agricultural 
and nomadic culture in southwestern China; and rice cultivation culture in 
southern China. Th e rich culture of the 56 ethnic groups can be superimposed 
upon the above-mentioned four plates.
However, it is not enough to just get mere general descriptions of the cul-
tural diversity of ethnic minorities. The variety and diversity of these ethnic 
minorities can be gleaned from the following detailed analysis.
Cultural Diversity in China’s Ethnic Minorities
Epics of Ethnic Minorities
German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770–1831) once 
asserted in Aesthetics that China had no epics. But he was wrong. China not 
only has epics but also owns the longest epic in the world.
Th e Tibetan epic, Th e Epic of King Gesar (or Gesar in short), is a living epic 
and is growing longer in the performance, dialogue and songs of folk artists. 
Dating back to 1,000 years ago, Gesar is the collective wisdom of all Tibetans. 
It has over 120 volumes, that is, one million lines or 20 million words, longer 
than all the combined five famous epics in the world. They are the ancient 

72 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
 Babylonian  Gelgamesh, Iliad and Odyssey of ancient Greece, and Ramayana 
and Mahabarata of ancient India. Gesar depicts the general picture of society 
and history, religious beliefs, communications between diff erent ethnic groups, 
social morality, and folk customs. It is considered an ancient encyclopedia by 
Tibetans in the past.
For thousands of years, Gesar had been passed on by peasants and herds-
men living in remote areas. How could they recite thousands of lines? How did 
they learn to sing? How did they memorize the words? No scholars can answer 
these questions and hence they have been tagged as the “Riddles of the Sphinx” 
in Gesar studies till today.
Among the folk artists, old Zhaba is a legend. He created 25 volumes of 
Gesar, which contain 600,000 lines or six million words. What does such a 
The Dai minority celebrating the Water-Splashing Festival.

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
73
large number indicate? It is 25 times as long as the Homeric epics of Iliad and 
 Odyssey.
Th e Epic of Manas of the Kirgiz minority is another living epic. It tells the 
story of how great leaders in eight generations of the Manas family led the peo-
ple of Kirgiz to fi ght against foreign oppression. Th e folk epic, which originated 
between the ninth and 10th centuries, is over 210,000 lines long, with tens of 
thousands of people participating in its composition. Because of its reputation 
in international literary history, the United Nations (UN) once designated the 
year 1995 as the “International Manas Year.”
Gesar, Manas, and the Mongol minority’s Djangar constitute the three 
heroic epics of China. Named aft er the legendary hero Djangar, it has 60 vol-
umes, or more than 100,000 lines.

74 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Aft er the founding of the People’s Republic of China, researchers on ethnic 
minority literature collected and discovered about 100 heroic and immigrant 
epics among 30 ethnic minorities in southern China, including the Yi, Miao, 
Zhuang, and Dai minorities.
Th e epics vividly conjure pictures of the creation of the universe, the ori-
gins of human life, fl oods and calamities, tribal wars and campaigns as well as 
constant migrations of ancient people. The images and modalities of narra-
tion employed by the epics fi nd their marks in later literature, making them an 
essential part of the culture of ethnic minorities.
Music of Ethnic Minorities
One common element that all 55 ethnic minorities shared is the love for music. 
Almost every ethnic minority appreciates music, and each has its own musical 
tradition with unique features.
The Dong minority, mainly living in Guizhou, boasts a special attitude 
toward music. For them, songs are synonymous to knowledge, the more songs 
one knows, the more knowledgeable he or she is. Master singers are the most 
respected people in the Dong minority. In traditional Dong society, people 
communicate with songs: they sing at work, they sing while resting, they sing 
Kirgiz herdsmen singing the national epic—Manas.

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
75
during courtship, and they even establish cooperation among villages through 
songfests.
Their idea about music is a typical example of the musical philosophy 
that all ethnic minorities share. In addition, they have also created a marvel 
in the ethnic musical community. Th e Dong Grand Song is a polyphonic cho-
rus sang by three or more people. As a type of folk music, experts think that 
the structure of the Dong Grand Song is more complicated than the others. 
Without conductors and accompaniments, it is quite amazing for ordinary 
Dong people to give stunning performances of such complicated polyphonic 
choruses.
For a long time, the world music community held the stereotype that 
polyphony only exists in the West and that China has no multi-vocal har-
mony. Th e choruses composed by the Dong minority, which they performed in 
France in 1986 stirred the international music community, who claimed it was 
an extraordinary discovery in Chinese music history.
Th e Dong Grand Song represents the ethnic music in southern China, and 
typical northern ethnic musical works are the 12 Mukam by the Uygur minor-
ity and the  Mongolian long-tune folk songs.
We seldom find music that can be compared with the 12 Mukam. Com-
prising 360 pieces of vocal and instrumental music, and  combining the works 
A performance of the Naxi music from Lijiang, Yunnan, which is also widely known as a 
"cultural relic" of Chinese music.

76 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
of 44 classic poems and numerous folk songs, the 12 Mukam includes 4,492 
lines and takes 24 hours of singing to complete it.
Mukam is a form of folk music which has also spread to Uzbekistan and 
Tajikistan. However, Uygur Mukam dwarfs them all with its large scale, com-
plete structure, diverse forms, and distinctive features. In 2004, the United 
Nations Educational, Scientifi c, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) listed 
Uygur Mukam among the Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Cultural 
Heritage of Humanity.
Th e beauty of the Mongolian long-tune folk songs is beyond description. 
Accompanied by the morin khuur (a “horse-head” fi ddle), the rhythm lingers, 
and it is solemn, stirring, and heartwarming. Th e innate beauty of it lies in its 
ability to “stretch time and space,” as if time has stood still, using only human 
voices.
The themes of the Mongolian long-tune folk songs are mostly related 
to: the vastness of the grasslands, the eternity of nature, the lapse of time, 
the  brevity of human life, and uncertainty of destiny. Like the shepherd on 
the grasslands, the singers cajole our souls to return to nature.
The Dong people performing the Dong Grand Song.

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
77
Th e most distinctive singing technique is an overtone singing style called 
nugola which has a vocal texture ranging from silky smooth to vibrant beats of 
horses galloping. All these subtle changes cannot be annotated in the scores. In 
2004, UNESCO included Mongolian long-tune folk songs as the Masterpieces 
of the Oral and Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.
Traditional Medicine of Ethnic Minorities
Th ere are many stories proving the glorious history of traditional ethnic medi-
cine. Th e following legend is a case in point:
In order to test the nine court physicians whom he spent a lot of money employing, King 
Trisong Deutsen (742–797) pretended to be ill and stayed in his palace. Th en, he issued a 
strange edict: “Since you are all famous physicians, feeling my pulse is too easy a job for 
you. I would like you to read my pulse by feeling the thread tied to my wrist instead.”
Th en, the king ordered his assistants to tie threads to the paws of several cats and 
handed them over to the court physicians. Th ey were confused by the pulse rate felt 
through the threads. Th ey wondered whether the king was fatally ill or if there was 
something wrong with their medical skills. With a light touch, the pulse felt very weak 
and slow, but with a stronger touch, it felt swift er, which resembled the pulse pattern 
of cats. Aft erward, the king ordered his assistants to tie threads to the claws of chicken 
The Xinjiang Uygurs performing the 12 Mukam.

78 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
and handed them over to the court physicians. Aft er a while, they came to a conclusion 
that the pulse vibrated on a light touch, and felt very hard on a stronger touch, which 
resembled the pulse pattern of chickens. Finally, the king asked his assistants to tie the 
thread to a stone mill. Th is time, the pulse was very deep and the physicians decided it 
was similar to rocks…
After Sontzen Gampo [569(617?)–650] unified Tibet, the sphygmol-
ogy of  traditional Chinese medicine was introduced into Tibet. Tibetan 
physicians developed their own pulse-taking methods by learning from 
traditional  Chinese medicine and Indian Ayurvedic medicine. The above-
mentioned legend indicates the mysterious origin of Tibetan pulse-taking 
methods.
The Four Medical Tantras is the best proof of the extensiveness and pro-
foundness of Tibetan medicine. The medical classic contains 156 chapters 
and 240,000 words. It is the height of achievement of Tibetan medicine. Every 
experienced Tibetan doctor and student of the Tibetan Traditional Medical 
College starts his or her medical journey with the Four Medical Tantras.
Tibetan medicine is a typical example of ethnic medicine. Surveys over the 
past 30 years showed that among the 55 ethnic minorities, about 20 have their 
A Tibetan doctor diagnoses a patient's illness by feeling his pulse and observing his tongue.

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
79
own independent medical practices. Also, almost each ethnic group has their 
own health care experiences.
Some ethnic groups set up independent medical theoretical systems, cre-
ating many complete classics of traditional medicine, such as the medicines 
of Tibetan, Mongolian, Uygur, Korean, Dai, Yi, and Hui minorities. Although 
some ethnic minorities do not have their own written languages, they still 
have mature and original medical experiences and theories. In recent years, 
under the support of the government, these ethnic minorities sorted out a set 
of medical theories passed down orally and had them systematically organized. 
Ethnic groups such as the Zhuang, Yao, Dong, and Tujia minorities, compiled 
and published their own medical works.
In June 2009, the fi rst nationwide assessment of 30 masters of traditional 
Chinese medicine was conducted. Two masters were from ethnic medical 
systems—Chadrel Rinpoche from the Tibetan Hospital in Tibet Autonomous 
Region and Ce Surongzhabu from the Inner Mongolia Medical College.
So far, there are nearly 200 ethnic hospitals financed by the central and 
local governments, and more ethnic specialist clinics have been opened in 
many areas. Fourteen educational organizations off er ethnic medical courses 
to train professionals in ethnic medicine. Ethnic medicine examinations of the 
Tibetan, Mongolian, Uygur, Dai, Korean, and Zhuang minorities have been 
A hospital built for the Dai ethnic group in Xishuangbanna, Yunnan.

80 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
included in the National Qualifi cation Examination for Doctors. Th e number 
of ethnic medical experts has reached over 10,000.
Festivals of Ethnic Minorities
Festivals of Ethnic Minorities in China, published in 1993, reveals a stunning 
number—from ancient times till 1993, 56 ethnic groups celebrate 1,700 festi-
vals. Among them are about 500 traditional festivals of the Han Chinese and 
the remaining 1,200 belong to ethnic minorities.
China has a variety of festivals, and those celebrated by the ethnic minori-
ties are especially colorful. Th ey fall into the following groups:
• Festivals relevant to the calendar, season, and phenology. These include 
Broad Season of the Lisu minority, Kaquewa Festival of the Derung minor-
ity, Duan Festival of the Sui minority, Noroz Festival of the Kazak minority, 
and Anie Festival of the Daur minority.
• Festivals about agricultural activities, such as Heaven’s Gift  Day of the Man-
chu minority, Bai minority’s Rice-transplanting Festival, and Hani minority’s 
New Rice Festival.
• Festivals related to rites and sacrifi ces, such as tributes to Supo by the Mon-
golians, tribute to gods by the Tujia minority, tribute to Obo by the Yugur 
minority, ceremonies to worship ancestors by the Yi minority, God of Moun-
tain Festival by the Qiang minority, and ceremonies to welcome ancestors by 
the She minority.
• Festivals that are related to religious beliefs, including the Tibetan Shai Fo 
Festival, Open-door Day and Closed-door Day of the Dai minority, Festi-
val of Walking around “Th ree Holy Temples” of the Bai minority, Gu Zang 
Festival of the Miao minority, Pan Wang Festival of the Yao minority, Sama 
Festival of the Dong minority, Hajie Festival of the Jing minority, and Yi Fan 
Festival of the Mulam minority.
• Festivals in memory of heroes and historical events, such as Lin Wang Festi-
val of the Dong minority, Danu festival of the Yao minority, and Alu Woluo 
Festival of the Achang minority.
• Festivals for socialization and recreation, such as the Folk Song Fair of the 
Zhuang minority, Mongolian Nadam Fair, Moqing Festival of the Daur 
minority, and March Street of the Bai minority.
Without festivals, there are no cultural integration, communication, and 
succession between ethnic minorities. A survey shows that in Guizhou, about 
40% of the population is made up of ethnic minorities and there are more 
than 365 ethnic festivals. That is to say, in Guizhou, almost every day is a 
 celebration.

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
81
The annual Festival for the Elderly celebrated by the Korean minority in China.
Miao women attending the Sister Festival in the mountainous areas of Guizhou.

82 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Practices to Protect and Promote China’s 
Ethnic Minority Cultures
Th e destiny of a nation depends on the destiny of her culture, as culture is the 
soul that constitutes the existence of a nation. Therefore, how a government 
determines the destiny of an ethnic minority largely depends on what policy it 
adopts for the ethnic minority’s culture.
China has many unique practices in protecting and promoting the cultures 
of ethnic minorities.
Spoken and Written Languages
“Th e government shall help create or improve written languages of the ethnic 
minorities with no written languages of their own, or with incomplete writ-
ten languages.” Th is was a resolution proposed in 1951, and in February of 
the same year, the State Council made six resolutions aft er hearing the report 
of the Visiting Delegation of the Central Ensemble of Ethnic Groups. “Help 
ethnic minorities create and reform their written languages” was the fifth 
resolution.
In fact, extensive research has already been conducted on the languages 
of ethnic minorities in China. Luo Changpei (1899–1958), a Manchu linguist, 
organized surveys on ethnic minority languages around China shortly aft er he 
was assigned to set up the Institute of Linguistics at the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences in 1950.
In June 1951, a brand new discipline in China’s higher education history, 
namely ethnic minority languages and literature, was born in the Central Acad-
emy of National Minorities (now known as the Minzu University of China). At 
almost the same time, the Advisory Committee of National Language Research 
was founded in Beijing, many of whose members are ethnic minority linguis-
tic experts. One important job this committee did was to draft  the “Report on 
Helping to Create Written Languages for Ethnic Minorities without Written 
Languages.” The report proposed that ethnic minorities who have their own 
spoken languages but no written languages or no commonly used written lan-
guages seek help from the committee to create a pseudo-alphabetic script using 
Chinese phonetics or to let the committee choose one from the present appli-
cable written languages aft er extensive research.
In 1956, another larger census on ethnic minority languages was carried 
out under the direct leadership of the State Ethnic Aff airs Commission. Seven 
teams of over 700 linguists visited ethnic minority regions. Th is was the largest 
census on ethnic minority languages.

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
83
Th e census lasted for more than two years. As a result, nearly 40 languages were 
presented in their phonological systems, vocabularies, and grammatical structures, 
providing a scientifi c foundation for the upcoming creation of written languages.
Th e Institute of Linguistics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and State Ethnic 
Aff airs Commission decided to choose one ethnic group for a prototype cre-
ation of written languages. Th at group was the Zhuang minority. In December 
1957, Premier Zhou Enlai (1898–1976) presided over the 63rd Plenary Meeting 
of the State Council, and the agenda was to discuss and approve the proposal 
on the Zhuang’s written language.
At the same time, the core program for the creation and reform of writ-
ten languages—Principles of Designing Letters for Ethnic Minority Written 
Languages—was fi nally unveiled. It went through several rounds of discussions 
before the program was offi  cially formulated.
Th e design was carried out under very cautious principles, as it not only con-
cerned political equality, but was also a scientifi c issue—did the newly-created 
language adhere to the rules of ethnic minority speeches? Did it respect the will, 
feelings, and habits of the users? And lastly, the design would aff ect whether the 
newly-created language would be accepted and used by the ethnic minorities.
Aft er the Zhuang written language was created, 14 language programs for 
another nine ethnic groups were launched one aft er another, which included 
the Buyi, Miao, Yi, Li, Naxi, Lisu, Hani, Wa, and Dong ethnic minorities. New 
programs for the Tu minority in Qinghai, Tao minority in Guangdong, and Bai 
minority in Yunnan were formulated in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
To improve and reform the existing written languages for some ethnic 
minorities was another important task. In the 1950s, the government helped the 
Lahu and Jingpo minorities design reform programs for their written languages 
and helped the Dai minority design four programs to improve the Dai language.
Th e creation and reform programs of written languages involved over 20 
million people of the ethnic minorities.
Th e newly-created and improved languages have been under careful experi-
mentation and testing. So far, all the written languages are being experimentally 
practiced except for the Zhuang language and standard Yi language in Sichuan, 
which have been approved by the State Council and offi  cially put into use.
In June 1991, when approving the notice on the “Report on Strengthening 
the Work on Ethnic Minority Languages from the State Ethnic Aff airs Com-
mission,” the State Council pointed out that “for written languages created or 
improved in the 1950s, those welcomed by the majority shall be reported for 
approval and implementation; those that did not achieve ideal results shall be 
further improved; and those that did not gain a good response from the major-
ity shall not be implemented.” Th is instruction fully indicated the complexity of 
the creation and reform of ethnic minority written languages.

84 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Language equality has always served as an important symbol of China’s 
ethnic policy. It is a belief of China’s ethnic policy that there is no ethnic equal-
ity without language equality. In the National People’s Congress (NPC) of the 
People’s Republic of China and the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Con-
ference (CPPCC), translation and simultaneous interpretation in seven ethnic 
minority languages are provided for representatives and committee members 
of ethnic minorities, including the Mongol, Tibetan, Uygur, Kazak, Korean, 
Zhuang, and Yi minorities.
In the late twentieth century, successive breakthroughs were made in 
China’s ethnic minority language information processing system and electronic 
publishing system. Tibetan was China’s first ethnic minority language with 
an international standard. In 1984, when DOS was the dominant computer 
operating systems, Northwest University for Nationalities began research on 
the “Tibetan Language Information Processing System.” In 1997, when the 
United Kingdom, the United States, India, and other countries all proposed 
programs for the Tibetan language code, the ISO (International Organiza-
tion for Standardization) voted to approve the international standard code of 
Tibetan language upon China’s proposal. At the beginning of 1999, research-
ers in Zhongguancun completed the fi rst Tibetan computer operating system, 
which was the fi rst Tibetan language processing program, and the world’s fi rst 
Tibetan website aft er a year of hard work.
In fact, the information processing for the Tibetan language has achieved 
the same level as that for the language of the Han Chinese. Currently, with the 
promotion efforts by the Chinese government, information processing and 
electronic publishing has become a reality for the written languages of 11 eth-
nic minorities, including Tibetan, Mongolian, Uygur, Kazakh, Kirgiz, Korean, 
Yi, Zhuang, Dai, Xibo, and Manchu.
In the twenty-fi rst century, cell phones in ethnic minority languages began to 
appear. Th e fi rst ethnic minority language cell phone in Uygur appeared in January 
2004. Th e menu used the Uygur language and allowed users to enter Uygur script 
to send short messages. Soon after, cell phones in Mongolian, Tibetan, Yi, and 
other ethnic minority languages appeared one aft er another. In November 2007, 
a multimedia news platform for cell phones in Tibetan language was launched in 
Gansu Province, the fi rst ever ethnic minority newspaper for cell phones in China.
Press and Publications of Ethnic Minorities
Th e Ethnic Press of China, established in 1953, is an unusual press. Its name 
was inscribed by then-Premier Zhou Enlai, and its president and  editor-in-chief 
was Sa Kongliao who was also the Deputy Head of the General Administration 
of Press and Publication (GAPP).

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
85
The Ethnic Press of China worked with some professional publishing 
houses soon aft er its founding, and published comic strips and maps in  ethnic 
minority languages, Uygur classical music 12 Mukam, and other  ethnic minor-
ities’ books, fi lling a series of gaps in the history of China’s ethnic minorities’ 
publications.
The Ethnic Press of China also founded the Nationality Pictorial maga-
zine in 1955 and its name was once again inscribed by Premier Zhou. It soon 
became one of the three most famous pictorials in China. Th e National Unity 
magazine began publishing in 1957 and it was an exclusive magazine for ethnic 
minorities. Aft er the 1980s, the National Pictorial and National Unity were pub-
lished in fi ve ethnic minority languages, including Tibetan, Uygur, Mongolian, 
Kazakh, and Korean.
In 1951, Xinjiang People’s Publishing House and Mongolian People’s Publish-
ing House were established. Th e following year, Guangxi People’s Publishing House 
was set up. In 1959, Ningxia People’s Publishing House was founded. Twelve years 
later, Tibetan People’s Publishing House was established. All these companies pub-
lish various books in their local ethnic minority and Chinese languages.
Meanwhile, in some provinces with multiple ethnic groups, compilation and 
translation bureaus for respective languages were gradually set up. Some autono-
mous regions also established publishing houses, mostly focusing on books in 
ethnic minority languages or having exclusive compilation and translation offi  ces.
In the 1950s, provincial newspapers were published in succession in the 
fi ve autonomous regions, among which the Guangxi Daily and Ningxia Daily 
were published in Chinese, while the other three were published both in the 
local ethnic minority language and Chinese.
In the twenty-fi rst century, China’s news publishing faced massive reforms 
and changes—the marketization and commercialization of publishing. How-
ever, according to the plan of the State Press and Publications Administration, 
publication in ethnic minority languages is defined as “publication for pub-
lic welfare.” In other words, to ensure that the publication of ethnic minority 
languages may not be aff ected adversely by commercialization, all the ethnic 
minority language publication houses in China are entitled to publication sub-
sidies from the government’s fi nancial expenditure.
Regardless of past or present situations, very few countries in the world can 
be compared to China with respect to the operation, scale, and investment of 
news publishing houses and their range of publications.
Folk Arts
Jiangbianjiacuo, a Tibetan, was born in Batang County, Sichuan Province. He 
was an interpreter for the 14th Dalai Lama and the 10th Panchen Lama in the 

86 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
early years aft er the founding of the People’s Republic of China. In 1981, he left  
his translation and editing career to research on Gesar.
From 1983, after the government formulated the Sixth Five-Year Plan  
(1981–1985), Seventh Five-Year Plan (1986–1990), and Eighth Five-Year 
Plan (1991–1995), the collection and research on Gesar was listed three times as 
a national key scientifi c research project. Jiangbianjiacuo was in charge of this 
project. During the Ninth Five-Year Plan (1996–2000), he fi nally began work on 
the compilation and publication of a concise edition of Gesar. Th e concise edi-
tion consists of 40 volumes, each containing 400,000 words, totaling 16 million 
words, which was a mammoth cultural project.
The Chinese government sent research teams comprising hundreds of 
scholars and scientists to Tibet to conduct surveys on Gesar. Th e survey started 
from the 1950s and is still ongoing until today. “Th e research and sorting tasks 
were the largest- and longest-ever in Tibetan cultural history that involved a 
great number of people, achieved the greatest success and had the most exten-
sive impact. It was an unprecedented feat in history,” wrote Jiangbianjiacuo in 
his memoirs.
For the research and publication of Gesar, another great achievement was 
that the Tibetan version of Gesar had been officially published in nearly 100 
volumes after the founding of the People’s Republic of China, with a total of 
Tibetan folk artists singing the Tibetan epic Gesar, accompanied by musical instruments.

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
87
nearly four million copies sold. Th is meant that each Tibetan adult would have 
owned more than one copy of Gesar based on the population in Tibet Autono-
mous Region. So far, Gesar has become one of the most dynamic fields of 
research in China’s folk literature.
In Uygur culture, the 12 Mukam opera can be considered a treasure. 
 However, due to the disruption of wars and social unrest, very few artists 
could perform the whole opera. Tu’erdiahong was the last and only master who 
could sing the full opera in the 1950s.
In 1950, the Chinese Ministry of Culture sent musical experts to Xinjiang to 
protect the 12 Mukam from extinction. Tu’erdiahong, then in his 70s, sang the 
whole 12 Mukam twice into a tape recorder. Aft er the recording, the great folk art-
ist passed away. One year later, the 12 Mukam Musical Collection was published.
Aft er the founding of the People’s Republic of China, the government was 
committed to protecting and promoting the folk arts of ethnic minorities. As 
research for ethnic minorities’ social history and language began in the 1950s, 
the government organized resources to search for and conserve folk arts. In 
the early 1980s, a huge publication project was launched, where up to 50,000 
experts and cultural workers participated in this project. Th ey spent 20 years 
compiling folk art materials collected from surveys and published the “Ten 
Collections and Annals of Chinese Ethnic Folk Literature and Arts” (Collection 
of China’s Folk Songs, Collection of China’s Folk Tales, Collection of China’s Folk 
Proverbs, Collection of China’s Folk Ballads, Collection of China’s Opera Music, 
Collection of China’s Quyi Music, Collection of China’s Folk Dances, Collection of 
China’s Folk Instrumental Music, Annals of China’s Local Operas, and Annals 
of China’s Quyi). Th e collection, a complete record of the folk arts and literature 
of the 56 ethnic groups was published in 310 volumes.
Ethnic Studies and Collation of Ancient Works
A team of over 3,000 members wrote 401 books consisting of more than 80 
million words in over a decade. It was a publishing project that had never been 
attempted before in China.
Th e program to compile the Five Collections on Ethnic Issues was derived 
from voluminous materials obtained from social, historical, and linguistic 
research on ethnic minorities done in the 1950s. In 1964, based on fi rst-hand 
data collected from social and historical research, the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences compiled three collections: The Brief History of Ethnic Minorities in 
China, A Brief Introduction to Chinese Ethnic Minorities, and An Overview of 
Chinese Ethnic Autonomous Regions.
In 1978, the State Ethnic Affairs Commission pointed out that the Three 
Collections should continue to be compiled and expanded to Five Collections 

88 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
on Ethnic Issues; where two collections were added: Ethnic Minorities in China 
(1 volume) and The Collection of Social and Historical Survey Data of Ethnic 
Minorities in China (148 volumes).
Th irteen years later in October 1991, Five Collections on Ethnic Issues was 
published by 32 publishing houses. Four hundred and one types of books were 
published with over 1.83 million copies sold. 
Th e Five Collections on Ethnic Issues was a milestone in the study of China’s  
ethnic issues. Th e value of this fi rst-hand historical data has become increas-
ingly precious as time goes by.
A large-scale collation of ethnic minority ancient works began in 1984. 
In March of the same year, the State Ethnic Affairs Commission submit-
ted the “Request on Conserving and Collating Ancient Works of Ethnic 
Minorities” to the central government. In the report, “according to incom-
plete statistics, there are over 10,000 ancient works of the Yi minority scat-
tered around the country. Also, there are more than 10,000 kinds of ancient 
Tibetan works, and more than 1,500 kinds of ancient Mongolian works. As 
for ancient Manchu works, there are over 1.5 million archive fi les, which is 
just the tip of the iceberg. All these ancient works had never been collated 
systematically before.”
The State Council quickly released exclusive papers on this issue. The 
papers pointed out that ancient works of ethnic minorities are a part of Chi-
na’s valuable cultural heritage. All local governments and departments will 
provide adequate manpower as well as financial and material support; they 
shall create reasonable working conditions for people who are in charge of 
research and collation, and train talented people for the collation and research 
of ancient works.
In July 1984, the national planning team for the collation and publication 
of ancient works of ethnic minorities was founded. The research and colla-
tion of ancient works of ethnic minorities started with “saving people.” Writ-
ten ancient works of some ethnic minorities were rarely handed down due to 
migration. Many ancient songs and ballads were passed down generation aft er 
generations orally and were able to survive to this day, thanks to the elderly 
artists who were still alive. Th erefore, “saving people” became the fi rst slogan of 
saving ancient works.
“Saving books” was the second slogan. A large volume of lost ancient works 
were found and collected in the survey, and were quickly collated and pub-
lished. To date, 120,000 (kinds, copies or volumes of) ancient books of ethnic 
minorities have been saved and 110,000 volumes of books have been collated. 
Over 5,000 kinds of ancient books from more than 40 ethnic minorities have 
been published. Meanwhile, this campaign has also trained a group of excellent 
and talented researchers for the study of ancient ethnic works.

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
89
Traditional Sports
In the 1990s, Chinese sports experts found that more than 1,000 folk sports 
were still being practiced in China until the end of the twentieth century. Th ey 
were surprised because aft er 100 years of the infl ux of Western sports concepts 
and models, Western sports have become very common in China. Th erefore, 
it was unimaginable that traditional Chinese sports still existed on such a large 
scale.
Th e experts were also surprised by another statistical fi gure. Among these 
1,000 traditional sports, more than 700 of them originated from China’s 55 eth-
nic minorities. Th is demonstrated that China has a rich variety of traditional 
sports, a large part of which were from ethnic minorities.
In fact, the diversity of ethnic minorities’ traditional sports was respected 
and cherished by the Chinese government as early as the middle of the 
twentieth century. Th is was refl ected in the National Sports Games for Ethnic 
Minorities, which have been held in China on a large scale since the 1950s. Till 
now, there have been eight sports games, and they are welcomed and appreci-
ated by ethnic minorities. Many traditional sports which were on the verge of 
extinction survived because of these sports events.
A Kazak traditional sport—horse racing.

90 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Besides the National Sports Games for Ethnic Minorities, sports games 
at the provincial level are also increasing. All provinces, municipalities and 
autonomous regions hold their own ethnic minority sports games on a regular 
basis. In addition, the research of ethnic minorities’ traditional sports are being 
conducted. Some schools have begun offering traditional physical education 
courses of ethnic minorities.
Protecting the Ethnic Minorities’ Intangible 
Cultural Heritages
In the twenty-fi rst century, a movement for preserving intangible cultural heritage 
evoked many people’s strong emotions toward alienated traditional local culture.
2003 was regarded as “the fi rst year for the protection of China’s intangible 
cultural heritage.” At the beginning of that year, the Chinese folk culture pro-
tection project was offi  cially launched. Th is project will last until 2020, and a 
comparatively comprehensive protection system of intangible cultural  heritage 
will be established in China. The Ministry of Culture established China’s 
Mongolian men competing in a wrestling bout. Also known as Khapsagay, it is the most 
archery.
important of the Mongolian's "Three Manly Skills," which also include horsemanship and 

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
91
 Center for the Protection of Intangible Cultural Heritage. Th e second Saturday 
of June every year was identifi ed as the Chinese Cultural Heritage Day. During 
the coming years, “intangible cultural heritage” will become a frequently-used 
word in Chinese society.
At the end of 2008, the State Council made public two lists of state-level 
intangible cultural heritage, totaling 1,028 items. Th e cultural heritage of eth-
nic minorities accounted for a significant proportion of these items. In fact, 
because of the geographical location and backward economy, more original 
cultural patterns were better preserved in some ethnic minority areas than in 
Han Chinese areas, which made ethnic minority areas the focus of protect-
ing intangible cultural heritage. In the perspective of intangible culture heri-
tage, ethnic minority culture has shaken off the label of “backwardness” and 
regained its magical charm.
The intangible culture heritage of ethnic minorities is starting to attract 
more of people’s attention, such that they are now keen to experience it. In the 
Left: A monk drawing the Thangka in 
Tongren County, Qinghai. With its origins 
traced locally, Regong art includes many 
art forms such as the Thangka, murals, 
sculptures, Barbola, butter sculpture, and 
so on.
Right: An old woman from the Li minority 
weaving cotton textiles by hand. The 
traditional textile dyeing and embroidery 
techniques of the Li minority have been 
included in the UNESCO’s List of Intangible 
Cultural Heritage in Need of Urgent 
Safeguarding.

92 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
meantime, these heritages have become national key protected objects. For those 
listed at the national level, the government clearly states that preferential policies 
will be given to a protection fund and specialized guidance. From 2002 to 2008, 
25% of the protection fund was used in ethnic minority areas, much higher than 
the population proportion of ethnic minorities in the whole country. In order to 
test the cultural integrity protection model, China established four cultural and 
ecological preservation experimental zones, two of which are located in ethnic 
minority areas—the Regong cultural and ecological preservation experimental 
zone, and the Qiang cultural and ecological preservation experimental zone. 
Th e government also established a series of specialized museums, folk museums 
and education centers for the intangible cultural heritage of ethnic minorities. 
In addition, experts and scholars began discussing the possibility of protecting 
traditional cultural heritage of minorities by legal means.
After the Wenchuan earthquake in Sichuan Province in 2008, the Qiang 
minority, who lived at the earthquake’s epicenter for a very long time, became 
the concern of all China. Rescuing Qiang cultural relics and saving endangered 
Qiang intangible cultural heritage in the earthquake became a top priority in 
The Qiang watchtowers in Sichuan are regarded as architectural masterpieces built by the 
Qiang minority.

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
93
post-quake reconstruction. Th is shows that in the era of globalization, culture is 
still being respected and a concern of society, thus culture can been considered 
as the soul of a nation.
Commercialization of the Traditional Culture 
of Ethnic Minorities
Is it possible for the culture of ethnic minorities to be commercialized? Defi nitely!
In the twenty-fi rst century, many changes have occurred in consumption 
structure and consumer’s psychology, and cultural consumption has become a 
popular trend. Against such a backdrop, the marketization, industrialization, 
and commercialization of the cultures of ethnic minorities have taken over.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
PROTECTION OF INTANGIBLE CULTURAL 
HERITAGES OF ETHNIC MINORITIES
Since 2002, the Chinese government has accumulated a RMB 386 
million fund that has been invested into intangible cultural heritage 
protection, and about 25% of it has been used in ethnic minority 
regions. Among the 1,028 items of national-level intangible cultural 
heritage identifi ed by the State Council, 367 belong to ethnic minori-
ties, accounting for 35.7% of the total. All 55 ethnic minorities have 
their own enlisted budgets.
Of the 1,488 representative inheritors of state-level intangi-
ble cultural heritage, 393 are from ethnic minorities, accounting 
for 26.4%. Ethnic minority culture heritage, such as Xinjiang Uygur 
Mukam music, Mongolian long-tune folk songs, Dong Grand Song, the 
Tibetan epic Gesar, Tibetan opera, Regong art, the Epic of Manas of 
the Kirgiz minority, festival of farmers’ music and dance of Korean 
minority, Mongolian Khoomei singing art, and Qinghai Hua’er have 
been enlisted in the UN’s Representative List of Intangible Cultural 
Heritage of Mankind; the Qiang minority’s New Year, and the Li 
minority’s traditional textile dyeing and embroidery techniques have 
been listed in the UN’s List of Intangible Cultural Heritage in Need of 
Urgent Safeguarding.

94 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
In the past, some people held the view that traditional ethnic culture hin-
dered “modernization,” which was a common aspiration of all people, since 
traditional culture showed great inconsistencies with modernization, and thus 
contradicted with modernization. For a long period of time, “modernization” and 
“ethnic traditional culture” were two opposing values in China, which stood for 
the contradictions between the advanced and the primitive; the rich and the poor.
With the ongoing reform and opening up, the paradox of modernization 
and traditional culture is changing. Surprisingly, at the dawn of the twenty-fi rst 
century, the two factors complement each other. Th e public began to investi-
gate if using traditional culture as a competitive advantage would translate into 
economic advantages for the process of modernization.
Th is was a dramatic change to Chinese ideas, where past obstacles of mod-
ernization have evolved into a very precious resource.
From confrontation to integration, the evolution is accompanied with the 
gradual progress of modernization with its unique Chinese characteristics. Th e 
implementation of a market economy reveals the value of traditional culture, 
moving the country onto the road of modernization.
On this journey, ethnic minority culture is especially attractive because of 
its well-preserved original form. Th is creates many opportunities for it when it 
is exposed to the modern world.
Nanning International Folk Song Arts Festival has become an international icon of Guangxi.

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
95
First of all, traditional ethnic minority culture with its distinctive features 
is transformed into a priceless tourism resource. Compared with other scenic 
spots, it does not only provide the tourists with natural landscapes, but also 
exotic cultural legacies, products, and also lifestyle. In the twenty-fi rst century, 
ethnic customs and folk cultural legacies have become the driving force of 
tourism.
Secondly, many cultural activities are developed into “products,” and 
repackaged as cultural “property” for “release” into the market. For example, 
the largest ethnic minority, the Zhuang minority, has a keen interest in folk 
songs. In areas where many Zhuang people live, songfests often attract tens 
of thousands of people. In order to turn it into an economic booster, Guangxi 
Autonomous Region decided to hold the “Guangxi International Folk Song 
Festival,” forging a commercial chain and developing a series of cultural prod-
ucts. Folk singing, an old cultural tradition, has become an engine of  economic 
growth.
The old town of Lijiang in Yunnan is home to the Naxi people and is also a popular tourist 
destination.

96 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
A case in point is the old town of Lijiang in Yunnan Province, where the 
Naxi minority lives in compact communities. They rely on ethnic culture to 
develop the local economy. Th e ancient town of Lijiang, full of Naxi fl avor, has 
transformed itself from a remote township into an international tourist desti-
nation, attracting millions of visitors from various parts of China and abroad 
each year. Tourism revenues account for half of the local gross domestic prod-
uct (GDP).
Yunnan Province was once a forgotten region because of its remote loca-
tion and backward economy. However, since the twenty-fi rst century, the home 
of 15 ethnic groups has caught the attention of the Chinese. It is considered a 
haven for visitors, and traveling to Yunnan has become fashionable in people’s 
eyes. In fact, it is the strategic goal of Yunnan to build itself into an ethnic cul-
tural province, to nurture new economic growth points by promoting the local 
cultural industry on the basis of local ethnic culture.
It is true that during this process, dramatic changes have happened to 
ethnic cultures. For example, as a post-modern industry, tourism has a decon-
structive effect on tourist destinations, decoupling traditional culture from 
social life, making ethnic culture more like a souvenir or a commercial venture, 
thus losing its original fl avor. Th is has become a contentious issue.
Of course, this is also an issue worldwide. In China, the idea of “cultural 
self-awareness” that was proposed by Fei Xiaotong, is a guideline for many 
scholars working on the above-mentioned issue. In a cultural transition 
brought on by economic development, an ethnic group should take the initia-
tive to make independent choices regarding its cultural development while 
adapting to new environments; maintain its original cultural characteristics and 
position itself well among world cultures. Th is is what “cultural  self-awareness” 
is about.
Modern Education for China’s Ethnic 
Minorities
Aft er being appointed the President of Central Academy of National Minorities 
in 1950, Ulanhu established the fi rst institution of higher education for ethnic 
minorities.
At that time, the newly-established People’s Republic of China had to 
undertake numerous tasks. In spite of fi nancial diffi  culties, the central govern-
ment spared no eff ort to support the construction of the Central Academy of 
National Minorities. In less than two years, a new campus, designed by famous 
architect Liang Sicheng, was presented to the public. Th e campus has a classic 

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
97
design with distinctive ethnic features: large roofs, gray bricks with tight joints, 
black tiles, beams and red columns with trees and fl owers planted around the 
premises.
Over the next 50 years, 15 institutions of higher education for ethnic 
minorities were established in China. Six of them are under the supervision 
of the State Ethnic Affairs Commission, namely Minzu University of China, 
Southwest University for Nationalities, South-Central University for Nationali-
ties, Northwest University for Nationalities, North University for Nationalities, 
and Dalian Nationalities University. Th e remaining nine are under the admin-
istration of provincial governments, and they are: Inner Mongolia University 
for Nationalities, Guangxi University for Nationalities, Yunnan University for 
Nationalities, Qinghai University for Nationalities, Tibet Institute for Nation-
alities, Guizhou University for Nationalities, Hubei University for Nationalities, 
and Sichuan University for Nationalities.
All the above universities and colleges have developed multi-level diversi-
fi ed educational models focusing on undergraduate education, supplemented 
by preparatory, graduate, doctorate, and post-doctorate education, as well 
as cadre training. The latest surveys show that the number of students has 
exceeded 200,000 in these 15 ethnic universities and colleges.
Minzu University of China, one of the highest institutions of higher education for ethnic 
minorities in China.

98 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Special Educational Policies
In China, the education of ethnic minorities is a sacred mission to improve the 
comprehensive quality and economic status of ethnic minorities.
In order to promote the education of ethnic minorities, the central govern-
ment endorses autonomy in developing the education of ethnic minorities. 
Th e Constitution of the People’s Republic of China stipulates that government 
organs in autonomous areas may decide on their own local educational pro-
grams, including the establishment of schools, the duration of compulsory 
schooling, educational systems, curricula, teaching languages, and procedures 
for enrollment.
Because of their relatively backward local economy, ethnic minorities may 
be fi nancially incapable of developing their education. As early as the begin-
ning of the People’s Republic of China, the government set up a fund to sub-
sidize the education of ethnic minorities. Th is is a fund that ethnic minority 
schools of various types and levels enjoy, apart from subsidies that common 
schools also have, and the amount of this fund has increased continually in the 
past decades.
In the annual enrollment of colleges, universities, and polytechnics, favor-
able policies for students from ethnic minorities also apply. Based on the 
various local situations in diff erent provinces, autonomous regions and munici-
palities, these measures take the form of lowering admission scores, reserving a 
certain quota of candidates from ethnic minorities, setting separate admission 
scores, or making preferential enrollment policies for these ethnic minorities 
with small populations.
All schools in China are open to both students of the Han Chinese and 
ethnic minorities. However, many local governments have either opened eth-
nic schools for students of ethnic minorities, or set up ethnic classes for ethnic 
minority students in common schools.
Ethnic schools refer to educational institutions that mainly enroll stu-
dents from ethnic minorities, including high schools, primary schools as well 
as vocational schools. It is either founded by a single ethnic minority or co-
established by two or more ethnic minorities. Th e aim of ethnic schools is not 
to diff erentiate the ethnicity of students. Th e government gives priority to them 
in terms of staff  and facilities, and ensures that ethnic minority languages are 
taught at the same time.
Ethnic minorities’ classes are a form of special education which is similar 
to common schools in terms of teachers and facilities, except that they only 
enroll students of ethnic minorities. Even aft er lowering the admission scores 
for them, there were still a low proportion of students from ethnic minorities 
enrolled in such classes. Hence, in 1980, the Chinese Ministry of Education 

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
99
decided to open ethnic minorities’ classes in the fi ve universities under its direct 
administration. Aft erward, such classes were also started in some medical col-
leges, institutes of water conservancy and hydroelectric power, as well as insti-
tutes of physical education. In 1984, documents were released by the Ministry 
of Education and the State Ethnic Affairs Commission, which specified the 
regulations on enrollment, placement of graduates, courses, and administrative 
management of ethnic minorities’ classes, making this educational form more 
mature and practical. Since then, ethnic minorities’ classes have been started in 
key middle schools, vocational schools, and schools for adult education.
Ethnic minorities’ classes in primary and middle schools were established 
for students in places where there were no ethnic schools. Only students of eth-
nic minorities can attend these classes. Th ese attendees are eligible for scholar-
ships, tuition exemption or reduction, and subsidies will be given to students 
with fi nancial diffi  culties. Most students of ethnic minorities’ classes eat in school 
cafeterias and are given the same treatment as those attending boarding schools.
Boarding schools are an effective measure by the Chinese government 
to improve the educational conditions of ethnic minorities. The Law of the 
People’s Republic of China on Ethnic Regional Autonomy clearly stipulates that 
public ethnic primary and middle schools that provide boarding and allow-
ances to most students are established in pastureland and mountainous regions, 
A classroom of an ethnic school in Xinjiang.

100 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
where families mostly have fi nancial diffi  culties and live in desolate locations. In 
 practice, autonomous governments at all levels shall open ethnic primary and 
middle schools that provide boarding to students in sparsely populated areas 
with poor transport services, especially in prairie and nomadic regions. All 
the costs for the construction of these schools shall be assumed by provincial, 
municipal and county governments, and by the central government through 
preferential treatment in terms of funding, teaching staff  salaries, and facilities. 
Students in boarding schools are eligible for scholarships, tuition exemption, 
and subsidies. Today, there are 6,000 primary and middle boarding schools in 
China for her ethnic minorities.
Preparatory education for ethnic minorities is a development unique to 
China. As a special phase in higher education, it serves as a transition period 
for students enrolled into universities through preferential policies. It works 
in this manner: in normal or ethnic minority universities, preparatory courses 
are conducted especially for ethnic minority students. These are tailor-made 
supplementary courses for students with poor academic background.
Since the 1950s, preparatory programs have been off ered in many technical 
secondary schools and institutions of higher education. Preparatory educa-
tion has become part of the ethnic educational system and a shortcut to speed 
up their educational progress. Usually, preparatory programs last one year, 
but they may be prolonged to two if the students have a poorer command of 
Mongolian children playing in a school.

 
Chapter 5 Protection and Development of China’s Ethnic Minority Culture 
101
 Chinese. Aft er fi nishing the courses, ethnic minority students who have passed 
the examinations go directly to universities or colleges for further education.
Bilingual Education
As stipulated in the Law of the People’s Republic of China on Ethnic Regional 
Autonomy, bilingual education is a basic educational system practiced among 
schools in ethnic regions. Th is means that school lessons are conducted in both 
their mother tongue and the Chinese language where ethnic minorities congre-
gate, and have their own spoken and written languages. Th is system, based on 
local situations, caters to the will of ethnic minorities.
Considering the diff erent language environments and status of written lan-
guages among diff erent ethnic minorities in various regions, native language 
education and bilingual education are mainly divided into three types:
 (1)  For schools in areas where ethnic minorities have spoken languages, but 
no written languages and Chinese is the commonly used language; courses 
are conducted in both Chinese and their mother tongue, but courses are 
not run for native languages.
Daur students attending a computer class.

102 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
 (2)  For ethnic minorities who have widely spoken and written languages, 
courses are taught in both Chinese and their mother tongue. Schools run 
both local language and Chinese courses, and emphasize the acquisition 
and application of ethnic languages.
 (3)  For ethnic minorities who have their own spoken and written languages, 
but use Chinese more oft en, courses are taught in both Chinese and their 
mother tongue. Schools run courses for both local languages and Chinese, 
and emphasize the acquisition and application of Chinese.
Th e country has been very supportive of bilingual education. For example, 
favorable fi nancial measures have been taken to improve the editing, translat-
ing, proofreading and printing of textbooks into ethnic minority languages.
Currently, bilingual education is carried out in over 10,000 schools in 13 
provinces and autonomous regions in the country. In these schools, there are 
six million ethnic minority students from 21 ethnic groups, speaking 60 ethnic 
minority languages in total.
Ethnic minority students 
learning Chinese 
phonetics in a class in 
Yunnan.



105
6
Are There Any Independent Ethnic Minority 
Economies?
In March 1979, nobody was skeptical when the “Economics of Chinese Ethnic 
Minorities” was listed as 27th among the 30 disciplines for scientifi c develop-
ment and planning of the national economy of China. In the initial stage of 
reform and opening up, people saw an urgency to establish a discipline to study 
the economic development of ethnic minorities and their ethnic regions.
However, by the end of the 1980s, with a holistic and in-depth develop-
ment of the market economy in China, a question began to surface: in a market 
economy, are there still any independent ethnic minority economies or ethnic 
regional economies?
Th e development of a market economy leaps over the boundaries of vari-
ous closed economic systems that were a result of the planned economy in 
China. Thus, regional economies that used to be divided by administrative 
units, geographic units, or communities have all gradually disappeared from 
the country.
In China’s market economy, economies once divided by administrative 
units, such as Guangxi, Inner Mongolia, and Xinjiang, and economies divided 
by communities, such as the Hui and Tibetan minorities have seen the gradual 
disappearance of their relative isolation and independence. Under the law 
of value in a market economy, through the optimal allocation of production 
Economies of Ethnic 
Minorities in China
Chapter 6

106 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
 factors and resources, every part of the country, including ethnic autonomous 
areas, as well as China’s 56 ethnic groups, are closely linked and inseparable.
Th e socialist market economy with its unique Chinese characteristics has 
changed the traditional economic system of ethnic minorities in China: form-
ing a new pattern of economic development, raising the level of economic 
development of ethnic groups, and improving the living standards of the 55 
ethnic minorities.
Although relatively independent ethnic regional economies or ethnic 
minority economies in a planned economy are no longer a subject of research, 
the economics of ethnic groups has broadened its fi elds of study, made impres-
sive achievements, and also established an innovative theoretical system 
in domains such as bridging the gap between eastern and western China, 
 sustainable development of ethnic regions, development of economic accelera-
tion strategies, human resources development in western China, the ecosystem 
in western China, the opening up of borders and border trade, and the urban-
ization of ethnic regions and the rural economy.
Th us far, the economics of ethnic groups as an academic discipline has been 
established in 30 higher educational institutions for undergraduates, masters 
students, doctorates, and post-doctorates in China. From 1994 to 2002, 6,200 
research papers on the economics of ethnic groups in well-known  Chinese 
With her beautiful grassland scenery and ethnic customs, tourism has become one of Inner 
Mongolia’s important revenue generators.

 
Chapter 6 Economies of Ethnic Minorities in China 
107
 academic journals were published. The growth of this discipline reflects the 
active, dynamic, and continuous changes of the Chinese ethnic minority econo-
mies in the last three decades.
Transition of the Traditional Economy
Before the founding of the People’s Republic of China, ethnic minorities were 
mainly engaged in traditional farming and animal husbandry: some regions 
were still using the method of “slash and burn” agriculture; iron tools had not 
been widely used and in some areas, people were still using implements made 
of wood or stone.
However, in the second half of the twentieth century, the traditional econo-
mies of these ethnic minorities generally completed their transitions in varying 
degrees.
Th e Oroqen and Ewenki minorities in northeastern China once depended 
on hunting and gathering to live; and the Hezhen minority mainly sustained 
themselves by fishing. After the founding of the People’s Republic of China, 
with the guidance and help of the government, the Oroqen and Ewenki 
minorities completed their gradual transition to settled farming. In the 1990s, 
Nomadic tribes are mainly concentrated in the northern and northwestern regions of China, 
most of whom have already settled down.

108 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Ethnic minority people farming in the countryside of Yunnan.
the Hezhen minority bade farewell to fi shing and hunting, and began farming. 
Owing to the tourism potential of the Hezhen minority’s fi shing and hunting 
culture, the local government helped to develop it. Since then, tourist activities 
in regions inhabited by the Hezhen minority have been developed into a lead-
ing industry.
Ethnic groups in northern and western China used to lead nomadic lives, 
such as the Mongol, Tibetan, Kazak, Kirgiz, Yugur, and Tajik minorities. Since 
the 1950s, the Chinese government has encouraged settled grazing instead of 
a nomadic life, called for the combination of farming and animal husbandry, 
as well as secondary production, such as processing animal products. Nowa-
days, these ethnic groups are no longer pure herdsmen. They are engaged 
in agricultural production and cash crops cultivation but they also continue 
with grazing. Also, villages and towns have emerged in previously nomadic 
regions.
Ethnic groups in southern and southwestern China, such as the She, Va, 
Lahu, Lisu, and Nu minorities, generally adopted the “slash and burn” agricul-
tural method before the founding of the People’s Republic of China. However, 
under the central government’s assistance and planning, these ethnic groups 
have adopted settled farming instead.

 
Chapter 6 Economies of Ethnic Minorities in China 
109
Generally speaking, the level of economic development of certain ethnic 
minorities who live together with the Han Chinese or near regions  inhabited 
by the Han Chinese in compact communities, have basically reached or are 
close to the economic level of the Han Chinese, such as the Zhuang, Hui, 
Manchu, and Korean minorities. For more than half a century, the economic 
development in these ethnic regions kept pace with the Han  Chinese region: 
from traditional agriculture to modern intensive agriculture; and a large-scale 
development of modern industry and  commodity-based  economy.
To briefl y sum up the changes of the ethnic minority economies over the 
past half century, these economies have gradually transformed themselves from 
a natural economy to a commodity-based economy.
Supportive Policies of the Central Government
In 1995, the total fiscal revenue of ethnic autonomous regions in China 
reached RMB 30.8 billion, while the total fiscal expenditure was RMB 74.6 
billion. In 2006, the total fiscal revenue of ethnic autonomous regions in 
China was RMB 128 billion, while the total fi scal expenditure reached RMB 
373.4 billion.
Comparisons on GDP growth rates between the eight provinces of ethnic minorities and the 
whole of China.

110 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Th ese two sets of fi gures show the tremendous economic growth of eth-
nic autonomous regions in China and at the same time raised a question: 
between the fiscal revenue and expenditure in ethnic autonomous regions, 
there was a huge gap—RMB 43.8 billion in 1995 and as much as RMB 245.4 
billion in 2006.
So who fi lled this huge gap? Th e answer is state fi nance.
After the founding of the People’s Republic of China, the fiscal expen-
diture of ethnic autonomous regions in China has relied on subsidies from 
the state and local finance at the provincial level. According to official sta-
tistics from 1959 to 2008 (Tibet carried out a democratic reform in 1959) 
which were incomplete, financial aid provided by the central government 
to Tibet amounted to RMB 201.9 billion, with an average annual growth 
rate of nearly 12%; from 1955 to 2008 (Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous 
Region was established in 1955), financial aid provided by the central gov-
ernment to Xinjiang totaled RMB 375.2 billion, with an average annual 
growth rate of 11%.
Judging from the financial aid policy, we can get a clear picture of the 
policy that the Chinese government has pursued consistently concern-
ing the economic development of ethnic minorities and ethnic regions: 
vigorously supporting and narrowing the gap, and achieving common 
 prosperity.
As early as the 1960s, the Chinese government implemented the “Th ree 
Financial Aid” policies in ethnic autonomous regions. Firstly, an additional 
5% emergency fund is added to the fiscal expenditure budget in ethnic 
autonomous regions. Secondly, the proportion of fi nancial reserves in eth-
nic  autonomous regions is higher than that in other regions. Thirdly, an 
A silk factory in Hotan, 
Xinjiang.

 
Chapter 6 Economies of Ethnic Minorities in China 
111
annual subsidy is provided to ethnic minority regions for certain special 
expenditures.
After the 1990s, besides fixed quotas for financial subsidies, China has 
established some special subsidies to support the development of various 
undertakings in ethnic regions. For instance, education subsidies for border 
areas and ethnic minority regions, border construction subsidies, funds for 
supporting the development of underdeveloped regions, and funds earmarked 
for construction in Tibet.
With regards to taxation, ethnic autonomous regions are endowed with 
a certain degree of decision-making power in terms of tax reduction. The 
provincial governments in ethnic autonomous regions are entitled to reduce 
local taxes included in local financial revenues. Meanwhile, the government 
has carried out some policies of moderate tax reduction in ethnic regions. For 
example, the government has reduced the tax on enterprises in ethnic regions 
and manufacturers of ethnic minority products.
As for finance, the central government has set up special loans for eth-
nic regions, offering favorable interest rates, easing lending restrictions and 
The Manzhouli port in Inner Mongolia is the largest land port of entry in China, serving as a 
distribution center for a large number of imported and exported goods.

112 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
 repayment periods. For example, the government has established special trade 
subsidies in ethnic regions and special poverty discount loans for pastureland.
With regards to investment, China has formulated preferential policies 
to guide and encourage foreign and domestic investment in ethnic autono-
mous regions, giving priority to reasonable arrangements of resource develop-
ment projects and infrastructure construction projects in ethnic autonomous 
regions. For more than half a century, a number of key projects were built 
in succession, such as the Sichuan-Tibet Highway, Qinghai-Tibet Highway, 
 Lanzhou-Xinjiang Railway, Qinghai-Tibet Railway, Lhasa Airport, Lanzhou-
Xining-Lhasa Optical Cabling Project, and Ningxia Yellow River Irrigation 
Project. These projects have vastly improved local infrastructure, such as 
 transportation and communication, as well as production and living conditions 
in ethnic regions. The establishment of large industrial enterprises has also 
transformed ethnic regions into several industrial bases for resource explora-
tion and processing, such as the iron and steel-making base in Baotou of Inner 
Mongolia, Karamay Oilfi eld in Xinjiang, Yunnan Tin Company Group Limited 
in Gejiu, Tarim Oilfi eld in Xinjiang, potash fertilizer project in Qinghai, and 
large-sized coal-fi rer power generators in Inner Mongolia.
In the exploitation of natural resources in ethnic regions, autonomous 
agencies in ethnic autonomous areas are permitted to rationally explore and 
exploit local resources; and the country will fi nancially compensate these eth-
nic autonomous regions that produce natural resources. Coal mines, power 
generation plants, and forestry enterprises established by the central govern-
ment in ethnic autonomous areas are entitled to a proportion of both the 
 profi ts and products.
The War against Poverty
Before 1949, most ethnic minorities in China lived a hard life, especially those 
living in the mountainous areas and deserts where food and clothing were 
scarce, and for several months each year, food supplies would be unavailable. 
Th ese people could only eat wild fruits and wear straw or palm-bark raincoats 
to protect themselves against the cold weather.
For many years, the Chinese government formulated a series of anti-
poverty measures for ethnic minorities, such as granting loans and distributing 
farming tools to the poor in ethnic minority regions, providing free medical 
services, opening public schools, and offering social subsidies. However, in 
1985, there was still a substantial population of over 40 million poor people in 
ethnic regions.

 
Chapter 6 Economies of Ethnic Minorities in China 
113
In 1986, China declared war against poverty and launched a planned, orga-
nized, and extensively development-oriented poverty relief scheme. At that 
time, there were 125 million people living in poverty with a poverty rate of 
14.8%. Two decades later, the number of people living in poverty had dropped 
to 2.165 million, with a lower poverty rate of 2.5%.
Half of the poor’s population in China is made up of ethnic minorities. 
Th ey mainly live in the Karst areas in the southwest, frigid and wet areas in the 
northwest, desert steppes in the northwest, and arid mountainous areas in the 
northwest. Th e harsh natural environments have become the biggest obstacle 
in the war against poverty.
Th e Karst area in the northwest of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region 
covers an area of 89,000 square kilometers which has extremely barren soil. 
More than 85% of poverty-stricken people in Guangxi live there and almost all 
of them are from the Zhuang, Yao, and Miao minorities. A report describes the 
life there as: the people channeled water droplets from high rock crevices into 
water vats at the foot of mountains using an iron wire; the corn plants grown 
in rock crevices was only one meter high and a corn ear was no larger than a 
human fi st.
Tibetan farmers harvesting wheat.

114 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Th e poverty relief eff ort in Guangxi was considered a “20-year war in Karst 
hilly areas.” In the mid-1980s, there were 15 million poor people in the rural areas 
of Guangxi. By 2004, there were about 840,000 people without enough food and 
clothing in Guangxi. Th e fi gures show that close to 14 million people have been 
lift ed out of poverty due to the long and painstaking “war” in the past 20 years.
In the war against poverty, China always pays close attention to ethnic 
regions. Ethnic minority regions enjoy a comparatively fl exible standard and 
special aid is given when the country identifies key poor-stricken areas. As 
for poverty relief investments in capital and goods, ethnic minority regions 
also benefi t in more allocations than the other regions. In addition, the gov-
ernment set up a special fund for development and poverty relief for ethnic 
minorities.
Educational, intellectual development, and science and technology poverty 
relief schemes have been deployed for the purpose of improving the quality of 
poverty-stricken people. Th ey are regarded as the trump cards in winning the 
anti-poverty war.
By 2008, the number of poor people living in ethnic regions in China was 
down to 7.7 million. In 2009, China adopted a new standard for poverty relief 
and fully implemented the anti-poverty policy in all low-income populations 
in rural areas of ethnic regions.
The pastures of Tian Shan Mountain in Xinjiang.

 
Chapter 6 Economies of Ethnic Minorities in China 
115
Ethnic Trade System
China’s ethnic trade policy is unique in the world. The so-called “ethnic trade” 
system is a form of commodity trade in which the Chinese government adopts 
special supportive policies in accordance with the characteristics of the ethnic 
regions.
In the early years of the PRC, commodity trade in ethnic regions showed 
two striking observations, to which the government attached great importance. 
Firstly, many ethnic minorities lived in mountainous, highland, and grassland 
areas, with poor transport facilities, and goods distribution were oft en delayed 
due to transport difficulties, resulting in low efficiency in commodity trade 
enterprises. Secondly, all ethnic groups demanded commodities closely related 
to traditional culture, customs, and faith. And many ethnic groups had special 
needs for certain commodities. For instance, there is a high demand for silver 
by the Miao, Yao, and Dong minorities because of their unique traditional 
costumes; the Tibetan minority’s love for tea; the special needs for Mongolian 
bowls and knives in Inner Mongolia; and the need for halal food by Muslims 
(the Hui minority). Th e special attention given to the two unique observations 
fostered the establishment of an ethnic trade policy system by the Chinese gov-
ernment for the following decades.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
Among the 331 impoverished counties designated as key recipients 
of state aid in 1986, 141 were in ethnic autonomous areas, account-
ing for 42.6% of the total. In 1994, the state began implementing 
the “Seven-Year Program for Delivering 80 Million People out of 
Poverty,” and among the 592 impoverished counties designated as 
key recipients of state aid, 257 were in ethnic autonomous areas, 
accounting for 43.4% of the total. The Outline Program for Poverty 
Alleviation and Development in the Rural Areas of China, which was 
implemented in 2001, once again recognized ethnic minority areas 
as key targets for assistance. In the 592 counties newly designated 
for state poverty alleviation and development, 267 were located in 
ethnic autonomous areas (excluding Tibet), accounting for 45.1% 
of the total. Tibet as a whole has been included as a target for key 
poverty alleviation and development from the state.
POVERTY RELIEF AND DEVELOPMENT 
OF ETHNIC AUTONOMOUS AREAS

116 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
The first national ethnic trade conference was held in August 1951. 
Chen Yun, then Vice-Premier of the Government Administration Council, 
declared at the conference that people should never regard ethnic trade simply 
as trading; ethnic trade is the concrete embodiment of ethnic policies and peo-
ple working in ethnic trade are the ones who had implemented and enforced 
ethnic policies.
By 1963, five nationwide conferences on ethnic trade had been held. 
Within that year, the concept of “three preferential policies for ethnic trade” 
offi  cially emerged. Th e three aid policies were: “profi t retention”—ethnic trade 
enterprises could retain 80% of the total profi ts, 30 percentage points higher 
than general enterprises; “self-owned funds”—wholesale enterprises had 50% 
self-owned funds, while retail enterprises had 80%, and local or state fi nance 
would make up the remainder. Th e government off ered price subsidies in vari-
ous forms to ethnic trade enterprises when they purchased farm and secondary 
products and sold daily industrial products, and gave freight subsidies to enter-
prises that delivered goods to remote places.
With the promotion of the market economy in China, ethnic trade policy 
has, aft er several important revisions, become a new policy system in line with 
the socialist market economy. In terms of content, the new preferential policy 
for ethnic trade includes fi nance, banking, taxation, and industry. As a means 
A street-side restaurant serving halal food in Shanghai.

 
Chapter 6 Economies of Ethnic Minorities in China 
117
of support, it includes earmarked allocations, discounted loans, tax reduction, 
favorable interest rates, and guidance for industry. Its beneficiaries include 
ethnic trade enterprises in ethnic trade counties, ethnic trade corporations at 
provincial and prefectural levels, and designated manufacturers of ethnic com-
modities which are at demand. As for the distribution of sectors that  benefi ted, 
they are the clothing, arts and crafts, ethnic minority medicine, Muslim 
food, tea sold at border areas, publications in ethnic languages, folk musical 
 instruments, and sports equipment for ethnic minorities, with all aspects of 
production involved.
The long-term national support to ethnic trade and ethnic commodities 
has lowered production and operating costs, strengthened market competitive-
ness and promoted commodity circulation and  market prosperity in ethnic 
minority regions.
Western China Development Strategy
Since 1999, the phrase “development of western China” has frequently 
appeared in Chinese society. Since China’s reform and opening up in the 
late 1970s, regional development strategies have basically gone through four 
stages: giving priority to the eastern coastal areas; coordinating the develop-
ment of eastern and western China; attaching importance to and supporting 
the development of the  central and western parts of China; and implement-
ing the western China  development strategy.
Th e gap between eastern and western China in terms of economic develop-
ment is both a longstanding issue in history and an issue of overall signifi cance 
for social development in China. To achieve the coordinated development of 
eastern and western China is an important strategic decision for the country in 
the twenty-fi rst century.
Nearly 70% of the ethnic minority population lives in western China; eth-
nic minority regions cover 75% of western China, and 33% of the population 
are ethnic minorities. Th erefore, the western China development strategy pro-
posed in 1999 is closely related to the economic development of ethnic regions. 
Th e Communist Party of China Central Committee (CPCCC) clarifi ed that the 
implementation of the western China development strategy was aimed at accel-
erating the economic development of ethnic minorities and ethnic regions.
Strictly speaking, the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region and Guangxi 
Zhuang Autonomous Region do not belong to the western part of China from a 
geographical point of view. However, they are included in the scope of the  western 
China development strategy. Furthermore, Yanbian Korean  Autonomous  Prefecture 

118 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
in the northeast, Enshi Tujia and Miao Autonomous Prefecture in Hubei Province, 
as well as Xiangxi Tujia and Miao Autonomous  Prefecture in Hunan Province, 
which are not geographically located in the west of China, are also included in this 
preferential policy.
In 2000, China made substantial progress in developing the western 
regions in China. The newly-started “10 Projects” focused on infrastructure 
construction to improve transportation and the electrical power grid system in 
western China. In the interests of ethnic minorities and ethnic regions in the 
western China development plan, the country implemented many  preferential 
measures, such as giving priority to the exploitation and processing of 
resources in ethnic regions, compensating those ethnic autonomous areas that 
produce natural resources, guiding and encouraging enterprises in developed 
areas to invest in ethnic regions, and increasing fi nancial investment and fi nan-
cial support in ethnic regions.
Since the implementation of the western China development strategy, a 
number of key projects have been completed, such as the “West-to-East China” 
Natural Gas Transmission Project and “East-to-West China” Power Transmis-
sion Project, and infrastructure such as airports, highways, and hydroelectric 
projects, all of which have created better conditions for development in ethnic 
The Qinghai-Tibet Railway runs from Xining of Qinghai to Lhasa of Tibet, It began operations 
in July 2006.

 
Chapter 6 Economies of Ethnic Minorities in China 
119
The Karamay oil ﬁ eld in Xinjiang is an important petrochemical base in western China.
Wind turbines are used to generate “green” electricity in Inner Mongolia.

120 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
communities. In 2006, the Qinghai-Tibet Railway was opened for rail travel 
and goods transportation. This railway, which is the highest in the world, 
ended Tibet’s history of not having railways, and built an inexpensive and fast 
transportation line between Tibet and China’s inland cities.
By 2008, the investments in fixed assets in ethnic regions had reached 
RMB 7.7899 trillion since the implementation of the western China develop-
ment strategy. Th e western areas are the source of large rivers in China, and so 
the ecosystem there is rather fragile. Th erefore, the major tasks of the western 
China development strategy also include stopping the deterioration of the 
ecosystem in western China, improving the eco-environment, and promoting 
environmental protection.
Partnered Assistance
Partnered assistance is a unique feature in China. It is a practice led and orga-
nized by the Chinese government where developed inland provinces and cities 
help selected underdeveloped areas with their social and economic development.
In 1979, the country made a list of partnered-assisted areas: Beijing to 
assist Inner Mongolia, Hebei to help out Guizhou, Jiangsu to assist Guangxi 
and Xinjiang, Shandong to help out Qinghai, Shanghai to lend a hand to 
Yunnan and Ningxia, and finally the whole nation to assist Tibet. This list 
Fixed assets investment in ethnic regions after the start of the western China development 
strategy (unit: RMB 100 million)

 
Chapter 6 Economies of Ethnic Minorities in China 
121
includes fi ve ethnic minority autonomous regions and three provinces with a 
larger proportion of the ethnic minority population—Yunnan, Guizhou, and 
Qinghai.
Tibet is the focus of national support. In 1984, the CPCCC decided to 
implement “projects with state’s direct investment, financial subsidies from 
the central government, and nationwide partnered assistance to Tibet,” which 
stated that nine comparatively developed provinces and cities together with 
several ministries and commissions would help Tibet with the construction of 
43 small and medium-sized projects closely related to people’s livelihood. And 
the total investment was close to RMB 500 million.
In 1994, an upsurge in “nationwide support for Tibet” began in China. 
From 1994 to 2001, 15 provinces off ered partnered assistance together with 
central ministries and commissions, and provided free aid for the construc-
tion of 716 projects. Th e annual GDP growth rate of Tibetan Autonomous 
Region reached 11.9% over the same period, higher than the national aver-
age for many years; a vast majority of poverty-stricken people no longer 
faced a shortage of food and clothing, and some even began to live a rela-
tively comfortable life.
Winter supplies for the Tibetans were airlifted to Gonggar Airport in Lhasa from inland China.

122 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Engineering machinery and equipments being transported from inland China to Xinjiang.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
In 2008, the economic aggregate of ethnic regions increased from 
RMB 5.79 billion in 1952 to RMB 3.06062 trillion, with an increase of 
92.5 times according to comparable prices. The per capita disposable 
income of the urban population increased to RMB 13,170, which was 
over 30 times more than that in 1978 (RMB 307); the per capita net 
income of farmers and herdsmen went up to RMB 3,389, which was 20 
times more than that in 1978 (RMB 138). The economic growth rate of 
Inner Mongolia has been ranked fi rst in the country for seven consecu-
tive years; Xinjiang has maintained a double-digit economic growth rate 
for six years; the total output value of Tibet in 2008 reached RMB 
39.591 billion, which was 66 times more than that in 1959.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF 
ETHNIC REGIONS

 
Chapter 6 Economies of Ethnic Minorities in China 
123
In 2001, China once again made the decision of extending the partnered 
assistance program to Tibet for another 10 years, and the 29 Tibetan counties 
without partnered assistance would be included in this program in  different 
ways. The country would also bear the expenses for the construction of key 
projects in Tibet.


7
125
7
Don’t the Chinese Have Any Religious Beliefs?
Th e Chinese media once reported that many Africans had the impression that 
the Chinese did not have religious beliefs. In Africa, when people go to govern-
ment offi  ces, they always need to fi ll in a series of forms. However, they noticed 
that the Chinese nationals working in Africa would always leave the category 
of religion blank. Th erefore, the Africans were puzzled: how could people not 
have any religious beliefs? And what made the Africans even more curious was 
that the Chinese work on Sundays instead of going to church.
Don’t the Chinese have any religious beliefs? Knowledge of Chinese history 
would help us to answer this question.
In many parts of the world, people always associate China with Confucius. 
The sage has become a “popular” representative of Chinese culture. Indeed, 
this philosopher who lived more than 2,500 years ago, had a great impact on 
 Chinese culture with his doctrines. In that sense, it can be said that contempo-
rary Chinese people’s lives are a product of Confucian culture.
Confucian culture holds a rational attitude toward society and life, and 
focuses on politics, ethics, and moral standards in practice. It believes that 
human rationality is the cornerstone of people’s happiness and that the pursuit 
of a moral life leads to the transcendence of life itself. Th us, Confucian culture 
does not pursue happiness based on fantasy.
Religious Beliefs of the 
Chinese People
Chapter 7

126 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
How does Western culture look at Confucian culture? As early as the six-
teenth and seventeenth centuries, Confucian philosophy shed new light on the 
philosophers in the Enlightenment period in Europe. Once, the great  German 
mathematician and philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716), 
argued that Confucian ethics was based on human rationality, and that China 
displayed characteristics of an “almost ideal state,” more or less realizing Plato’s 
“ideal state.” Another great French philosopher Voltaire (1694–1778), also 
advocated Confucian culture. He once wrote, “It is ethics and law that the Chi-
nese, taught by Confucius, understand best, nurture with the utmost care and 
devote all their time and energy to … the happiest ever and most delightful 
time in the world is when people followed Confucius’ laws.”
Interestingly enough, although Confucian culture did not pursue everlasting 
happiness, it later developed into a religious system called Confucianism. But it is 
still a hotly debated issue over whether there is a “Confucian religion” in China. 
However, in China, there is a common saying that Confucianism, Buddhism, and 
Taoism are regarded as the “three main religions” of China. The Chinese people 
once considered Four Books and Five Classics to be Confucian classics, and regarded 
the worship of ancestors and Confucius as prescribed rituals. As a matter of fact, 
Confucian philosophy in essence, is the knowledge of life. It is a combination of 
This picture shows devotees praying and making offerings at Lingyin Monastery in 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang.

 
Chapter 7 Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 
127
Pilgrims performing rites on the Tibetan Plateau.
A Taoist devotee making an offering to the 
gods.

128 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
seeking enlightenment and obtaining knowledge, which resolves not only questions 
in beliefs but also in knowledge; thus it is a philosophy as well as a religion.
Ancient China experienced a special process of cultural development 
which was independent of the history of Western thought. As for religion, it 
may not work to simply “import” a set of Western concepts into China because 
Chinese culture has its own uniqueness.
Religious Beliefs in China
The massive influence that Confucian culture and Confucianism exerted on 
China does not indicate that the Chinese do not have any religions. In fact, there 
are fi ve major religions in China. In addition, countless folk beliefs also exist in 
the country.
Buddhism, introduced from India in the fi rst century, has the largest group of 
devotees in China. Currently, China has more than 13,000 Buddhist  monasteries 
with some 200,000 monks and nuns. Since it does not have strict  admittance 
rites, it is diffi  cult to determine the exact number of Buddhists. According to the 
offi  cial  statistics released by the national organization of Buddhism in China—
the  Buddhist Association of China—the country has about 100 million Buddhists.
This picture shows a prayer session at the Dongguan Mosque in Xining, Qinghai.

 
Chapter 7 Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 
129
Taoism is a local religion that was started 
in the second century based on the ancient 
 philosophy of Tao in China. Th ere are more than 
1,500 Taoist temples nationwide with 25,000 Tao-
ist priests and nuns. It is also difficult to account 
for the actual number of followers as Taoism, like 
Buddhism, does not have strict admittance rites.
Islam was brought into China in the seventh 
century. Muslims are mainly distributed among 
10 ethnic minorities. Scholars usually use the 
total population of these 10 ethnic minorities, 
which amounts to 20 million, as a reference 
when they need to provide the total number of 
Muslims in China.
Catholicism was introduced into China in 
the thirteenth century, and experienced several 
Catholics praying in a church in 
the countryside of Yunnan.
A Christian church in Harbin, Heilongjiang.

130 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
ups and downs until the 1940s, when a large number of Catholic missionaries 
entered China. Now, the country is home to over fi ve million Catholics with 
more than 5,000 churches.
Christianity (referred to as Protestantism in particular) made its way into 
China in 1807. By 2002, there were 16 million Christians and 8,000 Protestant 
churches in China.
Many Han Chinese are religious, but they only account for less than 10% of 
the total population of religious believers in China. Ethnic minorities in China 
have a large proportion of believers with deep faith in their religions. Accord-
ing to official statistics, religious believers account for over 50% of the total 
population in 55 ethnic minorities. In more than 20 ethnic minorities, every-
one used to be a religious believer historically, and current religious believers 
still occupy a majority.
Introduction to the Five Major Religions
Buddhism
In the year 64, guided by a magical dream, Emperor Ming of the Eastern Han 
Dynasty (reigned 58–75) sent envoys to the Western Regions of China, in 
search of Buddhist doctrines. Th ree years later, envoys returned to the capital 
of Luoyang with two Buddhist monks from India, and also brought back Bud-
dhist scriptures and statues. The White Horse Monastery was specially built 
near Luoyang by Emperor Ming, a place where Buddhist monks could settle 
down and translate Buddhist scriptures. It is the fi rst Buddhist monastery in 
China and is still in existence today.
Aft er arriving in China, Buddhism experienced a long period of interaction 
with two Chinese major schools of thoughts—Confucianism and Taoism. By the 
seventh century, Huineng (638–713), a Buddhist monk, founded  Chinese Zen 
Buddhism based on traditional Chinese culture, and sinicized Buddhism in the 
aspects of mind and doctrine, self-cultivation, and attainment of Buddhahood. Zen 
Buddhism’s formation marked the complete sinicization of Buddhism in China.
Today, few Chinese point out that Buddhism is a foreign culture for China. 
In fact, over the past 2,000 years, Buddhism has merged into Chinese culture. 
The acceptance and localization of Buddhism by Chinese culture is a classic 
example of cultural integration in human history. 
Buddhist culture in China has created many world-class cultural landscapes. 
Th ere are three famous grottoes in the north of China: the Dunhuang  Grottoes 
were excavated in the fourth century, and Yungang and Longman Grottoes in 
the fi ft h century. Th ese grottoes have been listed on UNESCO’s World  Heritage 
Chinese Buddhism

 
Chapter 7 Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 
131
List. The Dazu Rock Carvings in Chongqing also made it on the list. It was 
 excavated in the ninth century and  completed 250 years later.
In China, there are Buddhist sites that represents the four Bodhisattvas of 
“great compassion,” “great wisdom,” “great vow,” and “great practice.” Th e four 
famous Buddhist mountains of China are: Putuo Mountain in Zhejiang is the 
Buddhist site of Guanyin Bodhisattva with “great compassion”; Wutai Mountain 
in Shanxi is the Buddhist site of Manjusri Bodhisattva with “boundless wisdom”; 
Jiuhua Mountain in Anhui is the Buddhist site of Ksitigarbha Bodhisattva, who 
claimed that “Not until all the hells are emptied will I become a Buddha”; Emei 
Mountain in Sichuan is the Buddhist site of Samantabhadra Bodhisattva with 
“great courage and practice.” Many Buddhists in China regard pilgrimages to the 
four famous mountains as their most sacred wish.
In China, current monasteries follow the system of selecting and appoint-
ing capable administrators based on democratic consultation. Buddhist monks 
in a monastery elect an abbot to manage monastery aff airs. Th e tenure of the 
abbot is three years and the abbot can be re-elected. Monks have to be dressed 
in monastic robe s , eat a vegetarian diet, remain celibate and not marry, and 
strictly follow religious disciplines and Buddhist etiquette. Buddhist monks 
should chant Buddhist scriptures in the morning and evening, learn scriptures 
by heart, and keep practicing Buddhist rules. 
Buddhist rites and prayers being conducted in Tanzhesi Monastery, Beijing.

132 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Shaolin Monastery is the most infl uential Chinese monastery in the world. 
At the mention of Chinese kungfu, Shaolin Monastery comes to mind. This 
ancient monastery was built in 495, which has become a symbol of Chinese 
martial arts. At the initial stage of its establishment, Shaolin Monastery, the 
cradle of  Chinese Zen Buddhism, accepted Chinese martial arts as part of 
the monks’ daily life, and included it as part of scripture learning and self-
cultivation. Fighting and martial arts is an extreme form of self-cultivation, 
since Buddhism advocates peace. However, Chinese Zen Buddhism founded 
the innate  philosophy that no extremes can withhold for long. It discovered the 
combination of dynamic and static extremes, and the paramount truth beyond 
fi ghting and universal fraternity—the most contradictory thing for philosophy 
to transcend contradiction. Th is can be regarded as the mysterious great wis-
dom of Buddhism in China.
Since the 1980s, China has experienced an unprecedented upsurge in 
 Buddhism. It is diffi  cult to get an accurate fi gure of the number of Buddhists in 
China, but it is obvious that more devotees are going to Buddhist monasteries 
and off ering more incense. So, we can easily estimate how fast the population 
of Buddhists in China is growing presently.
The Chinese government holds a positive attitude toward the develop-
ment of Buddhism. China has held two large-scale World Buddhist Forums. 
In  October 2004, when the seventh Buddhist Friendship Exchange  Conference 
was co-organized in China, South Korea and Japan, a decision was made in 
Beijing by eight Buddhist leaders from these three countries across the Strait: 
to hold a World Buddhist Forum in China to improve the quality of life, purify 
the mind, enlighten people, and maintain peace. Th e planned forum was tar-
geted at Buddhist disciples as well as spiritual friends who care for and respect 
Buddhism. On April 13, 2006, senior monks from 37 countries and regions 
attended the First World Buddhism Forum. Three years later, the Second 
World Buddhist Forum was held on March 28, 2009, attracting more than 1,700 
senior Buddhist monks from about 50 countries and regions.
In the seventh century, Buddhism arrived in Tibet and Tibetan Buddhism 
gradually took shape through its interactions with the local Bon religion in 
Tibet. In the thirteenth century, Kublai Khan, the emperor of Yuan Dynasty 
(reigned 1260–1294), honored Basiba (1235–1280) as Royal Preceptor, and 
began to establish the governance system of alliance between Tibetan Bud-
dhism and state in Tibet. By the end of the fourteenth century, Tsongkhapa 
(1357–1419) founded the Gelug school, which gradually became the most 
dominant school of Tibetan Buddhism. Th e monks of the Gelug school have 
been traditionally known as the “Yellow Hats,” because of the color of their 
Tibetan Buddhism

 
Chapter 7 Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 
133
ceremonial headdress. The other main schools of Tibetan Buddhism are the 
Nyingma, Sakya, and Kagyu.
Under the system of alliance between Tibetan Buddhism and state, monas-
teries in Tibet have abundant production materials and wealth, and most of the 
senior monks are government offi  cials at diff erent levels. Monasteries also have 
courts and prisons.
Aft er the founding of the People’s Republic of China, the Chinese  government 
carried out democratic reform in Tibet from 1959 to 1960, which  abolished the 
serfdom of alliance between Tibetan Buddhism and state.  However, democratic 
reforms in Tibetan Buddhist monasteries were only restricted to the abolishment 
of unreasonable traditional regulations. For example, monasteries are not allowed 
to interfere in the areas of administration, justice and marriage; monasteries are 
not allowed to appoint offi  cials and establish courts and prisons without permis-
sion; people’s personal bondage to monasteries are abolished; behaviors such 
as practicing usury and apportioning duties are forbidden in monasteries; the 
hierarchical management system in monasteries and the affi  liation between the 
parent and subsidiary monasteries are repealed; Buddhist monks could establish 
committees or groups responsible for democratic management with regards to 
religious affairs on their own through democratic elections. The country fully 
respects and protects the religious freedom of Tibetan citizens. 
Lamas enjoying a lively  debate on the Buddhist scriptures. 

134 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Tibetan Buddhism was introduced to the Mongol minority at the end of 
the sixteenth century, which made a tremendous impact on Mongolian  society. 
In addition, Tibetan Buddhism also spread to the Monba, Tu, Qiang, and 
Yugur minorities, whose people converted to Tibetan Buddhism too.
Tibetan Buddhism now has more than 3,000 monasteries, 120,000 
monks and nuns, and over 1,700 Living Buddhas. Th e historic Lhasa Jokhang 
Monastery was listed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List in 2000. Th e Gelug 
School has six famous monasteries; Ganden Monastery, Sera Monastery, and 
Drepung Monastery are all located in Lhasa, as well as Tashi Lhunpo Monas-
tery in Shigatse, Kumbum Monastery in Qinghai, and Labrang Monastery in 
Gansu. In inland China, Yonghe Temple (also known as the Palace of Peace 
and  Harmony Lama Temple) in Beijing, and Puning Temple (also known 
as Temple of Universal Peace) in Chengde, Hebei, are important Tibetan 
 Buddhist monasteries.
The reincarnation of the Living Buddha is a system adopted by Tibetan 
Buddhist monasteries to resolve the problem of leadership succession. It was 
first created by the Karma Kagyu school in the thirteenth century and then 
gradually accepted by other schools.
Th e Living Buddha is identifi ed through a strict set of procedures. Before 
his death, a Living Buddha always predicts the place where his soul is rein-
carnated in a baby boy; if not, Buddhist monks will need to get inspiration 
through divination and séances.
According to clues provided in the Living Buddha’s last words, indications, 
signs, oracles, and mirages on the lake, monasteries with the lineage of the Liv-
ing Buddha send monks to diff erent destinations, searching for children with 
signs or behavior of the reincarnated Living Buddha. Th ere may be more than 
one candidate for the Living Buddha, but only one is selected eventually.
Th e Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama are two Living Buddhas with the high-
est positions in the Gelug school. In 1653, the Fift h Dalai Lama was conferred 
a title by the central government of the Qing Dynasty. Aft er that, it became a 
rule that every reincarnation of the Dalai Lama was bestowed a title by succes-
sive imperial courts. In 1713, the imperial court of the Qing Dynasty off ered a 
title to the Fift h Panchen Lama. Since then, every reincarnation of the Panchen 
Lama was honored by either the imperial courts or central  governments.
In Tibet’s history, Chuizhong (the lama that protects and maintains the 
Buddhist dharma) was once in charge of identifying the Living Buddha by 
casting a spell and asking the gods at a séance. However, some of them engaged 
in frauds, and as a result, many of the “reincarnated” Living Buddhas came 
from royal and aristocratic families, thus religious power was manipulated 
by the upper nobilities or senior lamas. In 1793, the government of the Qing 
Dynasty issued regulations that created a selection system of  drawing lots from 

 
Chapter 7 Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 
135
a golden urn. Th e balloting went this way: each ivory strip was engraved with 
the name and birthday of each candidate and deposited into a golden urn. Th e 
ivory strip was then drawn and identifi ed as the “reincarnated” Living Buddha, 
under the supervision of representatives of the Qing government. In addition, 
two urns were specially designed for this method: one was used to select the 
“reincarnated” Living Buddhas for Tibet, such as the Dalai Lama and Panchen 
Lama, and is currently housed in the Potala Palace; the other is used for the 
selection of the Living Buddha in the Mongolian area, which is now housed in 
the Yonghe Temple in Beijing. Since then, the system of drawing lots from the 
golden urn became a rule and remains in use till today. 
On January 28, 1989, the 10th Panchen Lama passed away in Tibet. The 
Chinese government announced a mission to locate and identify the “reincar-
nated” Living Buddha according to historical conventions and etiquettes of 
Tibetan Buddhism. It took six years to search for candidates and three children 
were selected. On November 29, 1995, aft er drawing lots, Gyancain Norbu, a 
six-year-old boy, was confi rmed as the 11th Panchen Lama.
Pali Buddhism is also known as Hinayana Buddhism or Theravada Bud-
dhism. Around the seventh century, Theravada Buddhism was introduced 
into Yunnan Province. Th e religion fi rst exerted infl uence on the Dai minor-
ity in Xishuangbanna and Dehong, which made every member of the Dai 
minority a Theravada Buddhist. After that, Theravada Buddhism gradually 
spread among the Blang, Achang, and De’ang minorities, converting them to 
Buddhism.
Th e Dai minority has fully integrated Th eravada Buddhism into their daily 
lives. In almost every Dai village, there are solemn and peaceful monasteries as 
well as beautiful white pagodas. Th e Dai people once wrote Buddhist scriptures 
on patra leaves in the ancient Dai language, leaving behind a precious cultural 
heritage. Historically, monastic education is an important form of education 
for the Dai minority. When a boy reaches the age of seven or eight, he must be 
ordained as a monk in Buddhist monasteries and study Buddhist scriptures as 
well as secular culture. Aft er a period of study, ranging from several months to 
years, most of them resume secular life, while the others remain as monks in 
Buddhist monasteries.
Th e Blang, De’ang, and Achang minorities are all pious believers in Th era-
vada Buddhism although they have their own ancient style of worship. In the 
villages of the Blang and De’ang minorities, Buddhist monasteries and pagodas 
are everywhere.
Currently, in China, Pali Buddhism has nearly 10,000 bhikshus and elders, 
and m o re than 1,600 Buddhist monasteries.
Pali Buddhism

136 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Taoism
Lao-Tzu (about 580–500 B.C.) was revered as the father of Taoism for his contri-
bution to later Taoism. His concepts laid the foundation of Taoism. Distinctions 
should be made between Taoism, which was established in the second century 
and the Taoist philosophy of Lao-Tzu. However, Lao-Tzu wrote the Taoist classic 
Tao Te Ching that was fully embraced by successive elders of Taoism in later ages.
Th e Taoist societies of “Everlasting Peace” and “Five Buckets of Rice” in the 
Eastern Han Dynasty marked the start of Taoism. Also, the publication of these 
Taoist books; Tai Ping Doctrines, Zhouyi Cantong Qi and Lao-Tzu Xiang’er Zhu, 
initiated the maturing and formation of Taoist belief and theories. Most Chinese 
scholars tend to believe that, although Taoist doctrines contain shades of Lao-
Tzu’s thoughts, it is far from representative of the spirit of Taoism and Lao-Tzu.
Th e beliefs of Taoism are
• Tao is the essence of everything in the universe; 
• Tao is the ultimate reality, a presence that existed before the universe was 
formed and continues to guide the world and everything in it; 
• society and humans should follow the way of the Tao; 
• if humans follow the rules of Tao and concentrate on self-cultivation, they 
can eventually achieve peace of mind, improve their health, eliminate dis-
eases, prolong their lives, and even become immortals. 
Monks of the Dai minority conducting a religious activity.

 
Chapter 7 Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 
137
The Baopu Taoist Temple in Hangzhou, Zhejiang.
Th e utmost goal of Taoism is to achieve immortality through self- cultivation.
Many religious doctrines believe that life is full of pain. However, life is a 
source of joy for Taoists, and they encourage others to enjoy their lives. Th ere-
fore, Taoism developed many mystical methods of self-cultivation, such as 
spiritual, dietary, breathing, and physical practices, among which the most 
amazing one is Dan Tao.
Dan Tao includes external Dan and internal Dan. Th e former refers to pills 
of immortality made by Taoists by smelting minerals like cinnabar and lead in 
stoves and bronze urns. Th is cultivation method reached its zenith in the Tang 
Dynasty, followed by a gradual decline, and was replaced by internal Dan. Th e 
latter refers to Taoists using their bodies as a form of “stoves and bronze urns,” 
through deep breathing to gather and convert energy (qi) into pills of immor-
tality within their bodies; once this is carrid out successfully,  devout Taoists 
would eventually become immortals.
It does not matter whether immortals exist by the method of external 
Dan or internal Dan, but it is undeniable that external Dan and internal 
Dan have made unexpected contributions to Chinese culture. External 
Dan resulted in the achievements in metallurgy and chemistry in China, 
even leading to the invention of gunpowder. While internal Dan has greatly 

138 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
 contributed to medical knowledge in China. For instance, the practice of 
qigong (a breathing exercise), which benefi ts people’s health, is very popular 
in China today and other countries.
Th e “paradise” that Taoists yearn for, does not entirely refer to an imagi-
nary heaven because it also exists on earth. On earth, lands governed by gods 
are known as Dongtianfudi (literally heavenly caves and lands of happiness). 
Taoism points out that there are 10 major heavenly caves, 36 minor heavenly 
caves, and 72 lands of happiness in China. These are all located at famous 
mountains and rivers, where many historical Taoist temples are located. Some 
are even historical sites where legendary Taoist immortals practiced their self-
cultivation. Nowadays, these scenic spots of high heritage value have become 
popular destinations for Chinese tourists. Some of the scenic spots have 
been listed on UNESCO’s World Heritage List, such as Qingcheng Mountain 
in  Sichuan (also known as the “Fifth Heavenly Cave”), Wuyi Mountain in 
Fujian (also known as the “16th Heavenly Cave”), Wudang Mountain in Hubei 
(also known as the “Ninth Land of Happiness”), and Mount Lu in Jiangxi (also 
known as the “71st Land of Happiness”).
A Taoist priest is one who conducts Taoist rites and activities in a Taoist 
temple.  In the twelft h century, aft er the rise of the famous Quanzhen school in 
A Taoist rite in White Cloud Temple, Beijing.

 
Chapter 7 Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 
139
Taoism, Taoist temples began to use the best practices of temple management 
of Buddhist monasteries.
Th e Chinese Taoist Association was founded in 1957. It is located in the 
White Cloud Temple in Beijing. It was the fi rst Chinese Taoist association that 
included all schools of Taoism. In addition, there are 133 Taoist organizations 
of various sizes throughout China. In 1990, the Chinese Taoist Association set 
up the Chinese Taoist Academy, the fi rst nationwide academy devoted to the 
study of Chinese Taoism.
Islam
Th e open and liberal character of the great Tang Dynasty encouraged a lot of 
foreign merchants to trade with China. Due to their advanced maritime tech-
nology, more than 70 foreign countries traded with China during this period. 
At that time, a large number of Arabian and Persian merchants came to China. 
Attracted by the prosperous economy and tolerant atmosphere of politics and 
culture, some of them remained in China, married and had children, and 
worked for the imperial court aft er passing the imperial examinations. Th ese 
Arabian and Persian merchants, known as Fanke (literally foreign guests) in 
China, were the fi rst group of people that brought Islam to China.
Th e second crucial stage of the spread and development of Islam in China 
was during the Yuan Dynasty. For 50 years since the start of the thirteenth 
century, during the large-scale westward expansion by the Mongols, a group of 
Arabs, Persians, and Central Asians were conscripted for the war against China 
during the Song Dynasty. Th ese people, together with the descendants of the 
Arabs and Persians are known as the Huihui.
As the Huihui people lived together and has a long history of intermarriage 
with the Han Chinese and Mongolians, by late Yuan and early Ming dynasties, 
a new ethnic group had fi nally been formed; the Hui ethnic minority. Th e for-
mation of the Hui ethnic minority laid a stable social foundation for the spread 
of Islam in China. Meanwhile, this also indicated that Muslims were no lon-
ger immigrants, and aft er living in China for as long as 700 to 800 years, their 
descendants became native Chinese ethnic minorities. Th is also transformed 
Islam from a foreign religion into one that was rooted in China and became an 
important part of Chinese culture.
Chinese language is commonly used by the Hui ethnic minority, while 
 Arabic and Persian languages are usually used in religious activities. As to when 
and how these Muslims stopped speaking their mother tongues, some scholars 
explain that because there were few women among merchants and soldiers, they 
had to marry local women of Han Chinese ethnicity in order to have children. 

140 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Th en, the children of the Hui ethnic minority gradually became more familiar 
with their mothers’ language of Chinese, as it was passed down from mother 
to child, so later generations of the Hui ethnic minority eventually adopted it 
for daily use. Furthermore, they mastered Chinese for the purpose of trading. 
In fact, the Hui ethnic minority integrated Islamic ethics with the traditional 
Chinese concept of “respect for God and ancestors” in the aspects of ethics and 
code of conduct. As for the religious education system, the Hui ethnic minority 
combined Islamic monastic education with Chinese traditional private school-
ing, which forms the unique “Mosque Education” in Chinese Islam.
Th e Sinicization of Islam made further progress during the Qing Dynasty: 
some scholars not only explained Islamic doctrines, disciplines, decrees, and 
regulations in the Chinese language, but also dedicated themselves to the com-
bination of Confucian and Islamic doctrines. During the same period, Chinese 
Islam evolved into diff erent Islamic schools with Chinese characteristics and 
also the Menhuan system. Menhuan was the product of Islamic mysticism (also 
known as Sufi sm) and the patriarchal system in China. Furthermore, mosque 
architecture at that time began to adopt the style of traditional Chinese archi-
tectures. In addition, Chinese Muslim families started assimilating traditional 
Chinese etiquette and habits in their daily lives.
Islam arrived in Xinjiang as early as the tenth century. Prior to her 
arrival, the ethnic groups were all pious believers of Buddhism, which had 
A mosque in Kashi, Xinjiang.

 
Chapter 7 Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 
141
a history of more than 1,000 years in Xinjiang. Around A.D. 1 of the Grego-
rian  calendar, Xinjiang was a crucial route along the Silk Road, hence many 
important religions in the world, including Shamanism, Manichaeism, Nesto-
rianism, and Zoroastrianism were found there. Th e Uygur people used to be 
believers of the above-mentioned religions, as well as Buddhism. After the 
spread of Islam for more than four centuries and the Islamic holy war against 
Buddhism, Islam was finally accepted by the Uygur ethnic minority. Islam 
was only accepted by other ethnic minorities in Xinjiang from the eighteenth 
century onwards.
There are 10 main Muslim ethnic groups in China. Besides the Hui and 
Uygur ethnic minorities, they also include the Kazak, Kirgiz, Ozbek, Tatar, and 
Tajik ethnic minorities in Xinjiang; the Salar ethnic minority in Qinghai Prov-
ince; the Dongxiang and Baoan ethnic minorities in Gansu Province.
Currently, there are over 34,000 mosques and 20 million Muslims in China. 
Th is indicates that there is a mosque for every 600 Muslims in China. Many of 
these mosques were either restored or built in the 1980s.
The Islamic Association of China was founded in Beijing in 1953, serv-
ing as the nation’s main religious organization for Islam. The association’s 
An Iman preaching Islamic doctrines.

142 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
 magazine, Chinese Muslims, is published in both the Chinese and Uygur 
 languages. Some provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities where 
Muslims live, also have their own Islamic associations as well as local publica-
tions. China has since published the Koran in 10 languages to meet the needs 
of Muslim readers among various ethnic groups. 
Currently, China has 11 Islamic academies for mosque education. China 
Islamic Institute, founded in Beijing in 1955, is the highest institution of learn-
ing in Chinese Islam.
Catholicism
In 1294, the Franciscan missionary John of Montecorvino (1247–1328) arrived 
in the capital (Dadu, now known as Beijing) of the Yuan Dynasty and received 
the government’s permission to establish Catholic churches. Th is marked the 
introduction of Catholicism into China. However, with the fall of the Yuan 
Dynasty, Catholicism withered away in the country.
In the sixteenth century, with the expansion of Western colonialism, 
Catholicism re-entered China. During this period, Matteo Ricci (1552–1610), 
an Italian Jesuit missionary, laid the foundation for Catholicism in China.
Many Chinese view Matteo Ricci as an important figure in the cultural 
interaction between the East and the West, rather than as a Catholic mis-
sionary. His huge success in China was due to his flexibility in adapting to 
 Chinese culture.
Before setting foot on mainland China, Ricci first learned Chinese in 
Macau. In 1583, he arrived in Guangdong, where he made friends with 
 Chinese offi  cials and scholars. His daily life became localized. He once shaved 
his head, wore the monastic robes, and called himself a “Western monk.” 
Later, he took off his cassock, let his beard and hair grow, and wore Han 
 Chinese clothing. Through this change, he discovered that Confucianism 
really dominated China. Thus, he began to study Confucian teachings, and 
even translated Confucian classics, attempting to reconcile Confucianism 
with Catholicism. 
Although people speak highly of Ricci, his main aim was still to spread 
Catholicism in China. In 1601, Ricci visited Beijing, and was received by the 
emperor. Ricci’s extensive knowledge won the respect and appreciation of the 
emperor. He received the emperor’s permission to do missionary work, and 
was granted an offi  cial position in the Ming Dynasty. Th ereaft er, Catholicism 
secured a place in China.
By the time Ricci passed away in 1610 in China, there had been more 
than 2,000 baptized Catholics in the country. In 1637, China had over 40,000 
 Catholics. Th e Vatican decided to install a Vicar Apostolic in China,  entrusting 

 
Chapter 7 Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 
143
missionaries from Spain, France, and Italy with missionary districts in China. 
These three colonial empires struggled fiercely for missionary influence 
in China.
Tributes paid to Confucius and ancestors are Chinese traditions with a 
long-standing history. Ricci had once proposed to adapt such a practice in 
China. However, after Spanish and French missionary organizations entered 
China, a heated debate over whether to tolerate this practice began. It became 
known as the “Chinese Rites Controversy” in the history of Catholicism. Aft er 
swaying between the two opinions, the Vatican eventually forbade Chinese 
Catholics to practice traditional Chinese rites and sent special envoys to imple-
ment that decree. 
Th is move caused the Catholic Church to lose the support of many intel-
lectuals in China, and widened the gap particularly between the Chinese elite 
and Catholicism. Owing to the Vatican’s negative attitude toward Chinese rites, 
Emperor Kangxi of the Qing Dynasty (reigned 1662–1722) imposed a ban on 
Catholicism in China, which lasted for more than 100 years.
When the Opium War broke out in 1840, Western powers used gunboats 
to open up China. Soon aft er that, the Chinese government was forced to sign 
a series of unequal treaties and repeal her ban against Catholicism. Th e 1860 
A Catholic church in Wangfujing, Beijing.

144 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
 Sino-France Beijing Treaty stipulated that the Qing government should return 
and compensate previously seized Catholic property. A French missionary 
serving as a translator added an article to the treaty without permission in the 
process of translation, which stated that “French missionaries are allowed to 
rent or purchase land, and construct estates as they wish.” Th is treaty indicated 
that France had gained a political privilege that gave an all-rounded protection 
to Catholicism. Meanwhile, after more than 10 years of diplomatic negotia-
tions, the Vatican and the government of Portugal finally reached an agree-
ment to turn the mission fields in Beijing and Nanjing that once was under 
Portugal patronage into French mission fields. After the 1880s, German and 
Italy, through military powers, also gained the same privilege from the Chinese 
 government.
During this period, Catholic missionaries relied on colonial forces to 
acquire political privileges enjoyed by the dukes of medieval churches, which 
had long been abolished in Western Europe. In 1899, the Qing government 
was forced to issue “Rules for Reception of Missionaries by Local Offi  cials,” 
offi  cially admitting that Catholic Bishops enjoyed a political status equivalent 
to that of a governor-general and inspector-general; the General Secretary 
of the Church was equivalent to the status of the Sidao (literally Governor’s 
Offi  ce); while missionaries were the equivalent of state and county offi  cials.
During the same period, confl icts arose between Catholicism and the Chi-
nese society. Th e main reasons were that some missionaries purchased or took 
possession of land by force; some viewed themselves as war victors, and inter-
fered with local government affairs and laws. Under these circumstances, the 
Boxer Uprising broke out on a grand scale, and later swept across the northern 
provinces in China. The Boxer Uprising was an anti-imperialist and patriotic 
movement started by Chinese farmers who formed the bulk of the Boxers. It 
was also a phenomenon of the accumulated conflicts between Catholicism, 
 Protestantism, and the Chinese during the last half century. This movement 
made the Catholic Church aware of its own problems. The Vatican began to 
ban missionaries from interfering in the litigations of Chinese Catholics, and 
churches were ordered to refrain from intervening in political and diplomatic 
activities. Meanwhile, the Vatican began enhancing its social infl uence by run-
ning schools, practicing medicine, and participating in charities. From then on, 
Catholicism grew at a faster speed in China. By 1949, there were 3.18 million 
Catholics in China.
Unfortunately, the Vatican refused to accept the newly-founded People’s 
Republic of China. Some members of the Catholic Church took an anti- 
communist stance and forbade followers from joining any organizations led 
by the Chinese government. Others even collected information about China 
under the cover of priests.

 
Chapter 7 Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 
145
Under such circumstances, in November 1950, 500 Catholics and the 
Chinese priest Wang Liangzuo from Guangyuan County, Sichuan Province, 
issued the “Th ree Self-Declarations” calling for a Catholic Church that is self- 
governed, self-supported, and self-propagated. This appeal aroused much 
heated discussions among Chinese Catholics, but shortly aft erward, the Catho-
lics in other regions of China began releasing similar statements. In 1957, the 
Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association was founded.
Th e resolution adopted by the First Catholic Congress stated: “To maintain 
a purely religious relationship with the Vatican City on the premise that, no 
one violates the interests and independent dignity of the country; to obey the 
Pope’s teachings that are creditable and practical; and to cut off  political and 
economic ties with the Vatican City.”
Around 1949, many missionaries left  mainland China willingly, while some 
were deported for anti-China activities. Th ere were only 20 bishops left  in 137 
mission fi elds nationwide, which greatly hindered the religious development of 
Catholic activities in China. In March 1958, the Hankou and Wuchang mission 
fi elds in Hubei selected Dong Guangqing (1917–2007) and Yuan Wenhua (1905–
1973) as bishop candidates, and asked for the Vatican’s approval for the consecra-
tion date by telegram. However, the Vatican sent a reply saying that selection not 
done by the Vatican was invalid; due to whatever ritual or status, if a bishop con-
secrates another “bishop” without the nomination or approval of the Holy See, 
consecrators and consecratees were both subject to “super-excommunication.”
Th e Chinese Catholic Church was stuck in a dilemma: the Vatican’s ban on 
the one hand, and the needs of Chinese Catholics for a normal religious life on 
A consecration ceremony 
for seminarians in the 
National Seminary of 
the Catholic Church 
in China.

146 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
the other hand. It had no choice but to select and consecrate bishops by them-
selves. Th is method was determined then and has continued to this day.
Although the Catholic Church in China adheres to the principle of inde-
pendence, self-management does not mean that it refuses all contact and 
communication with Catholic churches around the world. In fact, since 
the founding of the People’s Republic of China, especially with the reform 
and opening up, the Chinese Catholic Bishops College and mission fields 
throughout the country have received a large number of Catholic clergies 
from around the world, among whom are many well-known religious leaders. 
In return, the Chinese Catholic Church has also received invitations to visit 
Catholic churches all over the world, and to attend events such as the “World 
 Conference on Religion and Peace.”
Currently, the number of Catholics in China has increased from three to 
five million since 1949. In 1983, the Chinese Catholic Academy of Theology 
and Philosophy was established. It is a national Roman Catholic seminary 
under the direct management of the Chinese Catholic Bishops College, with 
a six-year school system, serving as the highest institution of Catholicism in 
China and also functions as a theological research center.
Protestantism
The British missionary, Robert Morrison (1782–1834), arrived in China in 
1807, marking China’s first encounter with Protestantism. Due to the Qing 
government’s ban on the spread of Catholicism and Protestantism, Morrison 
and other missionaries who arrived in China aft er the ban could only do mis-
sionary work in secrecy along the southeastern coastal areas.
Th e Opium War in 1840 opened China’s doors to the rest of the world. By 
the end of the nineteenth century, there were about 1,500 Protestant missionar-
ies and around 80,000 followers in China.
Protestantism entered China together with the colonial invasion of  Western 
powers. Th erefore, many Chinese linked the spread of Protestantism with the 
country’s decline and fall, betrayal and humiliation. Jiang Menglin (1886–1964), 
the President of Peking University in the 1920s, provided an explanation: “When 
a religion is connected with military power, its image will defi nitely be changed. 
And when it comes to Protestantism, it is inevitable for people to link it to 
intimidation. Gradually, people got the idea that Tathagata came to China by 
riding on a white elephant, while Jesus Christ fl ew to China on artillery shells.”
Under the protection of unequal treaties, some Protestant missionaries 
had nothing to fear in China. Th at belief frequently led to confl icts and dis-
putes between the populace and Western missionaries, which was  historically 

 
Chapter 7 Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 
147
known as a “church case.” From 1840 to 1900, there were more than 400 “church 
cases” all over China. Various “church cases” became an excuse for Western 
powers to make further demands to the Qing government and even wage 
a war of aggression that led to the Boxer Uprising. With large-scale bloody 
confl icts, the Protestant Church suff ered a serious setback in China, forcing 
Protestants to tone down their behavior. Some missionaries began to realize 
that missionary methods should be reformed to reduce the Chinese people’s 
resentment and resistance to foreign missionaries. They decided to change 
tack and started schools, hospitals, and charitable institutions instead of 
preaching to people directly.
While the Western missionaries started their new missionary strategy, 
China was entering a new era where the decline of the country caused pro-
found cultural refl ections. It became a major cause in society that in order to 
save the nation from doom, Chinese people strove for self-support and innova-
tion, and accepted Western culture either consciously or unconsciously. Th is 
was a golden opportunity to spread Protestantism.
By 1922, the number of Protestants in China had increased to about 
400,000, and by 1949, there were almost 700,000 believers. The Protestant 
Church not only delivered sermons in China’s large cities, but also estab-
lished churches in remote and rural places. Meanwhile, it continued with the 
Shanghai International Chapel was built in 1920 in Hengshan. It is the largest Protestant 
church in Shanghai.

148 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
 “Self-Support” and “Indigenization” movements. The “Self-Support” move-
ment started from the 1870s, a time when the development of Protestantism 
was hindered, so this became a concern for some people in Chinese Protestant 
churches. They were keen in establishing an independent Protestant Church 
with Chinese characteristics. Th rough which, they hope to change the Chinese 
people’s impression of Protestantism as a “foreign religion.”
In the beginning, the “Self-Support” movement was merely a one-off 
spontaneous action by some Chinese Protestants. However, by the twentieth 
century, it had developed into a church movement. In 1922, the National 
Christian Conference of China was held in Shanghai, which set up a national 
organization—the National Christian Council of China. This organization 
put forth the slogan of establishing an indigenous church, and advocated 
that followers in China should assume responsibilities and promote tradi-
tional Chinese culture in order to remove the title of “foreign religion” from 
 Protestantism.
The “Indigenization” movement of Chinese Protestants aimed to make 
Protestantism indigenous. It was characterized by the following: opposing total 
Westernization; advocating the combination of traditional Chinese culture 
with Christian doctrines, organizations, and rites; advancing the inherent Chi-
nese culture while maintaining a certain degree of cooperation with the West-
ern Church.
In reality, it was not easy to assimilate Protestantism into Chinese culture. 
After proposing the “Indigenization” movement, Chinese Protestants made 
eff orts by adopting the architectural style of Chinese temples when construct-
ing churches and singing hymns in folk tunes. Obviously, that was only inte-
gration in form as people were still uncertain about the means of integrating 
Protestantism into the essence of Chinese culture.
Aft er the founding of the People’s Republic of China, although she advo-
cated religious freedom, many religious followers still held a skeptical attitude 
and sensed gloomy prospects due to anti-communist propaganda by some 
foreign missionaries. During this time, some farsighted members of Protestant 
churches realized that by purging the past influence and effects of Western 
powers, undergo a complete self-transformation to match the evolving Chinese 
society, could the churches break new grounds in missionary work.
For this reason, 40 leading fi gures from various Christian denominations 
headed by Wu Yaozong (1893–1979), declared Th e Plan for Chinese Christian-
ity to Support New China’s Nation-Building on September 23, 1950. It requested 
all Chinese Protestants to achieve the dictum of the “Three-Self” (i.e., self-
governance, self-support and self-propagation) of Chinese churches as soon as 
possible. Th at marked the start of the “Th ree-Self Patriotic Movement of the 
Protestant Church in China.”

 
Chapter 7 Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 
149
Th e declaration was met with enthusiastic responses from patriotic Prot-
estants. By 1954, more than 410,000 followers had signed up to uphold the 
declaration, accounting for two-thirds of the total number of Protestants 
in China.
In 1954, the First National Conference of the Chinese Christian 
Church was held in Beijing. It established the National Committee of the 
“Three-Self Patriotic Movement of the Protestant Churches in China” with 
Wu Yaozong as the chairman. The “Three-Self Movement,” to some extent, 
marked China’s Protestantism’s metamorphosis from a foreign to a local 
religion.
Protestant churches in China have sought self-governance, self-support, and 
self-propagation, but this does not mean self-isolation. For more than 50 years 
since the founding of the People’s Republic of China, Chinese Protestant churches 
have established formal relationships with Protestant organizations from other 
countries. Th ey have hosted overseas visiting groups, organized delegations for 
Students from Nanjing 
Union Theological 
Seminary singing 
hymns.

150 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
visits abroad, and attended international conferences of Protestantism. In 1991, 
the China Christian Council offi  cially joined the World Council of Churches.
After the reform and opening up, Protestantism grew exponentially. In 
1979, there were more than three million followers, and by 2002, the  number 
had surged to over 16 million and there were close to 50,000 Protestant 
churches in China.
It was once reported by the foreign media that there was an acute short-
age of Th e Holy Bible in China. In fact, from 1988 to the end of 2002, China 
published 30 million Bibles in various languages, such as Chinese, English, 
Korean, as well as the Miao, Jingpo, Lahu, Kawa, Lisu, and Yi languages. In 
some ethnic regions, most Bibles are given to followers free of charge. The 
Nanjing Amity Development Co., Ltd. specializes in printing Th e Holy Bible. 
It is a joint venture started in 1987 between the United Bible Societies and the 
Amity Foundation.
Apart from the National Committee of the “Th ree-Self Patriotic Movement 
of the Protestant Churches in China,” the China Christian Council, founded in 
1980, is another nationwide Protestant organization. Th ese two organizations 
are located in Shanghai. Throughout China, there are more than 1,700 local 
“three-self” patriotic associations and Protestant associations.
In China, there are 17 Christian theological seminaries. Established in 
1952, the Nanjing Union Theological Seminary is a nationwide theological 
seminary. 
The Policy of Religious Freedom in China
In a country governed by an atheist party, can theistic religions be tolerated 
and accepted? Generally speaking, current religious policies in China mainly 
include the following characteristics:
 (1)  Citizens enjoy the freedom of religious beliefs. One has the right to believe 
in any religion out of his/her own free will, to express one’s own religious 
belief and religious identity.
 (2)  Th e country follows the principle of separating religion from the state. No 
religion is allowed to interfere in government administrative and judicial 
systems; the government is not allowed to interfere in the internal aff airs 
of religions, and no single religion is granted a special position.
 (3)  Religious organizations must act within the scope of the State Constitu-
tion as well as the relevant laws and policies. When exercising the right 
of religious freedom, no individual should use religion as a pretext for 
doing harm to the country, society, and individuals. Th e country protects 

 
Chapter 7 Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 
151
 religious activities in line with the State Constitution, relevant laws, and 
policies. The country protects the legitimate rights and interests of reli-
gious organizations as well as the rights of professional religious personnel 
performing religious duties.
 (4)  All religions are equal. The government provides equal treatment to all 
religions; all religions are politically and legally equal regardless of the 
number of believers and infl uence.
 (5)  Mutual respect should be built between atheism and theism. In China, as 
non-believers are the majority, the government stipulates that religious 
activities should be carried out only in religious venues. No individual is 
Religious leaders 
attending the 
Chinese People’s 
Political Consultative 
Conference.

152 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
permitted to conduct atheist propaganda in religious venues, or to launch 
a debate on theism and atheism among religious believers; no religious 
organization is allowed to conduct a sermon, preach, and publicize theism 
beyond religious venues.
 (6)  All religions in China shall follow the principles of independence and self-
management, and shall develop mutual exchanges and cooperation with 
overseas religious organizations and personages on the basis of equality 
and friendliness. Th e country does not allow foreign countries to interfere 
in China’s internal aff airs in the name of religion.
September 2003 
marked the 50th 
anniversary of the 
establishment
of the Buddhist 
Association
of China. The 
celebration was 
held in Beijing.

 
Chapter 7 Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 
153
Bingzhongluo  
1 is located in the upper reaches of the Nujiang River, where 
A-Nong, a branch of the Nu ethnic minority, thrives here. Due to migration by 
the Tibetan and Lisu ethnic minorities from the north and south, respectively, 
the A-Nong people gradually had neighbors and relatives from these two ethnic 
groups. Th ey purchased Lisu ironware and Tibetan butter buckets and mean-
while added the supernatural beliefs of Lisu folklore and Tibetan Buddhism to 
their primitive beliefs. In modern times, Catholicism and Protestantism in the 
Western world entered China consecutively. Aft er experiencing a series of pain-
ful experiences, the A-Nong people received “Mary” and “Jesus” into their lives.
He Lin is a doctor working in a research institute of ethnic minorities 
at Yunnan University as well as in a research center for ethnic minorities in 
southwest China. In 2005, He Lin stayed for a year in a A-Nong village. Aft er 
some time, he made in-depth observations and research on a phenomenon—
the peaceful coexistence among ethnic minorities of diff erent religious beliefs 
in Yunnan.
Th e following is his story about Bingzhongluo:
1Bijionglo in Tibetan pronunciation and Manbiekong in A-Nong pronunciation.
A Buddhist temple in the countryside of Yunnan. 
Story of Bingzhongluo: Religious Harmony in 
Contemporary Society

154 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
Peach blossoms are blooming during springtime in Bingzhongluo. Ancient 
lamaseries, Protestant churches and Catholic churches are located no more 
than one kilometer away from each other. During each religion’s festivals, the 
winding mountain paths are full of well-dressed people, including the A-Nong, 
Tibetan, and Lisu people. In the Shuangla village of Bingzhongluo, there is a 
Protestant church and a Catholic church. They are sited opposite each other 
and separated by a river; while a Songdebu  
2 is near the stone houses surrounded 
by barley fi elds, a clear indication of the homeowner’s religious beliefs. How-
ever, it may not be completely correct to judge the religion of a household just 
by the Songdebu and the holy Lama’s symbol on the house, a cross painted on 
the door, or a Madonna statue placed in the house. Th is is because you may see 
two or more of the above religious symbols in many households. Sometimes, 
you may not see any of these symbols in a household because its family mem-
bers may have diff erent religious beliefs.
If people describe the paradise in their hearts as a “harmonious coexis-
tence between human and nature,” then in the paradise of the A-Nong people, 
there is still mutual tolerance and harmony among the relationships between 
humans, between human and god, and between the gods. People are curious 
how a “harmonious coexistence” among diff erent religions and among  diff erent 
ethnic minorities can be achieved.
At the end of 2004, Bingzhongluo had a population of 6,205, among which 
there were 3,159 A-Nong people, 2,027 Lisu people, 520 Tibetan people and 
305 Dulong people. Th e number of religious believers was 3,887, accounting 
for 63% of the total population.
Calling themselves “A-Nong,” these people actually belong to the Nu ethnic 
minority. People of the Nu ethnic minority were ancient inhabitants in the areas 
around the Nujiang River and hence were named after this river. The A-Nong 
people speak their own language and do not have a written language, but almost 
all the people there understand the Lisu and Tibetan languages. And increasingly, 
the A-Nong people are becoming profi cient in the Chinese language.
Tibetan Buddhism entered Bingzhongluo in 1733 and soon became the 
dominant religion. In 1889, Catholicism was introduced by the French mis-
sionaries. At that time, the spread of Catholicism triggered a violent religious 
confl ict. Due to repression from the Qing government and the then Western 
imperialist powers, Catholicism finally gained a foothold. Christianity was 
introduced in 1930 by American missionaries and it spread very  fast.
So, how do the A-Nong people view the diff erent religions in their village?
Historically, the A-Nong people used legends to explain their relations with 
the Lisu, Tibetan, Dulong ethnic minorities, and the Han Chinese who are their 
2Th is is where believers of Lamaism off er sacrifi ces to the Tibetan gods.

 
Chapter 7 Religious Beliefs of the Chinese People 
155
neighbors and relatives. According to an ancient legend, these ethnic minorities 
were all brothers and sisters who were born from the same “Father Moon” and 
“Mother Sun.” Subsequently, the A-Nong people used a new legend to explain 
the relations among various religions. Th e new legend was that Tibetan Bud-
dhism, Catholicism, and Christianity are “brothers and sisters of a large family.”
A long, long time ago, the religions of A-Nong were like a family. Th ey came from India, 
later moved to Tibet and lived at the foot of Mount Kawagebo. Th ere were four children 
in the family, but they did not get along well. Th e eldest son went to  Jinshajiang River 
and became Buddhism (Chinese Buddhism). Th e second son remained in Tibet and 
became Lamaism (Tibetan Buddhism). Of the two stubborn daughters, one was stuff ed 
into a bag by their mother and thrown into the Lancang River, and later drift ed to a 
place called France. Th e other was thrown into the Nujiang River and fi nally reached 
the United Kingdom. Aft er some time, the two daughters came back: one was Catholi-
cism, who called herself Mary and was later rescued by a Tibetan caravan, and thus 
Catholicism started her missionary work from the Tibetans. Th e other sister became 
Christianity (Protestantism), who drift ed to the place where the Lisu people live, and 
therefore Christianity started spreading from the Lisu ethnic minority.
In this legend, the A-Nong people used family ties to explain the relations 
among diff erent religions. In addition, they used family scenarios to describe 
the memories of the confl icts and fi ghts among diff erent religions in the past 
and to express a desire for a harmonious coexistence for the future.
In Bingzhongluo, Tuesday is market day. People speaking different lan-
guages conduct trade, engage in the latest gossips, eat and drink freely among 
each other. Although they dress in almost the same manner, you can still distin-
guish their religious beliefs within a short time: a person with a circle of woolen 
thread (red or multicolored) around his or her neck is likely to be a Tibetan 
Buddhist; one who does not wear such a thread around his or her neck but is 
smoking a tobacco pipe or drinking water or alcoholic beverages is likely to be 
a Catholic; a person, who only consumes soft  drinks, is likely to be a Christian.
In fact, the ancient primitive religion of nature worship still exists among 
the A-Nong people and its priests are called Nanmusa (sorcerers).
Th ere is a story of a family with numerous religious beliefs: Zhao  Guoqiang’s 
eldest and second sons are Catholics and they go to church every Sunday. His 
youngest daughter and her husband believe in Tibetan Buddhism, while his wife 
and a daughter-in-law are Christians, and go to church every Wednesday eve-
ning and Sunday. Zhao Guoqiang himself has no religious beliefs, and thus he 
goes nowhere but stays at home to look aft er his farm.
Religions in Bingzhongluo are not in contact with one another, and even 
religious ceremonies between Catholicism and Christianity, have no similari-
ties, even though both are of the same origin. Under such a situation, how can 
close relationships be established among believers of diff erent religions? Surely, 

156 
CHINA’S ETHNIC GROUPS AND RELIGIONS
in Bingzhongluo, a Christian would not go to a Catholic church nor would a 
Catholic attend a Protestant Church, nor would a Christian or a Catholic par-
ticipate in the Lamas’ chanting. Catholic priests and Christian pastors in Bing-
zhongluo all say that they have no religious connections, and no cooperation 
with regards to Christmas celebrations. However, when the Catholic Church 
was established there in 1996, congratulatory gift s were sent by the Protestant 
Church in Shuangla Village—the A-Nong people often congratulate relatives 
and neighbors in such a manner. Th is shows that the A-Nong people make a 
clear distinction between religion and daily life, and nobody likes to meddle in 
other people’s matters.
The A-Nong people would never have two or more than two religious 
beliefs because they are loyal to their own beliefs. Due to the unforgettable 
memories of disharmony among the “brothers and sisters” in the legend 
and a desire for a peaceful life, the A-Nong people are always striving for a 
 harmonious coexistence among diff erent religions.
A 100-year-old Catholic church in Cizhong 
Village, Deqin County, Yunnan.

157
INDEX
A
Achang people, 21, 80, 135
B
Bai people, 20, 26, 52, 80, 83
Barlow, Augustine, 3
Birth rate, 43–44
Blang people, 21, 135
Bolshevik, 54
Bonan people, 21
Bouyei people, 20, 42, 52
Buddhism
Chinese, 130–132, 155
Pali, 135
Tibetan, 132–135, 153–155
C
Catholicism, 129, 142–143, 146, 153–155
Census
fi rst, 15, 42
second, 43
third, 32, 43
fourth, 32, 41, 43
fi ft h, 32
Central Academy of National Minorities, 
49–50, 82, 96
Central Plains, 7–10, 24–26, 71
“China Model”, 66–67
Chinese People’s Political Consultative 
 Conference, 54, 84, 151
Christianity. See Protestantism
Cold War, Th e, 51
Common prosperity, 69–71
Communist Party of China, 51, 117
Confucianism, 126, 128
Confucius, 7, 125–126, 143
Cultural coexistence, 69–71
Culturalism, 6–10, 25
Cultural Revolution, 19
Cultural self-identity, 69–71
Cultural tolerance, 69–71
D
Dai people, 20, 72, 74, 79–80, 83–84, 
135–136
Dalai Lama, 42, 85, 134–135
Daur people, 21, 39, 42, 59, 80, 101
De’ang people, 21, 135
Demographic indicators, 40–42
Derung people, 22, 80
Djangar, 73
Dong Grand Song, 75–76, 93
Dong people, 16, 20, 52, 74–76, 79–80, 83, 
93, 115
Dongxiang people, 20, 141
Du Yuting, 19
E
Economic development, 13, 35, 37, 45, 
62, 65, 96, 105–106, 109–110, 117, 
120, 122
Education
bilingual, 101–102
mainstream, 43
monastic, 43, 135, 140
Th e Epic of King Gesar. See Gesar
Epic of Manas, 73, 93
Epics, 71–74, 86, 93
Ethnic group, 3–10, 13–22, 24–28, 31–36, 
45, 49–52, 54, 56–63, 71–72, 74, 76, 
79–80, 82–87, 96, 102, 106, 108, 115, 
139–142
Ethnic identifi cation, 15, 17, 19
Ethnic minority, 6–7, 13–17, 19, 22–24, 
27–28, 31–46, 49–56, 58–59, 61–63, 65, 
69–102, 105–123, 129–130, 139–141, 
153–155
Ethnic Press of China, 84–85

158 
INDEX
Ethnic regional autonomy, 51–52, 54–55, 
60–63, 65–67, 99, 101
Ethnic trade policy, 115–116
Ewenki people, 21, 39, 42, 107
F
Fairbank, John King, 7–8
Family planning policy, 36–40, 51
Federalism, 51–55
Fei Xiaotong, 23, 69, 71, 96
Festivals, 7, 17, 63, 66, 72, 80–81, 94, 96, 154
Five-Year Plan, 86
Folk songs (music), 75–77, 80, 87, 93–95
G
Gampo, Sontzen, 78
Gaoshan people, 20, 22, 39, 42
Gelao people, 21, 33, 42
Gelek Lobsang, 26
Gelgamesh, 72
General Administration of Press and 
 Publication (GAPP), 84
Genghis Khan Memorial, 54
Gesar, 71–73, 86–87, 93
H
Han Chinese, 5, 8, 15, 23–27, 31–32, 36–38, 
41–42, 44, 52, 54, 60, 80, 84, 91, 98, 109, 
130, 139, 142, 154
Hani people, 18, 20, 42, 80, 83
“Harmony in Diversity”, 71
Hebert, Jacques, 49–51
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 71
Hezhen people, 22, 33, 42, 107–108
Hui people, 5, 19, 33–34, 38, 42, 50, 52–53, 
57–58, 60, 79, 105, 109, 139–141
I
Iliad, 72–73
Independent ethnic minority economies, 
105–123
Intangible cultural heritage, 76–77, 90–93
International Conference of East Asian 
 Studies, 69
International Manas Year, 73
Islam, 129, 139–142
J
Jebtsundamba Khutuktu, 5
Jesus, 146, 153
Jiangbianjiacuo, 85–86
Jiang Menglin, 146
Jing people, 21, 33, 40, 42, 60, 80
Jingpo people, 21, 83, 150
Jino people, 15, 19, 22
John of Montecorvino, 142
K
Kazak people, 20, 42, 58, 80, 84–85, 89, 
108, 141
Kirgiz people, 21, 73–74, 84, 93, 108, 141
Korean ethnic minority, 35, 41–42, 70, 81, 
84–85, 93, 109
Kublai Khan, 132
Kuomintang, 5
L
Lahu people, 20, 83, 108, 150
Languages
spoken, 82, 101
written, 13, 17, 50, 62, 79, 82–84, 
101–102, 154
Lao-Tzu, 136
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 126
Lhoba people, 19, 22, 31, 33, 60
Liang Qichao, 5
Li people, 20, 25, 51, 53, 83, 91, 93
Lisu people, 20, 80, 83, 108, 150, 153–155
Living Buddha, 28, 134–135
Living standards, 37, 106
Li Weihan, 53
Longman Grottoes, 130
Long March, 51
A-long people, 155
Luo Changpei, 82
M
Mahabarata, 72
Manchu people, 4–5, 20, 28, 33, 42, 80, 82, 
84, 88, 109, 111
Manifesto of the First National 
Congress, 5
Maonan people, 21, 33, 42

 
INDEX 
159
Maxrap, 38
Mao Zedong, 22
Miao people, 5, 17, 19, 33, 52, 57–58, 74, 
80–81, 83, 113, 115, 118, 150
Middle Kingdom, 8–9
Mogao Grottoes, 130
Monba people, 22, 60, 134
Mongol ethnic minority, 19, 37, 39, 52, 73, 
84, 134
Mongolia, 5, 16, 19–23, 25, 36, 38–39, 51–52, 
54, 57, 59, 66, 75–77, 79–80, 84–85, 88, 
90, 93, 97, 100, 105–106, 111–112, 115, 
117, 119, 121–122, 134–135, 139
Morrison, Robert, 146
Mulam people, 21, 42, 60, 80
N
Naadam, 66
National Agricultural Development Plan, 51
National Family Planning Commission, 37
Nationalism, 3–10
Nationality, 3–10, 85
National People’s Congress, 22, 50, 53, 55, 
60, 84
National Sports Games for Ethnic 
Minorities, 89–90
National unity, 56–57, 85
Natural population growth rate, 44
Naxi people, 20, 42, 52, 75, 83, 95–96
Nu people, 21, 108, 153–154
O
Odyssey, 72–73
Opium War, 3, 27, 143, 146
Oroqen people, 22, 35–36, 39, 59, 107
Ozbek people, 21, 35, 42, 141
P
Paired-up assistance, 120–123
Panchen Lama, 85, 135
Pan Guangdan, 17
Plato, 126
Population mobility, 44–46
Population policies, 35–40
Poverty relief, 113–115
Protestantism, 130, 144, 146–150, 153, 155
Pumi people, 21
Q
Qiang people, 21, 24, 26, 33, 52, 58, 80, 92–93, 
134, 155
R
Ramayana, 72
Reform and opening up, 6, 19, 44–45, 65, 94, 
105, 117, 146, 150
Religious beliefs, 13, 72, 80, 125–156
Religious freedom, 53, 133, 148, 150–152
Ricci, Matteo, 142
Russian ethnic minority, 21, 35, 42, 51
S
Salar people, 21, 58, 100, 141
Seypidin Azizi, 57
She people, 15, 20, 42, 80
Shi Lianzhu, 15
Socialist market economy, 106, 116
Spring and Autumn Annals, 7
Stalin, Iosif Vissarionovich, 15
State Ethnic Aff airs Commission, 87, 97
Sui people, 20, 25, 80
Sun Yat-Sen, 4–5
T
Tajik people, 21, 76, 108, 141
Taoism, 126, 129–130, 136–139
Tatar people, 21, 42, 141
Th eravada Buddhism. See Buddhism, Pali
Tibet, 19, 22, 26, 28, 33, 35, 40, 42–44, 51, 57, 
60, 63–65, 78–79, 86–87, 97, 110–112, 
115, 118, 120–123, 132–133, 135, 155
Traditional economies, 107
Traditional ethnic medicine, 77
Traditional sports, 89–90
Trudeau, Pierre Elliott, 49, 71
Tujia people, 17–18, 20, 33, 42, 52, 57–58, 
79–80, 118
Tu people, 21, 83, 134
12 Mukam, 76, 85, 87
Two Innocents in Red China, 49, 51
U
UNESCO, 76–77, 91, 130, 134, 138
Uygur people, 19, 26, 28, 33, 38–39, 56–58, 
75–77, 79, 84–85, 87, 93, 110, 141–142

160 
INDEX
V
Va people, 20, 108
Vatican, 142–145
W
War against poverty, 112–115
War of Resistance, 52
Western Development, 106, 117–118, 120, 128
World Heritage List, 131, 134, 138
X
Xibe people, 21, 42
Xie Juezai, 53
Xinjiang, 14, 19–21, 26, 28, 38–39, 51, 56–59, 
77, 85, 87, 93, 99, 105, 110, 112, 114, 
121–122, 140–141
Y
Yao people, 15, 17, 20, 52, 60, 79–80, 113, 115, 
148–149
Yi people, 17, 19–20, 33, 52, 74, 79, 80, 83–84, 
88, 150
Yugur people, 21, 42, 52, 80, 108, 134
Yungang Grottoes, 130
Z
Zhou Enlai, 83–84
Zhuang people, 20, 27, 31–33, 38, 42, 52, 
57, 60–61, 74, 79–80, 83–84, 95, 109, 
113, 117
Zhu De, 53

