
Th e Sinopedia Series
China’s 
Culture
 

Th e Sinopedia Series
Editorial Board
Chief Advisor: Wang Chen
Chief  Conceptualiser: Wang Zhongwei
Executive Producer: Guo Changjian
Publisher: Li Xiangping
Chief Editor: Wu Wei
 

Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
Th e Sinopedia Series
China’s 
Culture
SHI ZHONGWEN
CHEN QIAOSHENG
 

© 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the 
copyright herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored or used 
in any form or by any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, 
including but not limited to photocopying, recording, scanning, 
digitalizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, or 
information storage and retrieval systems, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.
China’s Culture
Shi Zhongwen and 
Chen Qiaosheng
Publishing Director: 
Paul Tan
Editorial Manager: 
Yang Liping
Associate Development Editor: 
Tanmayee Bhatwadekar
Associate Development Editor: 
Joe Ng
Senior Product Director: 
Janet Lim
Product Managers: 
Kevin Joo
Lee Hong Tan   
Assistant Publishing Manager: 
Pauline Lim
Production Executive: 
Cindy Chai
Translator:  
Wang Guozheng
Copy Editor: 
Rosemary Lim
Cover Designer: 
Ong Lay Keng
Compositor: 
Integra Software Services, 
Pvt. Ltd.
Printed in Singapore
1  2  3  4  5  12  11  10  
ISBN-13: 978-981-4319-72-0
ISBN-10: 981-4319-72-4
Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd
5 Shenton Way #01-01
UIC Building
Singapore 068808
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized  learning 
 solutions with oﬃ  ce locations around the globe, including 
 Singapore, the United Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil and Japan. 
Locate your local oﬃ  ce at: www.cengage.com/global
Cengage Learning products are represented in 
Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
For permission to use material from this 
text or product, submit all requests online at 
www.cengageasia.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be emailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
asia.
For product information, visit www.cengageasia.com
 

Table of Contents
Preface vii
Chapter 1. Introverted and Open Cultural Identity 3
Chapter 2.  Chinese Th ought 17
Chapter 3. Virtues Upheld by the Chinese 37
Chapter 4. Political and Religious Concepts 51
Chapter 5. Th e Concepts of Economy and Wealth 77
Chapter 6. Ordinary Life and Customs 93
Chapter 7. Science and Technology 107
Chapter 8. Education 127
Chapter 9. Arts and Literature 145
Index 165
 

Preface
The term “culture” has a broad meaning ranging from the sum of material 
and spiritual civilizations created by human beings to a brush, a computer, a 
television program, or even street graffi  ti. It is thus a challenge to explain such 
a big topic as Chinese culture clearly and thoroughly in a book.
Th erefore, this book can only make some brief summaries, introductions, 
explanations, and comments on Chinese culture, including ideology, ethics, 
morality, political and religious ideas, economics and wealth ideas, customs, 
science and technology, education, literature and arts, and so on. Of course, it 
cannot hope to touch on every aspect of the Chinese culture.
Chinese culture is rich in content and heritage, with a history going back 
several thousand years. If calligraphy, Ci poetry of the Song Dynasty, Kun 
Opera, and Peking Opera are considered highlights of Chinese culture, we can 
conclude that the breadth and depth Chinese culture represents the root of 
the Chinese nation. Diff erent roots will give life to diff erent branches, as well 
as different leaves. Chinese culture and other cultures (for example Western 
 culture) are diff erent; however, we cannot compare these diff erences or suggest 
that one is superior or inferior. Unlike competitive sports where players can be 
ranked by their performances, cultures cannot be ranked at all.
No major cultural systems are perfect. Naturally, they have their own 
merits and shortcomings. All the signifi cant things in human civilization are 
inventions of vitality and universality. Let us look at the four great  inventions 
of ancient China as examples: the compass, gunpowder, printing, and 
 papermaking. Because of useful and vital features, they naturally spread to the 
rest of the world from China. Likewise, a large number of Western scientifi c 
inventions, ideologies, and academies have streamed into China in modern 
times. Beautiful things are like sacred creatures with agile wings; nothing can 
stop them from fl ying freely. At the same time, we human beings should clearly 
understand the deficiencies of various cultural systems and further improve 
the cultures of each nation and all people by learning from the strong points of 
other cultures to off set defi ciencies.
Th e premise of a long civilization is choice, the premise of choice is  creation, 
and the premise of creation is openness. Of the four ancient  civilizations 
in the world, only the Chinese civilization has never  encountered cultural 
 discontinuity, something which makes Chinese people proud of themselves. 
 

But Chinese people will not forget the fact that the long-term continuation of 
Chinese civilization has benefi ted from the three great openness and integration 
processes in history. The first great openness and integration gave birth to 
powerful culture during the Qin and Han dynasties; the second brought 
thriving culture during the Sui and Tang dynasties; and the third caused China 
to advance into a modern society. Another openness and integration process is 
currently under way, and its achievements are obvious.
If we, the Chinese nation, decide to be open to the outside world, we need 
to respect others, understand others, and learn from others. Since today’s 
society is highly open, it is very diffi  cult for us to rely exclusively on traditional 
culture. In fact, the whole of China, and even the whole world, has shared the 
Chinese civilization that resulted from the three great openness and integration 
processes in Chinese history. Just imagine the world around us and we can fi nd 
that Chinese hairstyles, dressing styles, dwellings, as well as household sofas, 
lamps, televisions, cell phones, and computers are all from the West. On the 
other hand, we can also fi nd that some Chinese words like tofu, kungfu, and 
qipao have been introduced to the English language in the Chinese phonetic 
form and that more and more people from the West are learning Chinese. 
Notably, most of the daily articles used by the Westerners are probably “made 
in China.”
Those with genuine respect and love for their own culture will certainly 
respect and love excellent parts of other cultures. Human civilization would be 
doomed to failure or decline if one only knows one’s own culture and ignores 
other cultures. All human beings share one earth, one world, and civilization as 
a whole. We fi nd that Chinese culture with a more modern relevance is taking 
shape.
viii 
PREFACE
 

 


1
3
Of the four ancient civilizations in the world, only the Chinese civilization has 
never encountered cultural discontinuity. This unique history and tradition 
has bred the unique cultural spirit of the Chinese nation. China’s traditional 
culture embodies a strong mark of continental culture, agriculture, and Con-
fucianism. Th ese three aspects are the environmental, economic, and ideolog-
ical foundations of Chinese culture respectively. Th erefore, Chinese culture, 
has an introverted quality as well as a strong sense of togetherness. Sometimes 
the process is spontaneous and active, sometimes it is passive. In a large sense, 
Chinese culture is of both introversion and openness.
Introverted Cultural Characteristics
In comparison with Western cultures, which are open and extroverted by 
nature, the Chinese traditional culture is basically one of introversion.
Th ere are two obvious characteristics of the Chinese mainland: the area is 
huge and the neighboring conditions are severe. A vast sea lies to the east of the 
Chinese mainland; deserts are in the west of central China; sea and mountains 
are in the south; and grasslands are in the north. Relatively speaking, there 
should be greater space for China to develop northward. However, historically, 
the nomads living on the grasslands oft en presented a huge threat to people liv-
ing in the central plain. During the Spring and Autumn Period (770–476 BC), 
the Chinese built the Great Wall north of the central plains; covering thousands 
Introverted and Open 
Cultural Identity
Chapter 1
 

4 
CHINA’S CULTURE
of miles, the Great Wall of China makes Chinese culture an introverted culture 
in a strict sense. China’s naturally agricultural economy and Confucian culture 
have strong features of closed development—a unique “wall” characteristic. 
Th e “wall” can protect stability and sustainable development.
However, the “wall” has not been totally enclosed. Actually, in accordance 
with the Chinese traditional culture, the wall was only used for separating the 
central plains from the outside world. Inside the wall, when people built tra-
ditional Chinese houses, they would often build partially enclosed or open 
verandas and pavilions. Western culture is open to the external but closed to the 
internal. For example, in the West, oft en parents ask for permission before enter-
ing their children’s rooms. If not, it is considered rude. In contrast, in traditional 
Chinese society, parents had the right to enter their children’s room whenever 
they wanted. Contemporary Chinese people have learned a lot from the Western 
culture, and many parents already know how to respect their children’s privacy. 
The Great Wall of China. The Wall has been repaired and reconstructed many times. The 
Great Wall we see today was built in the Ming Dynasty and stretches for thousands of miles.
 

 
Chapter 1 Introverted and Open Cultural Identity 
5
Nevertheless, in China, it is considered rude for children to refuse parents to 
enter their space.
Traditional Chinese culture features compatibility, integrity, reality, ambi-
guity, and so on. All in all, it does not favor extreme behaviors but places 
emphasis on moderation. Th ese characteristics determine that Chinese culture 
has a strong sense of togetherness. Inside the “wall,” the Chinese have been 
mainly living in a secular society because China has never been a religious 
country. In Chinese traditional culture, the emperors had a higher authority 
than the gods. Chinese emperors had the right to rank various religions and 
even gods by assessing their importance. For example, during a period when 
Confucianism prospered, an emperor canonized Confucius (551–479 BC) as 
a saint or a duke. Another Chinese emperor canonized Guan Yu (162–219), a 
popular Chinese historical fi gure, as the Great Defender against Demons. Since 
then, Guan Yu has been widely revered in China.
Although there were some religious confl icts in ancient China, the Chinese 
always advocated religious tolerance. Generally speaking, people of differ-
ent beliefs can live in harmony. Th ey can even help each other and bring out 
the best in each other. Th e Chinese are most proud of the culture of the Tang 
Qiao’s Grand Courtyard in Qi County, Shanxi Province, is a classic private residence
the 
Qing Dynasty in northern China. It is surrounded by a high wall and has internal walkways 
connecting each courtyard.
 from  
 

6 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Statue of Guan Yu in Guandi Temple, Xiezhou Town, Yuncheng, Shanxi.
 

 
Chapter 1 Introverted and Open Cultural Identity 
7
Dynasty (618–907), which was the result of the blending of three diff erent cul-
tures (Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism). In Chinese history, there were 
many confl icts, great and small, between diff erent ethnic groups.
Nevertheless, these confl icts resolved into harmony and integration, which 
was in accordance with mainstream Chinese history.
The Chinese would rather use the “Principles of Heaven,” the “Way of 
Heaven,” and other similar concepts than turn to religion to explain everything 
on Earth. Th e principles and laws of Heaven are omnipresent and everlasting. 
However, one rarely explains to what specifi cally they refer. More oft en than 
not, the principles and laws of Heaven are in line with human ethics. Schol-
ars used those ethics to tell people to forsake evil and to promote virtue and 
develop self-discipline.
Chinese cultural tradition attaches the greatest importance to real life. Th e 
Chinese love life with great passion. As the old sayings go, the desire of food 
and sex is part of human nature or diet and intercourse between males and 
females is the most basic and important requirement. The ancient Chinese 
emphasized on food and reproduction, considering that eating was the first 
desire and having children was also extremely important. Th is refl ects two main 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
Guan Yu was a general during the Three Kingdoms period (220–280). 
He was known for his bravery, combat skills, and sense of obligation 
when he served as a military general of the Kingdom of Shu. His army 
was once attacked by the army of the Kingdom of Wu. In the attack, 
he lost his life because he was too proud and underestimated the 
enemy. After his death, he was widely worshiped by the general pub-
lic, who respected him as “Guan Gong.” Ancient Chinese rulers and 
religious leaders deifi ed Guan Yu by conferring great titles upon him. 
The Emperor Shenzong of the Ming Dynasty, who was a believer of 
Taoism, canonized him as “Great Defender against Demons” and 
“Grand Emperor.” The emperor even adopted him as Wu Sheng 
(God of War), thus bestowing on him the same reputation as the 
Super Great Saint Confucius (Wen Sheng). At present, many Guan 
Di Temples have been reserved for people to show reverence for 
Guan Yu.
DEIFIED GUAN YU
 

8 
CHINA’S CULTURE
ideas of Chinese secular society. One is to cherish life. The other is to attach 
importance to the continuation of life. The Chinese hold a religious feeling 
toward the saying, “Th ere are three ways to be unfi lial, the worst of which is to 
not produce off spring.” For many Chinese, the non-corporeal belongings are of 
no use if they do not have a male heir. In other words, they would have a male 
heir at any cost.
Th e Chinese love life and have the desire to live a better and fulfi lling life. 
They are painstaking and hardworking. At the same time, they lay particu-
lar stress on enjoying good food—one reason why Chinese cuisine is world 
renowned.
“Kylin Sending a Son.” A traditional new year photo reﬂ ecting the ancient Chinese 
conventional ideal of valuing a son and heir.
 

 
Chapter 1 Introverted and Open Cultural Identity 
9
Some people believe that ethnic kinship is the most valuable thing for the 
Chinese. In fact, the Chinese love their native soil. Th e folkways are of utmost 
importance to them. Even when they travel to distant lands, thousands of miles 
from their homeland, they never forget to return home one day. People living 
on the same piece of land call each other their clansman. The four  happiest 
events for ancient Chinese people were rain aft er a long drought; meeting an 
old friend outside of the homeland; the fi rst night for a married couple; and the 
successful passing of an examination. Th e fi rst happy thing (rain aft er a long 
drought) refl ects one of characteristics of China’s natural agricultural economy, 
and the second happy thing refl ects that how much the Chinese attach impor-
tance to feelings for their homeland.
According to cultural tradition, the Chinese not only value their homeland 
and family relations but also attach great importance to other personal relation-
ships. The Chinese are hospitable. As the saying in the Analects of  Confucius 
goes, “Is it not a delight after all to have friends come from afar?” For the 
 Chinese, etiquette, ethical, and moral standards as well as “face” is of great value.
Nevertheless, hierarchy existed in the Chinese society for a very long time. 
Th e Chinese used to focus on the order of social status, a concept that had a 
far-reaching impact, even on today’s China, which has experienced the baptism 
“Manchu and Han” Royal Dynasty Feast is a masterpiece that depicts the traditional Chinese 
diet and f atures both the royal style and local color.
e
 

10 
CHINA’S CULTURE
of modern thoughts. In the late feudal society, however, this concept greatly 
hindered the transformation of China to a modern society.
From the above-mentioned characteristics of Chinese traditional culture, 
we can see that ancient China was not always an open state, and that self-
centeredness was historically popular in China, which resulted in the Chinese 
not forming a correct understanding of themselves and the rest of the world. 
Th is proved more serious during the late-feudal society period. In a macro 
way, there are no superior or inferior histories and cultures in the world. 
Nevertheless, a culture may be superior or inferior to another one in a spe-
cifi c period. It is an indisputable fact that Chinese traditional culture lagged 
behind Western civilization from the 15th century onward. It was therefore 
inevitable that some Western thinkers and scholars made biased comments 
about Chinese history and culture. For instance, Hegel (1770–1831) once 
commented, “In essence, there was no development in Chinese history, 
merely repeated fall of monarchies. It is unlikely to make any progress.” Th is 
was obviously not the case.
Murals from an ancient tomb in Xuanhua County, Heibei Province. Four servants in the mural 
holding a horsewhip, a riding habit, a tea set and so on, await their master’s trip by horse.
,
 

 
Chapter 1 Introverted and Open Cultural Identity 
11
Openness and Cultural Integration
China did not experience any cultural discontinuation. Nevertheless, China 
has experienced cultural vicissitudes. In considering these ups and downs in 
Chinese cultural history, we can draw the conclusion that whenever the rulers 
implemented an open and innovative policy, the Chinese lived viable and pros-
perous lives; however, whenever the rulers carried out a closed and rigid policy, 
it was during a period of decline.
The greatness of Chinese culture lies in its ability to break the inward, 
closed pattern and to accept new civilization with open arms. The develop-
mental history of Chinese civilization is merely a process in which the Chinese 
constantly absorbed and accepted new cultures, transforming old cultures and 
new rounds of ethnic and cultural integration, which were completed in an 
active or passive way. Nevertheless, Chinese culture has maintained its vitality 
for several thousand years by continuously accepting new culture and getting 
rid of the old culture, thus becoming the phoenix of human civilization. More-
over, Chinese culture is implementing a continuous cultural integration so as 
to become a new-born phoenix in the reform fl ames.
In short, there were three major open periods in Chinese history from the 
Western Zhou Dynasty (1046–771 BC) to the present. Accordingly, the three 
most important cultural integrations were completed during these three major 
open periods. Th ose important cultural integrations led to a long-term Chinese 
civilization lasting thousands of years; this civilization constitutes a unique 
development course and style of Chinese culture.
The first cultural integration took place during the Spring and Autumn 
and Warring States Period (770–221 BC). The cultures of various regions in 
north China and south China were largely integrated, ultimately leading to the 
creation of the fi rst feudal empire in China—the Qin Dynasty (221–206 BC)—
and laying a foundation for the appearance of the 400-year Han Dynasty (206 
BC–220 AD). Cultural achievements made by China during this period can 
equal those of the ancient Greek civilization.
Th e second cultural integration took place in the Wei, Jin, Northern and 
Southern Dynasties Period (220–589). Ethnic integration happened during this 
time. Th e Central Plain culture, the minority culture in the northwest of China, 
as well as the Buddhist culture, mutually collided and blended.
Compared with the fi rst time, this integration covered a larger geographic 
scope and a wider range of ethnicities, which eventually rooted the Buddhist 
culture in China. Later, Buddhist culture gained vast growth in China. Notably, 
this integration also led to the creation of the Tang Dynasty, which is world 
famous for its prosperity.
 

12 
CHINA’S CULTURE
The third cultural integration began in the mid-19th century. Since then, 
Western contemporary and modern culture has had an impact on China, resulting 
in a large-scale integration of Chinese and Western culture. Th is cultural integra-
tion made China advance into and get introduced to the wider world. Chinese 
civilization went through an earthshaking change and in the process, China was 
transformed from a traditional society into a modern civilized society. For Chinese 
culture, openness and integration was of an unprecedented signifi cance.
From 1840 (the fi rst Opium War) to 1911 (the Xinhai Revolution), China’s 
absorption and integration of Western culture went through three stages, 
namely, introducing artifacts, introducing institutions, and introducing ideolo-
gies and cultures.
What is the so-called artifact introduction? Artifact introduction implies 
the cultural idea of “using barbarians to control barbarians,” which appeared 
around the time of the first Opium War. Its specific manifestation was the 
Westernization Movement. At that time, people believed that the reason 
Terracotta soldiers and horses of the Qin Dynasty show the powerful military might of the era.
 

 
Chapter 1 Introverted and Open Cultural Identity 
13
China fell behind the West was that Chinese traditional cold weapons could 
not match Western muskets, artillery, warships, and so on. As a result, Li 
Hongzhang (1823–1901), Zhang Zhidong (1837–1909), and Sheng Xuanhuai 
(1844–1916), among others, initiated the Westernization Movement and set up 
factories in China, as well as created the Northern Fleet with new weapons and 
equipment. However, the Sino-Japanese War broke out in 1894, during which 
the Northern Fleet suffered a crushing defeat. Some people with knowledge 
and vision began to call for a change in the old system and the establishment of 
a new system of constitutional monarchy in the hope of making China a rich 
and strong country. However, due to the intervention of powerful conserva-
tives, the Reform Movement of 1898 ended in failure. Aft er that, the Chinese 
continued to explore, but their focus shifted to the introduction of Western 
ideology and culture. When China introduced foreign ideologies and cultures 
during the early 20th century, the awakening idea of national independence 
appeared in China at the same time. Th e Chinese made great eff orts to explore 
a new cultural direction, facing the decline of traditional culture and feudal 
Replica of the monumental battleship “Dingyuan” anchored at Weihai in Shandong Province. 
“Dingyuan” was the primary battleship of the Northern Fleet; it sank in the Huanghai Battle 
during the Sino-Japanese War in 1894.
 

14 
CHINA’S CULTURE
civilization. At the same time, they stood in defi ance, facing the bullying and 
looting of the Western powers. On one hand, the Chinese fought for national 
independence. On the other hand, they continuously learned and accepted 
Western ideologies and cultures while inheriting from their own strong tra-
ditional culture. It was impossible for China to accept a new culture while 
wholly retaining the traditional social structure at that time. At the same time, 
it was not possible for China to completely caste aside its traditional social and 
cultural patterns.  During the course of adjustment and change, China went 
through the 20th century and continued to advance into the 21st century.
Since China carried out the reform and opening-up policy in the late 1970s, 
this cultural integration has become more active and continues to the present 
time. In the future, the world will be fully open in a way in which  various national 
cultures will mutually promote, integrate, and co-exist. Whether the West or the 
East, social and cultural development trends shall follow the following principles: 
Th ose who are arrogant and close communication with the outside world will be 
losers while those who respect multiple cultures and have an open mind will be 
winners; conservatives therefore will be losers, while reformers will be winners.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
In the year 1894 (the 20th year of Emperor Guangxu’s reign), the 
 Japanese aggression against China over the control of North Korea 
broke out. The war was also known as the Jiawu Sino-Japanese War 
because the year 1894 was Jiawu Year according to Chinese  chronology 
(Ganzhi ). During the Yellow Sea Battle in September 1894, the Japa-
nese fl eet defeated the Qing government’s Northern Fleet, after which 
the Qing army was defeated. In April 1895, the Qing government was 
forced to sign the unequal “Treaty of Shimonoseki.” According to the 
terms of the treaty, China was obliged to recognize the independence 
of Korea and cede the Liaodong Peninsula, Taiwan, and the Pescadores 
Islands to Japan; and pay a huge indemnity of taels to Japan. Japan also 
gained many other benefi ts from China. This treaty severely endan-
gered the modern society of China and exerted a huge infl uence on 
the world history. Thereafter, the ambition of carving up China grew, 
which marked a further deepening of the Chinese national crisis.
THE JIAWU SINO-JAPANESE WAR
 

 
Chapter 1 Introverted and Open Cultural Identity 
15
Chinese culture has now become more viable, inclusive, and open. A new 
Chinese culture is taking shape. In addition, it continues to draw sustenance 
from traditional culture. The development, together with convergence, shall 
be a truly viable way of modern civilization. A complete denial of history and 
culture is not feasible. No matter how much some people criticize Confucius, 
Mencius, and Zhuangzi, Confucianism and Taoism are still existing elements 
in Chinese culture. The secret of the eternal youth of Chinese culture lies in 
two of its characteristics: absorbing the sustenance of traditional culture, and 
drawing on the achievements of all the alien civilizations. Open, tolerant, and 
vibrant Chinese culture with a rich heritage will certainly help the Chinese 
stand out among the people of the world and enable them to contribute to 
world civilization.
 

 

2
17
2
The Chinese are good thinkers. There exist rich, systematic, and complete 
materials related to the Chinese ideological history, featuring Oriental cultural 
quality and style. Chinese ideology has a long history. Almost all modern social 
sciences can fi nd their initial seeds in the Spring and Autumn Period. Th e fore-
sight of some great people from that era continues to inspire and benefi t people 
even today.
The Chinese Traditional Way of Thinking
Ancient China has given the world ideological masterpieces in almost every 
subject. Th ese masterpieces are represented by the writings of Mencius, Laozi, 
and Mozi, Th e Book of Changes, Zuo’s Commentary on the Spring and Autumn 
Annals, Th e Analects of Confucius, and Th e Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal 
Medicine. Each can be rated as a landmark of world thought and culture, along 
with aphorisms and fragments of ancient Chinese prose that appeal to diverse 
cultural tastes and philosophical outlook.
By studying these works, we fi nd that the traditional Chinese way of think-
ing is integrated, tacit, intuitive, and inclusive. Based on current understanding, 
the so-called integrity has a double meaning. Although there was a wide range 
of Chinese thoughts, there was lack of subdivision of the thought system. Th e 
latter is one of the important features that diff erentiate the traditional Chinese 
way of thinking from the Western way of thinking. In the West, there was a 
Chinese Thought
Chapter 2
 

18 
CHINA’S CULTURE
specifi c concept of subject division in ancient Greece. Subjects such as political 
science, philosophy, physics, zoology, logic, and so on, took shape at that time. 
Th e ancient Chinese did not like dividing subjects, yet they preferred to divide 
thinkers into diff erent schools, for instance, the hundred schools of thought in 
the Spring and Autumn Period.
Books written by Pre-Qin scholars contain a wide variety of knowledge 
on diff erent subjects. Almost all the scholars are like a living encyclopedia, but 
none of them has an obvious sense of subject division. Out of these scholars, 
Xunzi, a thinker of the Warring States Period, famous for his rigorous style of study.
 

 
Chapter 2 Chinese Thought 
19
Xunzi (313–238 bc) was most famous for his rigorous style of study. From his 
writings, we fi nd that he touched on knowledge in political science, ethics, phi-
losophy, aesthetics, and logic, but without specifi c subject division. In contrast, 
Aristotle (384–322 bc) divided his writings into specifi c subjects.
This does not affect Chinese theoretical expression and logical thinking. 
Ancient Chinese classics did not appear to have a specifi c topic on the surface, 
but they did in fact have substance. They appeared all-encompassing, but in 
fact had specific topics and discerning ideas with deeper meaning; this is a 
characteristic of the traditional Chinese way of thinking. However, this is very 
diff erent from the Western way of writing.
When a typical Western way of thinking met with a typical Orien-
tal way of thinking, comprehension proved difficult for the counterparts 
from each culture. Hegel looked down on Confucius, and he often used 
ironic words to comment on Confucianism. With the gradual increase in 
the exchange of ideas between the East and the West, modern Western-
ers today have a more objective impression of Confucius than did Hegel. 
The so-called tacitness means the comparative simplicity and subtlety in 
the Chinese traditional way of thinking and expression. There are three 
reasons behind this. The first two relate to culture and habit, with Chinese 
language and Chinese characters—tools for expressing the thoughts of the 
Chinese—being the third reason.
Th e Chinese are most infl uenced by Confucianism, which places a special 
emphasis on respect for sages and teachers. Confucius himself once advocated, 
“Only elaborate the theories of one’s predecessors and do not have original 
ideas of one’s own.” He was unwilling to build his own ideology, preferring to 
use the classics of his predecessors to express his feelings. Aft er Emperor Wu 
of the Han Dynasty (156–87 bc) implemented the policy of “paying supreme 
tribute to Confucianism while banning all other schools of thought,” the Con-
fucian scholars despite having the ability to think independently, had no choice 
but to express their ideas based on the ideology of the the ancient sages.
The tacitness in Chinese traditional thinking, in consequence, leads to 
the fact that the ancient Chinese were not good at writing long articles and 
books with a rigorous system. Instead, they were better at writing prose and 
fragmented commentaries. After Buddhism was introduced into China, Zen 
(Chinese-style Buddhism) came into existence. Th e special feature of the Zen 
quotations is their tacitness. One cannot appreciate their true meaning if they 
are taken literally. There lived a monk in the late Tang Dynasty. One day, he 
visited Monk Zhaozhou, saying, “I rush to come here for the purpose of getting 
your instructions.” Monk Zhaozhou asked him, “Have you had porridge?” Th e 
monk replied, “Yes.” Monk Zhaozhou then said, “Go and wash your dish.” What 
idea is refl ected in the above dialogue? It is hard to explain clearly;  however, 
 

20 
CHINA’S CULTURE
“Bodhidharma” painted by Wu Bin during the Ming Dynasty. According to legend, 
Bodhidharma, the reputed founder of the Ch’an School, brought the Zen School to China.
 

 
Chapter 2 Chinese Thought 
21
the meal of consideration here is a traditional meal of rice; while eating this 
meal, it was customary for monks to maintain samadhi (complete meditation). 
Zhaozhou is thus not asking about the meal but whether the monk was able 
to remain in samadhi throughout the meal. Th e monk affi  rms realizing he has 
already received the teaching. Th is is one interpretation of the above story.
It is not possible to determine the true meaning of the Zen master simply 
by insisting on getting to the bottom of the matter. All traditional Chinese 
thinkers can take the hint of such a dialogue.
The so-called intuitiveness has the following implications. The Chinese, 
in particular those who have not been infl uenced by modern Western ideolo-
gies, are generally not good at abstract logical thinking. Instead, they prefer to 
express their own thoughts by connecting everyday life in metaphor, analogy, 
and assumption. In other words, the Chinese are used to transforming abstract 
thinking into imagery.
Laozi (the fi rst philosopher of the Taoist school who lived about the same 
time as Confucius) and Zhuangzi (about 369–286 bc) are best at abstract spec-
ulation among Chinese thinkers. When he talked about how to govern a coun-
try, Laozi believed that “governing a big country is like cooking a small fi sh.” 
Laozi also described the relationship between the strong and the soft as that 
between the teeth and the tongue. More often than not, Zhuangzi expressed 
his thoughts by telling fables. Because fables had vivid images, they would 
 usually leave readers with a deep impression. Without metaphors, Laozi would 
have found it hard to express his thoughts. Likewise, Zhuangzi could not have 
expressed his thoughts without telling fables. It is difficult for the  common 
 people to remember abstract theoretical texts. Nevertheless, the  intuitive 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
As one of the Chinese Buddhist sects, Zen became the mainstream 
of Han Buddhism in the middle- and late-Tang Dynasty. With its 
unique style, Zen basically advocates the direct grasping of the truth 
in daily life instead of in writings. Zen outstripped other Chinese Bud-
dhist sects in its proliferation and impact. It has produced a major 
impact on Chinese culture. Later, Zen was introduced into Japan and 
other countries. After World War II, the impact of Zen Buddhism 
spread to Europe, the United States, and other places.
ZEN
 

22 
CHINA’S CULTURE
 thinking of the Chinese philosophers makes the spread and popularization of 
their ideas easier. It is hard for us to imagine what the quotations of Laozi and 
Zhuangzi would look like if Western philosophers like Immanuel Kant (1724–
1804) and Hegel, who are experts in abstract speculation, made them.
Nevertheless, intuitive thinking has its own obvious shortcomings. After 
all, expression in this form makes it hard for the Chinese to develop  modern 
rigorous logic in some subjects. Because of the long-term popularity of 
 intuitive thinking, speculative philosophy cannot be fully developed in China.
A French version of the Tao De Ching by Laozi.
 

 
Chapter 2 Chinese Thought 
23
Th e so-called inclusiveness refers to the overall tolerant attitude of Chinese 
ideological and cultural traditions toward diff erent theories, including  diff erent 
religious thoughts. Th is does not mean that there was no authoritarianism in 
ancient China. There is a big difference between the authoritarianism in the 
era of Chinese Confucianism and the religious despotism of the West in the 
Middle Ages.
Th e events “burning books and burying Confucian scholars alive,” which 
were carried out by Emperor Qin Shi Huang (259–210 bc), are extreme 
 examples of autocracy in ancient Chinese history. Besides this, other autocratic 
acts include the policy of “paying supreme tribute to Confucianism while 
Ancient Chinese thinkers, represented here by Laozi, laid special emphasis on the concept 
of Tao.
 

24 
CHINA’S CULTURE
banning all other schools of thought” implemented by Emperor Wu of Han 
Dynasty and the policies of cultural tyranny and literary inquisition during the 
Ming and Qing Dynasties. Nevertheless, such autocractic interference did not 
take place very oft en. Generally speaking, Chinese people hold a tolerant atti-
tude toward a variety of theories and they are more willing to integrate nascent, 
 foreign ideas into their own ideologies in a subtle way.
It was the emperors rather than the religions that were authoritative. 
Nevertheless, emperors were not immortal. Did the ancient Chinese believe 
that someone (or something) with more authority than the emperors existed? 
According to the Chinese tradition, only the “Principles of the Heaven,” and 
“Ways of the Heaven” had higher authority than the imperial power. Diff erent 
schools of scholars had diff erent interpretations of the Ways of the Heaven. Th e 
Chinese believed that such principles existed and that no school, religion, or 
power can go against or beyond them. Everyone must comply with such prin-
ciples—sometimes they are dynamic concepts.
Because of such an ideology, ancient China repeatedly stressed the 
 authority of Confucianism, but it also allowed the existence of other doctrines 
and religions as long as they could prove that they were in keeping with the 
Ways of the Heaven. In a way, such an ideological tone is also one of the strong 
points of traditional Chinese thinking and culture. Th is is why no wars broke 
out due to confl ict between diff erent thoughts in Chinese history. In contrast, 
many wars broke out in Europe in the Middle Ages due to religious despotism: 
One religion did not allow the existence of other religions.
From a historical point of view, regardless of whether the impact was 
large or small, the Chinese schools of thought jointly made a monumental 
contribution to the history of Chinese ideology and culture. If any school was 
missing, it would be a great loss for Chinese culture. For any era where theory 
factions and schools of thought prospered, there would be contention, which 
led to resonance and further development. In this sense, theory factions and 
schools of thought should be considered a great asset to the Chinese. If there 
was only one voice in an era (such as an era where only Confucianism was 
advocated), the pace of social progress would have slowed down or even 
reversed.
Three Major Open Periods of Chinese Thought
Chinese culture was not always tolerant and open. Th ere were three major open 
periods from the Western Zhou Dynasty to the present. These three  periods 
made a great historical contribution to Chinese ideological history.
 

 
Chapter 2 Chinese Thought 
25
The first major open period was the Spring and Autumn Period and 
 Warring States Period when a hundred schools of thoughts prospered 
 simultaneously. Th e contributions made by China at that time were as great as 
those made by ancient Greece to world ideology. Just like the Yellow River and 
the Yangtze River, the ideology and culture of the Spring and Autumn Period 
and Warring States Period runs deep within Chinese history.
There are several outstanding features of the ideology and culture of the 
Spring and Autumn Period and Warring States Period:
First is the freedom of creativity. At that time, there were various schools, 
each of which had a unique style of creativity. Chinese philosophers of that 
period enjoyed freedom in expressing ideas and acting them out. They got 
together to give lectures. They travelled and disseminated ideas. They wrote 
books with great passion. Some of them emphasized self-cultivation. Th ey were 
concerned with reality, but they also yearned for history. Some were profession-
als in a speci fi c fi eld. Others were learned men. Th e era was looking forward to 
sages and sages did emerge during the era. Th e Pre-Qin ideology and culture is 
a spiritual legacy for later generations of Chinese people, which is  inexhaustible 
and bottomless. It is important to develop the Chinese  ideology and culture on 
the basis of this spiritual heritage and create a new Chinese ideology and cul-
ture for today’s Chinese people.
Th e second feature was the freedom of contention. Since there were vari-
ous schools, there were also arguments. All the arguments were made in an 
atmosphere of equality. Albeit different thinkers had different ideas (some 
ideas were intolerant of others), no school could manage to or attempt to rely 
on government powers to exclude or destroy others. None of the schools was 
dominant. At that time, a number of princes and nobles accepted many elites 
from several schools as their personal think-tank.
The third feature was the freedom of movement. During this period, 
rulers of diff erent states fought with each other, while scholars put forward 
their ideas from one state to another. If the State of Qi did not accept their 
ideas, they would go to the State of Chu. If Chu did not accept their ideas, 
they would go to the State of Qin. Wherever they went, all scholars, including 
Confucius, Mozi (about 468–376 bc), Mencius (372–289 bc), and Han Feizi 
(about 280–233 bc), would  promote and sell their ideas with great passion. 
Freedom of movement facilitates the spread of ideology and culture. Under 
suitable conditions, such ideas would prosper making the academic air active, 
further  promoting the development of various schools. When Confucius was 
alive, he did not succeed in career development. However, after he passed 
away, he left  his thoughts for later generations. If there was no such ideologi-
cal and cultural atmosphere at that time, China’s  history would have been 
totally diff erent.
 

26 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Fourth, the freedom of development. Development within the same 
school was also free. Confucius created Confucianism and after he passed 
away,  Confucianism was divided into several sects, among which Mencius and 
Xunzi had the greatest impact on later generations. Nevertheless, there were 
 signifi cant diff erences in their ideological systems: Mencius believed in good 
human nature while Xunzi believed in bad human nature. Han Fei and Li Si 
(280–208 bc), who were Xunzi’s students, developed the Legalist Th ought. In 
particular, Han Fei was famous as a synthesizer of Legalist Th ought.
“Way” is an important part of ancient Chinese philosophy. Laozi was the 
fi rst one to defi ne “Way” as the origin of the universe and the universal law, and 
to sum up the movement law of “Way” meaning “No extreme will hold long.” 
He reveals a series of conflicting concepts, such as having and not  having, 
noble and mean, beauty and ugliness, misfortune and happiness, stiff  and soft , 
strong and weak, clever and clumsy, life and death, and so on. He believed that 
none of these contradictions can exist in isolation and all of them need to exist 
interdependently.
Zhuangzi also regards “Way” as the world’s highest principle.  Nevertheless, 
he left the movement and made an absolute change in terms of people and 
environment. He believed there are no differences between things and 
that there are no fixed standards of right or wrong. Accordingly, Zhuangzi 
a dvocated an ideology similar to relativism and agnosticism, which is in sharp 
contrast with the thoughts of Laozi.
“The Sage’s Traces” (detail) from the Ming Dynasty portrays a scene of Confucius’ travels.
 

 
Chapter 2 Chinese Thought 
27
Immediately after Emperor Qin Shi Huang unified China, academic 
freedom came to an end. In Emperor Wu’s region during the Western 
Han Dynasty (206 bc–25 ad), Confucianism became the official ideologi-
cal theory. This narrowed down the path of the development of Chinese 
thought.
“Laozi Riding an Ox” (detail) by Zhang Lu  
Ming Dynasty.
from the
 

28 
CHINA’S CULTURE
The second major open period of Chinese ideology began in the Wei 
(220–266) and Jin (265–420) Periods. Th e rise of metaphysics and Taoism are 
considered important aspects of this period.
Metaphysics is different from Confucianism. Taoism refers to the Tao 
School in the Pre-Qin Period. Aft er Buddhism spread throught China, its infl u-
ence began to increase. All three religions were a blow to the dominant status 
of Confucianism. In the Th ree Kingdoms—Wei-era masters of  Confucianism 
exited from the center of the social stage, and cutting-edge, open-minded 
scholars, represented by Wang Bi (226–249), replaced them. With their sharp 
writings, they became a group of new stars in the Chinese ideological and 
 academic history. Nevertheless, Taoist and Buddhist cultures soon overwhelmed 
their brightness. During the Wei, Jin, and Northern and Southern Dynasties, 
different sects of China’s ideology and culture were realigned. The Pre-Qin 
Period outstripped other periods by the appearance of outstanding thinkers and 
endless new cultural patterns, which ultimately led to an unprecedented boom 
in Chinese cultural history during the Sui (581–618) and Tang Periods.
However, the characteristics of Chinese history determined that 
 Confucianism must be in a dominant position. Led by Han Yu (768–824) and 
 others, a classical Chinese literature and art movement of Chinese ideology and 
culture emerged in the mid-Tang Period. After that, the Confucian position 
gradually rose. In the Song Dynasty (960–1279), Neo-Confucianism began to 
appear. By the late Qing Dynasty, Neo-Confucianism became the most impor-
tant ideological and cultural pattern in China.
The third major ideological openness started from the late-Ming (1368–
1644) and early-Qing Dynasty (1644–1911) Periods, when several thinkers 
carried out activities, saw several rises and falls, experienced many important 
events, such as the late Qing Westernization Movement, the Hundred Days 
Reform, Xinhai Revolution, and so on, and ended with the May Fourth Move-
ment in the early 1900s. Th e great openness, as well as the great development of 
Chinese ideology and culture, reached its climax during this period.
Th e fi rst great openness period of Chinese ideology featured disputes and 
the blending of cultures of south China and north China. The second great 
openness period was one of mutual collision and blending of the Central Plains 
culture, the minority culture in northwest China, and Buddhism. In the third 
great openness period, Eastern and Western ideologies and cultures impacted 
and blended with each other on a large scale.
Th e third great openness period also led to the appearance of brand new 
doctrines, ideas, and development ideas in China, which had hitherto been 
shut off from the world. Theories of evolution, democracy, and science, as 
well as other kinds of Western academic ideas, began to enter China. Dur-
ing this period, Western missionaries and other people came to China to 
 

 
Chapter 2 Chinese Thought 
29
spread  Western culture, while China assigned a large number of students to 
study abroad. Many scholars in China continued to think deeply and explore 
widely, which, together with the bloody lessons the Chinese learned from for-
eign  invasions, brought unprecedented major changes to Chinese thought and 
culture. Th e three ideological and cultural open periods resulted in historical 
achievements, demonstrating that only by accepting all the new contemporary 
ideological achievements can historical development be successful and glorious.
Th e trend of openness continues to the present day with China opening up 
and integrating new ideologies.
The “Wang Bi Version” of Tao De Ching by Laozi.
 

30 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Dominant Confucian Thought
Although there were several major periods of ideological openness, Confucian 
thought had remained in the dominant and ruling position for a long time. 
Why was only Confucian thought dominant among all the schools of thoughts 
in Chinese ancient times? To fi nd the answer to this question, we need to con-
sider the demand characteristics of traditional Chinese society.
Ancient Chinese feudal empires had a large population and a vast terri-
tory. Agriculture was their economic basis, and the emperors used feudal hier-
archy to reinforce their power. An agricultural subsistence economy requires 
the maintenance of economic activity, stability, and order, which is consistent 
with the concept of Confucian thought (placing emphasis on ethics). Given a 
large population, a vast territory, and diff erent cultural types and development 
needs in diff erent places, a common value was required to maintain the bal-
ance in Chinese feudal empires. Coincidently, the moderation of Confucian 
doctrine met all the above requirements. Centralized empires required a pow-
erful hierarchy, and ritual thoughts advocated by Confucianism, whose core 
content was the Three Cardinal Guides and the Five Constant Virtues, met 
this need. As a result, Confucianism stood out among hundreds of schools of 
thought and achieved its dominant status. In a sense, Confucianism is like a 
wide-angle lens of Chinese traditional culture and history. Its advantages are 
in line with the advantages of traditional Chinese society, while its shortcom-
ings and defi ciencies are also in line with those of Chinese traditional ideology 
and culture.
In the past, China adopted national ideology and culture with Confucian-
ism at the core, which ensured the unity of the nation and integration and 
coexistence of diff erent ethnic groups. However, since the early 20th century, 
the Chinese have realized the shortcomings of Confucianism. Because it is 
moralist, it cannot help but exclude science and economics. Because mod-
eration is its main idea, it cannot help but depress personality and creation. 
Because it advocates centralized government and the maintenance of hier-
archy, it cannot help but reject equality and democracy. Th ese shortcomings 
aff ected and delayed the pace of China’s advancement into a modern industri-
alized society.
Chinese Confucianism, together with Confucian ideology and culture, has 
a 2,000-year-old tradition, although it was not set in stone. Instead, it experi-
enced several major changes and countless minor ones.
To later generations of Chinese, Pre-Qin Confucianism mainly refers to 
the doctrine of Confucius and Mencius, which in fact was not well received at 
that time. Although Confucius was a great and learned man, educationalist, 
 

 
Chapter 2 Chinese Thought 
31
and thinker, he spent half of his life promoting his thoughts because no princes 
would accept him. Mencius failed to find a place to practice his ideological 
doctrine despite his remarkable eloquence. It was Dong Zhongshu (about 179–
104 bc), a scholar living in the Western Han Dynasty, who changed the fate of 
Confucianism.
Dong Zhongshu’s thoughts diff ered somewhat from the thoughts of Con-
fucius and Mencius. He introduced a new set of doctrines in his masterpiece 
(Chun Qiu Fan Lu) by combining the thought of yin-yang and five elements 
with Confucian doctrine. In his view, the Th ree Cardinal Guides and the Five 
Constant Virtues constitute the Principles of Heaven. Furthermore, this doc-
trine was to be obeyed forever. It provided a basis for the supremacy of the 
Stone memorial archway in honor of Xu Guo, an ofﬁ cial of the Ming Dynasty, Shexian County, 
Anhui. The emperors of ancient China safeguarded Confucian culture by recognizing sages 
and men of virtue, loyal ofﬁ cials, and dutiful sons.
 

32 
CHINA’S CULTURE
emperor; the Chinese emperors were naturally in its favor, which then became 
the mainstream of Chinese thought and culture.
During the Wei, Jin, and Northern and Southern Dynasties, when 
 Confucianism faced another downturn, Buddhism and Taoism had the oppor-
tunity to fully develop. Although Confucianism, Buddhism, and Taoism all 
shared the prosperity of the Tang Dynasty, Confucianism eventually came 
to prevail. After all, the Tang Empire was still a Chinese feudal empire with 
Chinese traditions. During the Song Dynasty, Confucianism climaxed, with 
A bronze statue of Wang Yangming at his home in Yuyao, Zhejiang.
 

 
Chapter 2 Chinese Thought 
33
Cheng-Zhu Lixue (School of Principle or School of Neo-Confucianism) as the 
core and Lu-Wang Xinxue (School of Mind) as a supplement. By then, Confu-
cianism had also evolved into Song-Ming Lixue.
In terms of the preciseness of doctrine, Cheng-Zhu Lixue and Lu-Wang 
Xinxue outperformed their predecessors greatly. However, when compared 
with traditional Confucianism, they advocated “Way,” “Principle,” “Mind,” and 
other fundamental concepts containing Buddhist and Taoist components. Th ey 
could not match the innovation of the Pre-Qin philosophers, but Lixue, in the 
Song and Ming Dynasties (Song-Ming Lixue), developed into Confucianism 
with a more practical and rigorous system. Th e main theme of this Confucian-
ist system is the concept of ritual thoughts, which played an important role in 
making China’s feudal era prosperous and had a signifi cant impact on neigh-
boring countries, such as Japan and Korea. However, Neo-Confucianism was 
also a powerful force that hindered China’s development and held it back from 
transforming into a modern society.
In the Ming and Qing Dynasties, Confucianism embraced another wave of 
 transformation and produced several representative thinkers, such as Gu Yanwu 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
Ancient Chinese believed that all things are composed of yin and 
yang eternally moving and converting into each other, which is the 
basic law of the whole universe. The simple dialectical thought of the 
coexistence of yin and yang is one of the bases of traditional Chinese 
philosophical thought.
The fi ve elements are wood, fi re, soil, gold, and water. Ancient 
Chinese thought that all things in the world were generated from the 
movement and variation of the fi ve basic substances. At the same 
time, they also interpreted the interrelationships among all things 
based on the same fi ve elements.
The fi ve elements theory is a far-reaching notion in Chinese 
 traditional culture. People combine yin and yang, fi ve elements, eight 
diagrams, and other elements together to generate a theoretical 
 system with powerful vitality, so as to explain various natural and 
social phenomena. For example, the theory of traditional Chinese 
medicine is based on the fi ve elements theory.
FIVE ELEMENTS THEORY
 

34 
CHINA’S CULTURE
(1613–1682), Wang Fuzhi (1619–1692), and Huang Zongxi (1610–1695), as 
well as the more rebellious thinker, Li Zhi (1527–1602). Traditional Confucian-
ism was monarchical-power-oriented, and the most important thrust of the 
Three Cardinal Guides and the Five Constant Virtues. When Huang Zongxi 
commented on the rise and fall of feudal empires, he praised ancient kings for 
practicing justice but criticized the later emperors for their hypocrisy because 
they oft en used power to serve their own interests. He also advocated the rule 
of law, which challenged Confucian traditions, especially those dating to the 
Han Dynasty. Th inkers of the Ming and Qing Dynasties actually gave new life 
to traditional Confucianism with their thoughts. Nevertheless, it was a pity that 
the ideas of Chinese thinkers lagged behind those of Western thinkers who lived 
in the same era, a such as Francis Bacon (1561–1626), Descartes (1596–1650), 
Hobbes (1588–1679), and Locke (1632–1704), to name a few. However, Gu, 
Wang, Huang, and others initiated the change in Confucianism, which continued 
to aff ect the trend of Chinese ideology and culture until the late Qing Dynasty.
After several major changes, especially after the huge impact of Western 
ideology and culture dating back to the late Qing Dynasty, Confucianism 
could no longer occupy the central position of Chinese thought and culture. 
 Nevertheless, as one of the world’s ideological doctrines with a long history, 
Confucianism will exist for a long time to come. We should cherish and protect 
the essence and valuable part of Confucianism—it would be naive to imagine 
that it can ever be uprooted.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
Cheng-Zhu Lixue, aslo known as School of Principle is a major sect of 
Lixue which emerged during the Song and Ming Dynasties. Founded 
by the brothers Cheng Hao (1032–1085) and Cheng Yi (1033–
1107), the two thinkers of the Northern Song Dynasty (960–1127), 
Cheng-Zhu Lixue was completed by Zhu Xi (1130–1200) during 
the Southern Song Dynasty (1127–1279), who became the most 
important representative of this school. It has had the greatest impact 
on the future generations of all Confucian schools. Cheng-Zhu Lixue 
offi cially became the country’s ruling ideology in the Ming and Qing 
dynasties, exerting a signifi cant infl uence on China’s political, social, 
ideological, and cultural aspects.
CHENG-ZHU LIXUE & LU-WANG XINXUE
 

 
Chapter 2 Chinese Thought 
35
Th e more than hundred years of historical practice since the 20th century 
also demonstrates that aspects of the Chinese traditional ideology and culture 
can be looked upon for reference. It is not a coincidence that another new wave 
of Confucianism occurred from the 1920s to the present day. Th e interpreta-
tions of the thoughts of Laozi, Zhuangzi and other thinkers by contemporary 
researchers gave these interpretations new appeal.
In the future, traditional Chinese ideology and culture will play an 
 increasingly important role in driving the development of modern Chinese 
culture as well as world culture. It will also have a great effect on modern 
 Chinese culture and even world culture. Th e modern Chinese need to address 
an important task: How to eff ectively integrate the wisdom and essence of tra-
ditional  Chinese ideology and culture with a modern Chinese cultural system.
Confucius Temple in Japan, built in 1893.
 

 

3
37
3
Encouraged by Confucianism, the feudal ethical code satisfied the needs of 
a feudal hierarchy and national agricultural economy; thus, it had been the 
dominant moral standard for a very long period of time and became the most 
infl uential national ideology and culture in China. It infl uenced every aspect of 
the traditional society and culture.
Th e ideology and culture of Confucianism is centered on morality focused 
on ethics, with the core of its main principles dealing with social order. Th e so-
called Th ree Cardinal Guides are: 1) the ruler guides the subjects; 2) the father 
guides the son; and 3) the husband guides the wife. Th ese guides established 
the absolute authority among the three parties. Th e Five Constant Virtues are 
benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and faith—the fi ve moral stan-
dards summarized and advocated by Confucianism.
These main principles of social order, especially the Three Cardinal Guides, 
seem incompatible with our current perspective on humanism and democracy. 
However, in traditional Chinese society, these were indeed the highest virtues 
upheld by people. Th ese moral conditions supported the spiritual world of the Chi-
nese for over 2,000 years. Th ey have been integral in nurturing the moral integrity 
of the Chinese people. Even to this day, some of these principles hold value.
The Five Constant Virtues: The Virtues Upheld 
by the Chinese
What are the fi ve constant virtues?
Virtues Upheld by 
the Chinese
Chapter 3
 

38 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Benevolence
According to Confucianism, benevolence is the summation of all virtues; 
that is, all other moral standards can be regarded as diff erent conditions for 
benevolence.
The core of benevolence is to love others. This is how Confucius inter-
preted the meaning of benevolent people: Th ey shall sympathize, care, respect, 
help, and think about others. Mencius inherited and developed this thought. 
He proposed loving one’s family to loving all people, loving all people to lov-
ing everything in the world. According to Confucius and Mencius, from the 
moment a person is born, he is placed in the bloodlines and the love of family. 
One enjoys a parent’s tender love and gradually develops the love and respect 
for the family. Th is is the natural psychological basis for benevolence. Extend-
ing this family love, one develops love for others and treats everyone with a lov-
ing heart. Th us, one establishes a loving and harmonious interrelationship with 
Murals portraying virtuous and dutiful people, Qinglong Temple, Jishan County, Shanxi. 
Confucianism advocates loyalty, ﬁ lial piety, chastity, and righteousness.
 

 
Chapter 3 Virtues Upheld by the Chinese 
39
one another and fi nally extends it to everything in the world. Th e  benevolence 
of Confucianism comes from family love and extends beyond it.
Confucian scholars have developed other meanings for benevolence, such 
as poet Han Yu from the Tang Dynasty mentioned in Yuan Dao: “Benevolence 
is to love all.” He advocates embracing all and common love. Zhang Zai (1020–
1077), a Neo-Confucian scholar from the Northern Song Dynasty, proposed 
in Xi Ming that we should treat everyone as our brothers or sisters and every 
object as our friend, which further deepens the connotation of benevolence. 
Following Zhang Zai, Zhu Xi, Kang Youwei (1858–1072), and other ideologists 
developed their own understanding of benevolence. Benevolence has become a 
crucial part of Chinese traditional virtues.
Ancient Chinese ideologists not only regarded benevolence as the basic 
principle of life but also hoped to integrate the spirit of benevolence into 
political operation. During the Pre-Qin Dynasty, Mencius strongly advocated 
a  “policy of benevolence.” In Li Ji (Book of Rights) and Li Yun (Evolution of 
Rights), he designed a society of “great harmony” fi lled with the spirit of benev-
olence, describing a loving, peaceful, and harmonious relationship among 
people. The society of “great harmony” became the ideal society that count-
less Chinese people pursued and yearned for throughout time. In On Yueyang 
Tower, Fan Zhongyan (989–1052), in the early Song Dynasty, wrote, “Plan and 
worry ahead of the people, and enjoy the fruits after the people.” This is the 
 sublimation of traditional Confucian benevolence.
Righteousness
Righteousness is morality and justice, that is, the correct and reasonable valued 
standard to judge the right and wrong in people’s behavior. To the ancient Chi-
nese, righteousness represented the common and basic interest of all people; 
hence it represents the social morality of modern people. The relationship 
between righteousness and interest is that between moral behavior and per-
sonal interest, the interest of a certain group, and even the interest of a nation. 
It is an important issue that has been long debated by the Chinese. To this day, 
it is a hot topic for discussion.
Confucius did not deny people’s pursuit of personal interest, but hoped to 
take righteousness as the standard to weigh a person’s behavior. Mencius devel-
oped this idea, focusing more on the direct signifi cance of righteousness. He 
believed that if a certain action did not abide by righteousness, then even if one 
was rewarded with the entire world’s treasure, one should not consider doing it. 
He also advocated that under extreme circumstances, one could not have both 
life and righteousness. As a result, one should lay down his life for righteous-
ness. Th is value is an important part of the Chinese national moral fi ber that 
 

40 
CHINA’S CULTURE
has inspired generation aft er generation of people with high ideals to strive for 
justice and righteousness, even sacrifi cing their lives in the process. Th is value 
is diff erent from that of humanism advocated today, but it is diffi  cult to say that 
the two are completely opposite.
Mencian thought has shown the tendency of valuing justice over material 
gain. During the Western Han Dynasty, Dong Zhongshu pushed this value to 
an extreme. Th e Neo-Confucian scholars inherited this concept,  emphasizing 
the “debate between justice and material gains.” Th ey believed that everything 
should comply with the standard of righteousness. This concept bore the 
 signifi cance of emphasizing personal dignity and realizing personal value, but 
at the same time, the rejection and negation in pursuit of the personal  interest 
of Neo-Confucian scholars formed the dominant attitude of “justice over 
 interest” in traditional Chinese moral ethics.
Propriety
Being an important category of Confucian moral ethics, propriety means the 
detailed code of conduct for people. Confucian scholars regard benevolence 
as the basic ethical requirement in relationships while requiring people to 
follow certain principles while conducting themselves in society, instead of 
In traditional Chinese opera, Guan Yu is often regarded as the embodiment of righteousness.
 

 
Chapter 3 Virtues Upheld by the Chinese 
41
loving everyone without any distinction. Th is principle is known as propriety. 
Th us, for diff erent relationships, people’s behavior shall follow diff erent ethical 
requirements. It is safe to say that propriety is a combination of benevolence 
and  righteousness.
Confucian scholars attached great importance to propriety. Th ey estab-
lished a huge and complete propriety system involving every aspect of daily 
life—the ethical codes system. Confucianism describes fi ve major social ethi-
cal relationships (Five Cardinal Relationships) between rulers and subjects; 
father and son; husband and wife; and brothers and friends. For every specifi c 
relationship, there is a detailed ethical code. Th ese codes have entered into 
every aspect of people’s life, aff ecting all daily behavior. It is safe to say that 
in traditional Chinese society, propriety is a series of tangible ethical moral 
standards.
Confucianism regards propriety as the basis for people to build their lives. 
It requires people to consciously learn and follow the ethical codes. It plays an 
important role in improving personal moral integrity, maintaining a harmoni-
ous relationship, and keeping a stable social order. The Chinese have always 
been regarded as people with good manners. However, in ancient China, 
the influence of a feudal hierarchy and a privileged class had many negative 
impacts that repressed humanism.
Wisdom
Wisdom is rationality and intelligence. According to Confucian ethical  values, 
wisdom mainly implies moral recognition and moral rationality. Accord-
ing to Confucius, “A wise man cannot be misled.” Correct moral recognition 
is the premise and assurance of right moral behavior. He considered wisdom, 
benevolence, and courage as the basic qualities of kind and upright men. 
 Mencius regarded wisdom as the ability to distinguish right from wrong. He 
proposed, “Wisdom is the sense of distinguishing between right and wrong.” 
Dong Zhongshu emphasized the equal importance of benevolence and wisdom. 
 Confucian scholars from various dynasties supported the importance of wisdom.
Th e basic function of wisdom is to distinguish right from wrong and estab-
lish correct moral concepts. People are always confronted by a complex social 
life, where it is sometimes diffi  cult to distinguish right from wrong. Th erefore, 
it is necessary to analyze, judge, and choose with rationality and wisdom. 
According to Confucianism, certain moral behaviors also existed with animals, 
such as benevolence between father and son among tigers and wolves, righ-
teousness between father and son among bees and ants. Yet only humans can 
consciously conduct moral behavior under the guidance of moral recognition. 
Confucianism regards wisdom as the tool to recognize other virtues.
 

42 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Faith
Faith is a key principle of traditional Chinese morality. It requires people to 
be honest, to act accordingly with words, and keep a promise. Chinese people 
always associate faith with loyalty and sincerity as Zhong Xin and Cheng Xin 
(loyal and faithful and honest and faithful). Th roughout the history of Chinese 
ideology, various schools of scholars have attached diff erent degrees of impor-
tance to faith. Among them, Confucianism praises faith the most.
According to Confucianism, keeping good faith is the basic method to 
improve one’s moral integrity. Confucius not only regarded faith as the basis of 
a person’s life but also as the basis of a nation. He believed that “a country will 
collapse if people have no faith in it”—without people’s trust, the administra-
tion of a country won’t be able to stand.
Mencius further elevated the ethical principles of honesty and faith to 
the law of nature, with philosophical intellectual analysis that subtly proved 
the objectivity, reasonability, and absoluteness of the faith principle. Later, 
 Neo-Confucian scholars of the Song and Ming Dynasties provided further and 
more profound elaboration along this thinking path.
The Hall of Great Achievements at the Confucian Temple in Qufu, Shandong; Chinese 
emperors from different periods in ancient China respected Confucius and his Confucianism.
 

 
Chapter 3 Virtues Upheld by the Chinese 
43
Ancient Chinese emphasized and advocated good faith but did not list as 
the absolute rule of conduct how deeds should be carried out in accordance 
with the words. Th e pursuit of faith must be associated with righteousness. It is 
necessary to decide if the words uttered should be put into practice with righ-
teousness. Mencius, Zhang Zai, and other philosophers proposed that we must 
not emphasize faith without moral standards. If it is against the greater good, 
then one rather break one’s words. The advocating of faith by Confucianism 
does not focus on the form but on the spiritual essence.
Ideal Personality and Realm of Life
If the inner spiritual quality and outer behavior of a person are above those 
of ordinary people, then that person shall become a model for others. This 
realm of life is known as the “ideal personality.” In the history of Chinese 
ideology, philosophers from diff erent schools of thought, such as Confucian-
ism, Mohism, Legalism, Taoism, and Buddhism, spent a long time exploring 
the ideal personality and put forth various patterns defi ning it. Th ese patterns 
have long aff ected the life-value orientation of Chinese people. Among these, 
the ideal personality pattern defined by Confucianism has been profoundly 
infl uential.
Confucianism attaches great importance to the substantiality of moral-
ity, the greatness of character, and the perfection of moral integrity. Th e ideal 
personality of Confucianism is that of the saint, with the typical models being 
Yao, Shun, Yu, Shang Tang, Emperors Wen and Wu of the Zhou Dynasty, Zhou 
Gong, and Confucius. Th e saints of Confucianism always bear the character-
istics of “inner virtues and outer merits.” Th e so-called inner virtues mean the 
high standard of inner moral integrity; the so-called outer merits mean the 
saints’ behavior of extending inner moral integrity to the activities of bring-
ing harmony to the family, order to the nation, and peace to the world, so that 
the whole of society becomes the “era of kingcraft .” As for how to fulfi ll this 
ideal personality of “inner virtues and outer merits,” different philosophers 
presented diff erent ways. Of course, in reality, such perfect a perfect saint does 
not exist.
The ideal personality of “inner virtues and outer merits” of Confucian-
ism mainly includes the following basic characteristics: the fi rst is the spirit of 
benevolence, which is the highest value of life pursued by Confucianism; the 
second is the sense of charity (virtue is demonstrated in the governing and ben-
efi ting of one’s people); the third is moderation, meaning one’s words and deeds 
shall not be biased and shall avoid being extreme; the fourth is the emphasis 
 

44 
CHINA’S CULTURE
of moral integrity and devotion. Mencius said, “Neither riches nor honors can 
corrupt him; neither poverty nor humbleness can make him swerve from prin-
ciple; neither threats nor forces can subdue him.” Th is concept of emphasizing 
moral integrity had substantial infl uence on future generations and became an 
important characteristic of the Confucian ideal personality. Besides this, the 
spirits of “dying for a just cause” and “sacrifi cing oneself for a noble cause” have 
been advocated since the time of Confucius and Mencius.
However, in reality, the inner virtues and outer merits are basically 
separated. How to change the inner virtues into outer merits and how to 
combine the two is the endless unresolved practical dilemma of traditional 
Confucianism.
Unlike the Confucian attitude of active involvement in the world, Taoism, 
as represented by Zhuangzi, designed an ideal personality that was beyond 
secularization—he called it “the real person” or “the loft y person.” With a mag-
nificent imagination and picturesque words, he described an ideal life with 
rich and romantic colors. Th is Taoist ideal personality created by Zhuangzi is 
completely beyond knowing, eliminating every limit between life and death, 
benefi t and harm, material and spirit, and achieving the absolute free realm of 
individual spirit.
Th e other-worldly ideal personality pursued by Zhuangzi obviously does 
not exist in the real world. However, as a realm in spirit and life, it creates 
signifi cant fascination, giving people unlimited imagination and yearning. 
Th is life-theory from Taoists also has great infl uence on the psychological 
and cultural life values of Chinese people. Th e theory led to the awakening 
of self-awareness in the Wei and Jin Dynasties and later, the liberation of 
individualism.
Zhuangzi preached that people should lead a simple and natural lifestyle, 
keeping their spirits pure. This theory of the realm of life greatly influenced 
the living attitude and emotional interest of the Chinese people, especially the 
intellectuals. Th e spiritual pursuit of Taoism helps them to maintain a peace-
ful mind and a psychological balance in the complex real life. Tao Yuanming 
(about 365–427) from the Eastern Jin Dynasty and Su Shi (1037–1101) from 
the Northern Song Dynasty, among others, were all influenced by the Taoist 
spirit. Of course, the ideal personality and realm of life pursued by Taoism also 
tend towards world-weariness, escaping from reality, and empty and melan-
choly sentiments. They advocate negative endurance and reconciliation with 
the environment.
Besides Confucianism and Taoism, Mohism, Legalism, and Buddhism also 
formed their own ideal personality. Th ough not as infl uential and popular as 
the fi rst two, they also contributed, to some degree, to the construction of tra-
ditional Chinese virtues.
 

 
Chapter 3 Virtues Upheld by the Chinese 
45
“Listening to the Wind in the Pines” by Ma Lin, Southern Song Dynasty, portraying an old 
man sitting in the shade of a pine tree.
 

46 
CHINA’S CULTURE
For example, Mohism pursues the ideal of loving all equally, which means 
to love without distinction, regardless of relationships, precedence, or social 
status. Mohists pursue the “interest,” not the public interest of people. It is fun-
damentally different from the “interest” in Confucianism. Mohism requires 
us to not only help others by using our labor and fortune but also our spirits. 
To realize the highest goal of “loving all equally and benefiting each other,” 
Mohists also propose assisting the poor, helping people in distress, and going 
to the aid of the nation with great courage. An important characteristic of 
Mohism is to emphasize life practice. Th e ideal Mohist personality also radiates 
with extraordinary intensity.
A portrait of Tao Yuanming by Wang Zhongyu, early Ming Dynasty, depicting his indifferent 
life-style.
 

 
Chapter 3 Virtues Upheld by the Chinese 
47
Th e ideal personality of Buddhism is “Buddha,” or “the enlightened one.” 
It is an ideal personality detached from society. Buddhism believes that life 
is painful. Human beings should eliminate all lust and emotional turbulence 
to become “Buddha.” Th e ideal personality of “Buddha” emphasizes “no ego,” 
“unselfi shness,” and “being without desire.” It is hard to follow this path, but 
the rational elements within provide spiritual medicine for people calming the 
risky worldly desires.
Method of Cultivating Morality to Gain Virtues
In traditional Chinese culture, different schools provide not only their ideal 
personality, but also ways to realize these ideals.
Confucians emphasize self-improvement of morality. They treat self-
improvement as the foundation of all other activities, including introspection, 
prudence in heart, maintaining innocence and cultivating kindness, relearning 
and practice, and so on.
Confucianism believes that people’s moral integrity must rely on their 
conscious eff ort instead of those of others. Confucius advocated learning from 
the sage (if one had the opportunity) and introspection for wrongdoings if one 
did not meet a sage. Th is is the so-called introspection and self-questioning, 
and accordingly, Confucian Tseng Shen proposed the theory of “learn to refl ect 
upon oneself daily,” meaning everyone should practice self-reflection several 
times every day. This thought was inherited by later Confucian scholars and 
was further developed.
Prudence in heart means that one should be cautious all the time without 
relaxing or becoming indulgent—the most important method of  cultivating 
morality according to Confucianism. This thought was further advocated 
and developed by Neo-Confucian scholars in the Song and Ming Dynas-
ties. According to Zhu Xi, “Prudence is the first commandment in the path 
to becoming a saint. It must be carried out thoroughly without intermission” 
(Words of Zhu Xi). He believed that the importance of prudence exceeded that 
of any other method of cultivating morality.
Maintaining innocence and practicing kindness in order to cultivate 
morality were closely associated with the Confucian concept of the inherent 
goodness of men. Later, Mencius proposed the theory that men are inherently 
good. Th is theory has always been the mainstream theory of human nature in 
Confucianism. Maintaining innocence and practicing kindness maintain and 
amplify the inherent goodness in human nature, preventing them from being 
corroded by the outside world. Th is proposition has greatly infl uenced Confu-
cian theories throughout history.
 

48 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Confucianism attaches great importance to ethical knowledge. It regards 
acquiring this knowledge as a key process to realize moral integrity. Since the 
time of Confucius, there have been various theories on learning. Th roughout 
his life, Confucius “always had a thirst for learning and was tireless in teach-
ing,” presenting a great model of learning. Xunzi started with the theory of the 
inherent evil of human nature. He believed that with propriety and culture, men 
could change the evil in their nature and cultivate kindness. Th erefore, he estab-
lished the importance of cultivation and learning.
Confucianism not only emphasizes learning but also putting the knowl-
edge into practice. Cultivating morality needs learning but cannot be limited 
to learning alone. We need to integrate moral knowledge into our own moral 
integrity. During the Spring and Autumn Period, Confucius emphasized the 
importance of practices. Also during the Song and Ming Dynasties, issues con-
cerning knowledge and practices were about moral consciousness and moral 
practices, thus provoking a long debate in the Confucian school. Cheng-Zhu 
“The Filial Piety Story of Zhou Jiang” by Jiao Bingzhen (Qing Dynasty), portraying how the 
mother of King Wen of Zhou was ﬁ lial toward Zhou Jiang, King Wen’s grandmother thus 
preaching ethics and advocating Confucianism.
,
 

 
Chapter 3 Virtues Upheld by the Chinese 
49
Lixue, Lu-Wang Xinxue, and other schools had different opinions. However, 
there is no debate over the importance of the realization of moral integrity.
Taoism, represented by Laozi and Zhuangzi, also emphasizes realizing the 
ideal personality through self-improvement. However, the method was quite 
diff erent from that of Confucianism. Taoism advocates a “do-nothing” perspec-
tive, abandoning humanity and morality, “sitting in oblivion,” “purifi cation of 
heart,” and so on. Do-nothing is the basic political opinion of Taoists, as well 
as their key method of cultivating morality. It requires people to follow the 
natural situation and the inner order of things, to maintain an innocent and 
pure nature. According to Taoism, the most valuable thing in a person is one’s 
conscience and natural instincts. Th us, one must escape from the restraint of 
moral ethical codes to obtain freedom of spirit. Th is proposition of abandon-
ing humanity and morality of Taoism was a bit extreme, but still resonates with 
today’s pursuit of natural harmony. Th e “sitting in oblivion” and “purifi cation of 
heart” advocated by Zhuangzi required one to completely eliminate ones’ self-
consciousness, which is impossible to realize. It can only be understood from a 
psychological perspective.
Buddhism believes that to escape from endless suff ering, one must elimi-
nate lust and various emotional turbulences in order to separate oneself from 
reality. Th erefore, one must go through a long and painful active process, con-
fi ning and restraining oneself with various complicated and strict command-
ments, so one can focus on the spiritual world and understand the essence 
of Buddhism. The practicing methods proposed by Buddhism are extremely 
complex. The basic principles can be summarized as discipline, meditation, 
and wisdom. Discipline implies the commandments—the rules Buddhists must 
follow in the temple or at home. Meditation is the Buddhist mind—the focused 
psychological condition and culturing method. Wisdom is intelligence, which, 
according to Buddhism, can lead people toward truth and liberation.
“Six Patriarchs  of  Zen School” (detail) by Dai Jin, Ming Dynasty. The ﬁ gure on the right side 
of the picture is Bodhidharma, who, according to legend, faced a wall and meditated for nine 
years at the Shaolin Temple in Dengfeng, Henan, and preached Buddhism.
 

 

4
51
4
China has been a political power since ancient times; as such, it has created, 
contributed, gained, and lost a great deal in the political fi eld. Th e enthusiasm 
amongst the Chinese with regard to politics is not less than that of Western 
people’s toward religion. Th e ancient Chinese made notable political achieve-
ments and had more influence on politics than on any other field. Over 
thousands of years, the Chinese have formed their own political  philosophy, 
political ethics, political faith, political culture, conceptual talent, and a 
talent-training system, as well as an extensive and well-organized political 
 structure. In short, they have formed an oriental political culture with Chinese 
 characteristics.
China was never a religious nation but a secular society where the worldly 
imperial authority surmounted religious authority. However, Chinese religious 
activities were not rare; on the contrary, religion was always accepted and 
encouraged in history. Th is was a typical feature of traditional Chinese culture.
Political Philosophy
Ancient Chinese political philosophy had faith in the way of heaven, the will 
of heaven, the fortune of heaven, and the principles of heaven. In particular, 
Dong Zhongshu developed a political philosophy to connect the celestial act 
with worldly reign. In considering the primitive theory of natural elements, he 
claimed that the emperor was the son of Heaven, was chosen by Heaven, and 
Political and Religious 
Concepts
Chapter 4
 

52 
CHINA’S CULTURE
this was the reason for incontestable authority. At the same time, he  advocated 
the union of the emperor and Heaven, saying that an emperor could only 
be judged by heaven, and if an emperor had faults, he could be criticized by 
 ministers and recorded by a historian.
In general, traditional Chinese political ideals were Confucian, as decided 
by Confucian practices in Chinese politics. The policy of benevolence was a 
very Confucian ideal. As the practice of benevolence is the highest state of 
Mencian political thought, it followed that “people are the noblest, followed by 
the government, and then the king,” promoting public integrity and love of the 
people. All of China’s successful emperors promoted public integrity.
It is understandable that under this traditional mindset, incorruptible 
tradition was formed in China where enlightened politicians wanted to be 
 incorruptible officials and the people had high expectations from such offi-
cials. Th e “incorruptible tradition” was very infl uential in traditional society. 
For example, Bao Zheng (999–1062) was renowned as “Bao Fairness.” In 
 traditional opera, he was not only the judge in the physical world but also 
the judge in the after world (the world of souls). Ancient Chinese politics 
 emphasized the  pursuit of world unity and the coexistence of all ethnic groups. 
In ancient times, the Han people living in central China had an advanced level 
of  civilization, while minority ethnic groups were not as advanced. Th e Huaxia 
nation had gradually developed the idea of how to judge people by their 
 civilized character and etiquette. This meant that people who fit the Huaxia 
civilization and etiquette standards were considered civilized, while those who 
In Beijing opera, Bao Zheng wears black facial makeup, representing a just and fair ﬁ gure.
 

 
Chapter 4 Political and Religious Concepts 
53
did not were considered uncivilized; thus there was discrimination between the 
civilized and the uncivilized.
There was a great deal of discord between the Huaxia nation and the 
minority ethnic groups from time to time. However, throughout Chinese 
 history, ancient Chinese politics advocated world unity and the coexistence of 
all ethnic groups.
In the Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period, neither 
the Qin Kingdom nor the Chu Kingdom was a political majority, though each 
had a powerful infl uence on politics. Finally, Qin united China. From the Wei 
and Jin Dynasties onward, the Hu and Han blood became mixed. After the 
Song Dynasty was destroyed by the Mongolians, during the Yuan Dynasty 
(1206–1368), rulers promoted a racial discrimination policy, which was not 
common in Chinese history. When the Manchu’s established the Qing Dynasty, 
they decided to embrace the Han culture, and fi nally Manchu, Han, Mongo-
lian, and other ethnic groups achieved coexistence and mutual benefi ts.
Undoubtedly, historical Chinese power and prosperity was the inevitable 
result of ethnic coexistence.
Ancient Chinese people had a political faith, which stressed collective 
interest, attaching great importance to state safety, as well as land and people’s 
“Lady Ming Leaving the Han Realm” (detail) by Gong Suran (Southern Song Dynasty), 
portraying the lady-in-waiting Wang Zhaojun who left Han and married a Hun tribal chief 
during the reign of Emperor Yuan of the Western Han Dynasty.
 

54 
CHINA’S CULTURE
living conditions. Th e Chinese people paid great attention to land. For example, 
Chong’er (697–628 bc), the exiled prince of the Jin Kingdom, asked for food 
from a farmer in a fi eld, who handed him a clod of soil at which point Chong’er 
became very angry. However, when an adviser told him that land was the root 
of a kingdom and that he should thank the heavens for blessing him with the 
land, he thanked the gods.
Traditional Chinese political faith paid great attention to society. The 
 Chinese state meant land and grain, referring to a government. In other words, 
from a traditional Chinese perspective, a government was based on land and 
grain, and all acts of the king and his government should be for the purpose 
of state prosperity. Li Shimin (599–649), the founder of Tang Dynasty, had 
a famous saying: “Water may either carry a boat or overthrow a boat.” Here, 
“water” represents the people and “boat” represents the state. Ancient Chinese 
political faith believed that everything was related to civil loyalty and the state. 
Without civil loyalty, a state would not be sustained: without a state, how could 
there be an emperor?
Confucians also paid great attention to political culture, which was 
 especially necessary for an emperor because political culture enlightened him 
and prevented him from driving the state into danger. People expected the 
The “Altar of Land and Grain” in Beijing’s Zhong Shan Park. It was the site of imperial 
sacriﬁ ces to the gods of land and grain in the Ming and Qing dynasties.
 

 
Chapter 4 Political and Religious Concepts 
55
emperor to accept public opinions, especially critical comments. Li Shimin 
was ready to accept ministers’ opinions, and his straightforward minister, Wei 
Zheng (580–643), always criticized him sharply—fortunately, the emperor 
found it easy to accept his opinions. When Wei Zheng died, the emperor sadly 
observed: “My mirror is lost, and I will not fi nd my faults any longer.” Ancient 
China was a nation of strong politics with an ethical core, where almost all 
important articles and expressions were about politics. In particular, extreme 
theoretical writings were inherently connected with Chinese politics and 
 history. Niccolò Machiavelli’s (1469–1527) Th e Prince is famous; so are  brilliant 
Chinese works like The Book of Lord Shang, Han Feizi, and Lü’s Spring and 
Autumn Annals.
Li Shimin, Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty.
 

56 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Political System and Reform
Th e ancient Chinese political system was inclusive. From the Pre-Qin Period 
onward, China not only had a tight and effective management system but 
also an eff ective organizational system, economic system, and a more detailed 
 ethical system, as well as a system for talents education, training, and selection. 
Th e Chinese imperial examination system had a tremendous impact on history.
Portrait of Sun Yat-sen erected in Tian’anmen Square during festivals.
 

 
Chapter 4 Political and Religious Concepts 
57
China experienced at least three key reforms from the Pre-Qin period to 
the People’s Republic of China in 1949.
The first was Shang Yang’s (c. 390–338 bc) legal reform and Ying 
Zheng’s unification of the six Warring states. Shang Yang’s reform not 
only laid an  economic and military foundation for Qin prosperity, it also 
established the political structure of the Qin Kingdom. Later, Ying Zheng, 
the first Qin emperor, continued and reformed the structure, forming the 
system of  prefectures and counties, standard characters and vehicles, stan-
dard weights and measures, and other national systems. The Han Dynasty 
 generally followed this system but adopted Confucianism as the official 
 ideology.
The second reform was that of the ministerial system from the Wei and 
Jin to the Sui-Tang Periods, when the Chinese political structure underwent 
important changes from the three-dukes-and-nine-chamberlains system to a 
ministerial system. As for the selection of talent, the promotion system was 
changed to the examination system, a reform that lasted for hundreds of years 
and was most developed in the Tang Dynasty. This system was the longest 
 system in use in ancient China.
The third reform was the political structural reform from the late Qing 
period to the early Republic of China. At the risk of national survival, 
a group of  reformists tried to promote political reform, with the ulti-
mate ideal of  having a constitutional monarchy, which meant the ancient 
 Chinese political structure would be modernized. But the reformists failed 
to achieve this. Finally, Sun Yat-sen (1866–1925) led the Xinhai Revolution 
of 1911 to overthrow the  autocratic monarchy that had lasted for more than 
2,000 years, and tried to establish modern democracy and  republicanism. 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
This system was a political structure established in the Sui-Tang 
Period. The Tang departments, being the organs of supreme power, 
were Secretariat, Chancery, and Department of State Affairs. The 
six  ministries responsible for various governmental affairs were the 
Ministry for Personnel, Revenue, Rites, War, Justice, and Works. This 
system developed and strengthened the national centralized feudal 
system applicable until the Qing Dynasty.
MINISTERIAL SYSTEM
 

58 
CHINA’S CULTURE
In  Chinese history, this  political reform was epochal. However, there was 
still a long and difficult road ahead before the realization of a modern 
political structure.
As great as Chinese political history was, there were also serious short-
comings in traditional Chinese political concepts and systems. In particular, 
the political history after the Song and Yuan Dynasties typically reflected 
these shortcomings. For example, imperial authority, or sovereign power, 
would surmount all laws, and the ethical codes would replace laws in tradi-
tion. The direct result was Dai Zhen’s (1724–1777) critique on the ridicu-
lous phenomenon of “ethics in killing people.” Centralized authority lacked 
democracy because strict hierarchy lacked equality; the focus on politics 
led to a disregard of economics; the focus on ethics and morality led to the 
disregard of science and technology. Moreover, traditional Chinese political 
concepts and systems were closed to the world outside China, resulting in 
a lack of enterprise and vitality. Such features were not suitable for modern 
politics.
Religions in a Worldly Regime
As mentioned above, China was never a religious nation; worldly imperial 
authority prevailed over religious authority. Th e ruler would sometimes accept 
the infl uence of some religious organization or religious leader, but state policy 
was still decided by the emperor-centered worldly regime. Th is does not mean 
that China lacked religious activities; in fact, all kinds of religious organizations 
and religious ideas were always active in China.
Of the Chinese emperors from different dynasties, many were interested 
in religion, especially Buddhism and Taoism, such as Emperor Wu of Liang 
Dynasty (464–549), Empress Wu Zetian of Tang Dynasty (624–705), Emperor 
Huizong of Song Dynasty (1082–1135), and Emperor Shenzong of Ming 
Dynasty (1563–1620). Th ey even practiced Buddhism or Taoism. However, the 
royal rights were superior to religion, so the emperor could give an order and 
hand religious aff airs over to someone else or some other organization to be 
managed.
All influential global religions left their footprints in China. Buddhism, 
Islam, and Christianity contributed diff erently to the Chinese civilization. Local 
Taoism was also influential. In China, Taoism rivals Buddhism. Buddhism 
(including Tibetan Buddhism) and Taoism are the most influential religions 
in Chinese culture. In addition, Judaism and other religions also had roles in 
Chinese history. Religious accommodation by a government was a great feature 
of the Chinese civilization, which was also an advantage. Due to this, Chinese 
 

 
Chapter 4 Political and Religious Concepts 
59
culture was neither subjected to a cultural gap phenomenon nor confl ict due to 
diff erent beliefs.
Naturally, religious activities were not unexpectedly carried out, and it is 
evident that some foreign religions had to encounter diffi  culties in China.
“Listening to the Zither” by Zhao Ji, Emperor Huizong of the Song Dynasty. The person 
playing the zither in this picture is Zhao Ji himself, who believed in Taoism.
 

60 
CHINA’S CULTURE
In fact, all religions had to face obstacles before developing and taking 
root in this land. Consider Buddhism and Taoism, for example. They con-
fl icted fi ercely with Confucianism and one another. In Chinese history, there 
were several incidents of “repressing Buddhism” and other religious perse-
cutions. Though generally speaking, there were no extreme instances. The 
religious and cultural factions confl icted, learned from each other, and fi nally 
reached a state of mutual prosperity. Traditional Chinese culture is a system 
seeking  stability and balance, including the balance between secular culture 
and religious culture.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
In Chinese history, for political and social reasons, there was large-
scale religious oppression and intolerance of Buddhism. Emperors 
from various dynasties such as Emperor Tai Wu of the Northern Wei 
Dynasty, Emperor Wu Di of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, Emperor 
Wu Zhong of the Tang Dynasty, and Emperor Shi Zhong of the Later 
Zhou Dynasty, carried out measures to eradicate or “kill” Buddhism. 
Temples were confi scated and the monks were secularized but few 
deaths occurred during these incidents.
ERADICATING BUDDHISM
Buddhism entered into the golden age during the Tang Dynasty. The Giant Stone Buddha at 
Leshan Mountain in Sichuan is 71 meters high. Its construction began in 713 AD and lasted 
90 years.
 

 
Chapter 4 Political and Religious Concepts 
61
“Admiring Lotuses on Lushan Mountain” painted by Shangguan Zhou, Qing Dynasty, 
portraying the scene of the monk Huiyuan interacting with reﬁ ned scholars.
 

62 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Foreign religions had to deal with three types of relationships in order to 
take root and develop in China, namely, with imperial power; with central 
 Chinese cultural traditions and customs; and with Confucianism. A good 
 relationship might help smooth out development, while a bad one might cause 
 trouble and frustration.
Relationships with imperial power were the key to development in China. 
This is because imperial power was the sovereign power in ancient China, 
backed by Confucian tradition and public support; so rejection by imperial 
power might have equalled rejection from the whole of China.
Buddhism was brought to China during the Han Dynasty, and it evened 
out in Northern and Southern Dynasties (420–589). Buddhist beliefs contra-
dicted Chinese cultural traditions, but when Buddhism became popular, such 
contradictions became superficial. According to Buddhist theory, Buddhists 
should respect only Buddha without respecting the emperor; but according to 
the Confucian view, disrespect to the emperor was considered a big offense. 
In addition, monks had to expose their left  arm, and this dress style confl icted 
with the inherent Chinese ethical code.
In the Eastern Jin (317–420) Period, eminent monk Hui Yuan (334–416) 
proposed the “coexistence of Buddhism and Confucianism,” with the core 
argument that Buddha did not have any confl icts with Confucius or Emperor 
Yao; in fact, they were ultimately the same so all confl icts between Buddhism 
and  Confucianism should also be resolved. Under this theory, Buddhists began 
to accept Confucian ethical views, respect the emperor and filial piety, and 
reform their clothing. In this way, the barrier between Buddhism and Confu-
cianism was broken down.
Christianity faced similar diffi  culties in China at the beginning. Th e con-
cept of God contradicted with Confucian loyalty to the emperor and filial 
piety toward the family. Th is obvious confl ict made it impossible for preach-
ers to establish their religion in China. Later, Italian Jesuit priest Matteo 
Ricci (1552–1610) found the solution. He used three methods. Th e fi rst was 
the upper-class route, seeking support from offi  cials and even the emperor. 
The second was to learn from Western technology and arts, to arouse the 
official class’ attention and respect. The third was to adapt Christianity to 
Chinese customs. For example, Ricci wore a European monk’s habit in order 
to do missionary work when he fi rst came to China. Later, he found that this 
method was not helpful and began to wear a long Confucian-style gown and 
learned Chinese. In 1583, he was allowed to enter Zhaoqing, Guangdong 
Province, to visit local officials and he kowtowed to the magistrate. From 
then on, Ricci became a very successful preacher in China and transmitted 
many Western cultural ideas to China. However, his behavior was criticized 
by the Vatican.
 

 
Chapter 4 Political and Religious Concepts 
63
Matteo Ricci in Confucian costume.
 

64 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Traditional Religious Concepts
The traditional Chinese concept of religion was unique. To understand the 
Chinese attitude and behavior toward religions, it is important to understand 
its features.
Th e traditional Chinese concept of religion was strongly colored by pan-
theism. China was never a monotheistic nation. The number of spirits and 
phantoms are endless.
Th ere are many personalized nature deities in China, like mountain deities, 
water deities, sea deities, and land deities. Deities play a role in everyday life; 
for example, there are gate deities, well deities, kitchen deities, and even bed 
deities.
According to folklore, every industry had its industrial deity. Th ere were 
17 classes of ancient industrial deities governing nearly 200 industries—some 
even had more than one deity. In fact, some deities were creators of certain 
industries while others were protectors. For example, Lu Ban was the creator of 
carpentry; Emperor Minghuang (685–762), the Tang emperor, was the creator 
of drama (opera). Creators and deities in medicine were numerous: Farming 
Deity, Yellow Emperor, Sun Simiao, Bian Que, Li Xuan and so on.
A Christian preacher does missionary work in China during the late Qing Dynasty.
 

 
Chapter 4 Political and Religious Concepts 
65
Chinese folk religions are strongly secularized. Th e deities have almost the 
same attributes as people. They have emotions and they care about ordinary 
life. People pray to the deities for several reasons, for example, for rain  during 
draught, speedy recovery from illness, and more often, for marriage, birth, 
 official promotions, fortune making, and so on. Praying for the granting of 
such wishes was not acceptable in Buddhism, but Chinese people believe that 
the deity should be interested in worldly aff airs, irrespective of religion, be it 
Buddhism, Taoism, or Confucianism.
The worship of deities in Buddhist or Taoist temples is different from 
 Western practices in churches. Chinese people burn incense in order to win 
Many areas in China still maintain the custom of putting up red couplets and gate deities 
during the Spring Festival.
 

66 
CHINA’S CULTURE
a deity’s promise. More precisely, people trade with deities; they offer some 
money and burn a couple of incense sticks in order to obtain peace, good 
future, health, an ideal marriage, and so on.
Th e Chinese rebuild deities. For example, Avalokitesvara was originally a 
male image in India, but the Chinese feminized him as a “Son Giver.” Many 
believers worship “her” for a son and heir.
Traditional Chinese culture focuses on balance and harmony and harmony 
between different religions. For example, the Chinese try to harmonize the 
confl icting thoughts of Buddhism and Taoism. In a folk rite, both  Buddhists 
and Taoists will be mentioned. In classic Chinese literary works, monks 
( Buddhists) and Taoists were always mentioned. For example, in the famous 
classic works A Dream of Red Mansions, Jia Baoyu was closely related to a 
monk and a  Taoist who always appeared at the same time, showing no religious 
difference. Of course, a faithful religious follower will regard this differently 
due to his or her diff erent beliefs. But what is interesting is that such a union 
between  Buddhism and Taoism does exist in reality. For example, in the Eight 
A statue of Avalokiteshvara (Son Giver), a product of the combination of Buddhism and the 
Chinese conventional idea of valuing a son and heir.
 

 
Chapter 4 Political and Religious Concepts 
67
A painting depicting the farming deity gathering medicinal herbs, discovered in a wooden 
pagoda in Ying County, Shanxi.
 

68 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Religious  Destinations, Beijing, you will fi nd Buddhist and Taoist idols sitting 
together. Emperor Guan (Guan Yu) is considered as a deity in Chinese  society, 
and also always worshiped and presented in Buddhist or Taoist temples; this is 
never considered strange. Th is aspect is closely related to the Confucian out-
look on spirits and deities. Confucius had a mixed attitude toward spirits and 
deities. For example, he advocated that people should “respect spirits and dei-
ties but also keep away from them.” Infl uenced by this thought, most Chinese 
people are close to souls and deities, but they do not think that they cannot 
live without them. So a Chinese person may believe in Buddhism, in Emperor 
Guan, in Laotse, or any other deity. Th eir faiths are not very deep-rooted and 
they would not like to discuss the diff erences.
Religious Infl uence on Traditional Chinese 
Culture
All religious organizations and ideas in history had some influence on and 
made some contribution to traditional Chinese culture, each serving as a 
 component of it. They debated and even had conflicts but most often, they 
lived in harmony. Generally speaking, religious culture contributed greatly to 
Chinese civilization.
With respect to foreign cultural exchange, the monk Xuan Zang (602–664) 
went on a pilgrimage to India for Buddhist scriptures, which marked a  successful 
cultural exchange between China and India. His book Great Tang Records on the 
Western Regions was an important piece of historical literature. He also translated 
a number of Buddhist scriptures which are still publicly recognized.  Buddhism 
also plays an important role in the Chinese–Japanese cultural exchange. 
 Buddhism in China blossomed in the Tang culture. Th e spread of Buddhism was 
signifi cant for Chinese cultural expansion.
Of all religions, Buddhism has had the largest infl uence on the structure of 
Chinese philosophy. When Buddhism was introduced in China, it confl icted 
with local Confucianism; but on the other hand, it gained from metaphys-
ics, and Confucianism and fi nally became synchronized. In the Tang Dynasty, 
Buddhism in turn had an infl uence on Confucianism; for example, Confucian 
intellectuals such as Liu Zongyuan (773–819), Bai Juyi (772–846), and Li Ao 
(772–836), were considerably infl uenced by Buddhism. Th e three religions—
Confucianism, Buddhism, and Taoism—promoted each other and this became 
a cultural feature of China. In the Song Dynasty, Confucian idealists such as 
Cheng Hao, Brother Cheng Yi, and Zhu Xi carefully studied Buddhism and 
their idealist ideas were mixed with several Buddhist ideas. Buddhist infl uence 
 

 
Chapter 4 Political and Religious Concepts 
69
Statue of the monk Xuan Zang.
on Confucianism was not specifi c to one person or one thing; it was  systematic 
communication and integration. Song and Ming ideals were called neo- 
Confucianism due to the neologism caused by Buddhism.
Religions left a great influence on Chinese literature and arts, too. 
 Buddhists and Taoists were brilliant at poetry, prose, painting, and calligraphy, 
with many works on display. More importantly, ideation obviously featured by 
Buddhism and Taoism was imported in the fi elds of literature and arts, raising 
classic Chinese literature and arts to a new level.
 

70 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Great Tang Records on the Western Regions compiled by modern scholars.
 

 
Chapter 4 Political and Religious Concepts 
71
“Drunken Li Bai” by Su Liupeng of Qing Dynasty, portraying the scene of drunken Li Bai in the 
Imperial Palace.
 

72 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Buddhism prospered during the Northern and Southern Dynasties. The famous Yungang 
Grottoes in Datong, Shanxi, were constructed during the Northern Wei Dynasty (386–534).
The most famous Tang poets, Li Bai (701–762), Du Fu (712–770), and 
Wang Wei (701–761), represented the religious aspect in arts influenced 
by Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism. For example, Li Bai was dubbed 
the Immortal of Poetry due to his imaginative poetry, as affected mostly by 
 Taoism. Du Fu showed great concern for the state and people, marking the 
Confucian personality. Wang Wei was dubbed Buddha of Poetry, and his 
poems were deeply affected by Buddhism, revealing a far-reaching sense of 
Zen Buddhism.
Religions had great influence on Chinese art. For example, the Buddhist 
statues of the grottoes of Mogao, Longmen, and Yungang, as well as in Dazu 
County, Sichuan, are world treasures. There are numerous Taoist temples, 
Buddhist temples, mosques, and Christian churches across China, and many 
of them are representative of religious architecture with a variety of religious 
artwork. Th e tradition of Buddhists preaching in Buddhist temples aff ected the 
creation of Chinese storytelling arts and classical novels.
In addition, Buddhism, Taoism, and other religions contributed to  Chinese 
science and technology, education, medicine, martial arts, Wushu, and 
 breathing exercises (qigong).
 

 
Chapter 4 Political and Religious Concepts 
73
Temple fair at a Buddhist temple.
Th e Chinese love a sophisticated lifestyle. Th ese religions aff ected Chinese 
customs, and some customs affected the development of religions. Famous 
religious mountains are also destinations for folk activities. The Chinese are 
naturals at combining religious activities with folk activities. Th e best-known 
festival is the temple fair.
The temple fair is a large-scale entertainment event held in Buddhist or 
Taoism institutions. For example, Beijing has the famous Baiyun Temple Fair. 
Westerners may wonder how a temple can be a noisy place. It is probably 
impossible that such an event would be held in a Western church. However, it 
is believed that during the temple fair, the religious deities share their joy with 
the public.
A temple fair is also a venue for profitable activities. In China, temple 
 economics is a subject for study. Temples, whether Buddhist or Taoist, are 
 generally located on famous mountains with beautiful scenery. Th ey also con-
tribute to help the local tourism industry.
Th e golden age of Chinese religion has faded, but religious culture will be 
alive for a long time to come. Over the past few years, religious activities have 
been on the rise again.
 

74 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Qingcheng Hill in Sichuan. A famous holy place for Taoists in China.
 

 


5
77
5
There are significant historical differences between the development of 
 China’s economic model and Western economic models. Th e curve of histori-
cal development of China’s economy is stable and gradual, unlike the West 
whose clearly contrasting curve has strong ups and downs. During the Spring 
and Autumn Period, China had almost the same economic level as the 
ancient Greeks in the West. During the Middle Ages, the Western economy 
fell into a depression while China experienced extraordinary prosperity, 
especially during the Song Dynasty when the Chinese economy achieved 
 unprecedented success.
However, since the middle of the Ming Dynasty, the Western economy 
 initiated modern economic development and achieved historic progress. 
China entered a continual decline, allowing the giant of the East to become the 
object of Western plundering. Th e social and cultural reasons that caused this 
 phenomenon are worthy of further study by people today.
A Historic Period in China’s Economic 
Development
The economic development of ancient China was characterized as being 
steady and gradual, but this did not mean that there was no rapid develop-
mental stage. In fact, the earlier Western Han Dynasty was a period of rapid 
development.
The Concepts of Economy 
and Wealth
Chapter 5
 

78 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Since the founding of the Western Han Dynasty by Liu Bang (256–195 bc), 
and through nearly a hundred years of recuperative policies during the reign 
of Empress Lü, Emperor Wen, and Emperor Jing, the Han Dynasty made great 
accomplishments. During the reign of Emperor Wu, the Han Dynasty (156–87 
bc) prospered from a strong sense of nationalism, which allowed the Han 
Dynasty to battle and drive out the Huns who repeatedly violated the Chinese 
border. Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty led crusades against the Huns in the 
Map of Chang’an city during the Tang Dynasty.
 

 
Chapter 5 The Concepts of Economy and Wealth 
79
north, contacted the Western Regions, establishing close cooperation with all 
countries of the Western Regions, and thus opened the famous Silk Road. An 
important reason that enabled him to achieve this series of advancements was 
the strong economy of the Western Han Dynasty.
Aft er the Western Han Dynasty, economic success once again appeared in 
the Sui and Tang Dynasties. Aft er the eff orts of several generations, the Tang 
Dynasty also achieved great economic strength with internal and external 
accessibility, and helped China to become the most advanced and prosperous 
country in the world in terms of culture. Chang’an (now Xian), capital during 
the Tang Dynasty, was a prominent international metropolis leading the world.
According to archaeological discoveries, Chang’an of the Tang Dynasty 
was indeed unprecedented in scale. It was 8,470 meters from north to south, 
9,550 meters from east to west, and the circumference of the whole city was 
35 kilometers. Th e layout of the city was in the shape of a square with straight 
streets. In  addition to royal family members, offi  cials, and local residents, there 
Murals of No. 296 Grotto at Mogao Grottoes in Dunhuang in Gansu, portraying the life 
scenes of merchants on the Silk Road.
 

80 
CHINA’S CULTURE
were a number of foreign envoys and foreign students in this great city. Asian 
and African  countries, as well as Europe’s Byzantine Kingdom, constantly sent 
their envoys who brought their own belongings and culture with them. This 
included the famous Japanese diplomats to the Tang Dynasty.
It is particularly worth mentioning that many businessmen gathered in 
Chang’an. Most of them were merchants from the Western regions. Some of 
them were from Uighur (Xinjiang), some came by sea, most were Arabian and 
Persian—who fi rst came from the South China Sea to Guangzhou, then from 
Guangzhou via Hongzhou (now Nanchang, Jiangxi Province), Yangzhou (now 
belongs to Jiangsu Province), Luoyang (now belongs to Henan)—and arrived 
in Chang’an. During its most prosperous period, the total number of mer-
chants from Western Regions in Chang’an city reached several thousand. Th ey 
carried out business in Chang’an; their assets and profi ts were substantial; and 
they formed a very rich group. Some Chinese classical novels vividly described 
the legendary businesses and adventures of these traders. It was not possible to 
support such a large commercial activity without solid economic foundation.
Comparing the development level of the world’s cities at that time, the scale 
of the buildings and the economic levels of Chang’an were said to be supreme. 
Chang’an directly infl uenced Japan, the Korean Peninsula, and other places. Th e 
Japanese city of Nara was built to a plan similar to that of Chang’an city. At that 
time in Europe, the Roman Empire had been destroyed and the East Roman 
Empire was headed toward a decline. Belgian historian Irene (1862–1935) wrote 
in her book Cities of the Middle Ages that at the time, the count’s territory in each 
province of the Frankish Kingdom did not have its own capital, just as the King-
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
From the beginning of the 7th century to the end of the 9th 
century, in order to learn about Chinese culture, Japan sent more 
than 10 diplomatic delegations to the Tang Dynasty, some of up to 
fi ve or six hundred people. Japanese diplomatic visits to the Tang 
Dynasty were important events in the history of Sino–Japanese cul-
tural exchange. The embassies of the Tang Dynasty brought their 
regime, culture, and arts to Japan, playing an important role in pro-
moting the development of Japan and friendly exchanges between 
China and Japan.
JAPANESE DIPLOMATS TO THE TANG 
DYNASTY
 

 
Chapter 5 The Concepts of Economy and Wealth 
81
dom did not have a capital. Similar to the  emperor’s palace, the castle that the 
count lived in was usually in the countryside.
According to the book Civilization and Capitalism, 15th–18th Century 
written by French historian Fernand Braudel (1902–1985), even until the 
15th century, about eight centuries after the foundation of the Tang capital, 
Chang’an, the population of Cologne, the largest city in Germany, was only 
about 20,000. This obviously could not compare with Chang’an of the Tang 
Dynasty.
In the Song Dynasty, China’s economy was more developed and had 
achieved unprecedented success. Japanese scholars dubbed the period “the 
Oriental Renaissance.” Urban trade in the Song Dynasty was very prosperous, 
refl ected in masashi, all kinds of notes, words, and novels. Th e famous painting 
“Painting Scroll” of the Song Dynasty described the bustling urban economy of 
the capital Bianliang (today’s Kaifeng) of the North Song Dynasty (960–1127). 
It can be seen from the scroll that on both sides of the streets of Bianliang, 
there were restaurants, pubs, various shops, and workshops. Th e streets were 
very large and commercial activity was thriving. Th ere were many boats on the 
river loaded with cargo. Due to overloading, some of the ships had to be pulled 
by a number of boat trackers in order to move. Bianliang in the painting was 
bustling with activity.
Issues of Traditional Economic Models and 
Wealth Concepts
The great economic success of ancient China could not be sustained, and 
 economic and social development failed to attain advanced development and 
so declined until, by the late Qing Dynasty, it had become the object of Western 
“Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty Meeting Tibetan Emissaries” (detail) by a painter in the 
Tang Dynasty.
 

82 
CHINA’S CULTURE
plundering. Th e reasons are complex because the causes of economic problems 
cannot only be economic but concern all aspects of society. Th e following is an 
explanation from only an economic perspective and attitude toward wealth.
One of the reasons is that traditional Chinese culture does not highlight 
the role of the market but that of self-suffi  ciency.
The history of ancient Chinese economy can be said to be a history of 
self-sufficiency. The Chinese people believed that almost all material needs 
could be derived from self-reliance. However, during the transition from an 
agricultural economy to a market economy, this had a major downside. Mod-
ern people often reflect on the difference between Zheng He (1371–1433), 
who went to the Western Seas, and Columbus (about 1451–1506), who found 
the New World. This is a good example, illustrating the differing concepts 
of economy and wealth between China and the West. Both the voyages took 
place in the 15th century. Zheng He travelled half a century earlier and his 
fl eet was much greater. But Columbus discovered the New World of America, 
which was a landmark in the development of capitalism. Yet Zheng He’s 
 voyage did not have much economic significance. The fundamental reason 
was that Zheng He was not backed by a vibrant export-oriented production 
system. There was also a lack of a commercial market that creates wealth. 
Zheng He never made profi t from trade as the main objective of his voyage to 
the Western Seas.
The characteristic of self-sufficiency within China’s traditional  economy 
had some positive value in dealing with a poor natural environment, but it 
“Riverside Scene during the Pure Brightness Festival” (detail), describing the bustling urban 
economy of the capital city Bianliang (today’s Kaifeng) in the Northern Song Dynasty.
 

 
Chapter 5 The Concepts of Economy and Wealth 
83
became a major obstacle to expansion,  productivity, development, and the 
application of science and  technology. Self-suffi  ciency could not encourage the 
formation of modern markets or heavy industry.
The second reason was that all production was carried out according to 
consumption, so meeting consumer needs was both a cause and result.
Th e ancient Chinese economy was not undeveloped; rather, the  structure 
was irrational. There were many industries in Chang’an, Kaifeng, Nanjing, 
and other big cities, but they were mostly confined to the production and 
 operation of products necessary for everyday living. Take old Beijing, for 
An idol of Zheng He (middle) in the Dajue Temple in Semarang, Indonesia. Semarang is the 
only city in the world named after Zheng He (Sam Po).
 

84 
CHINA’S CULTURE
instance. Although there were a large number of industries, such as hotels, 
 pharmaceuticals, tea, agriculture, and so on, almost without exception these 
industries were only related to people’s daily consumption, particularly for 
 royalty, the nobility, and high offi  cials. Th e size of this economic activity was 
limited and it was diffi  cult to achieve leap-forward development.
Regretfully, China’s four greatest inventions were not fully applied in pro-
duction and in the military. Westerners used gunpowder to make weapons, 
while Chinese made fi reworks; Westerners used the compass to aid in  sailing 
and exploration, while Chinese used the compass in geomancy. Of course, not 
all of China’s gunpowder was used to make fi reworks and the compass was not 
entirely used in geomancy; however, they were not used for large-scale pro-
duction and trading. This economic characteristic of satisfying consumption 
impeded the emergence of large industry.
Th e third reason was taking the family as the basic production unit, which 
was not conducive to the expansion of the production scale and the transfor-
mation of existing industries into new industries.
Th e traditional Chinese production unit was the family, more precisely, the 
household. Even the rich did not employ too many workers. Production activities 
were for family survival, rather than to sell large quantities. Chinese one-hundred-
year old shops were almost all family-style that followed stereotypes like “Pass to 
the son but not to the daughter, pass to the son but not to the son-in-law”: they 
preferred them lost rather than have them handed over to other families.
Trade or other industries of the traditional Chinese society had a subor-
dinate position. The primacy of traditional Chinese was always agriculture. 
Th e interpersonal relationships between big or small workshops and all kinds 
of shops and other commercial premises in cities and towns more oft en relied 
on the relationship, not contracts. Even today, many Chinese who are in the 
business line do not focus on marketing, but focus on a close and reliable 
relationship. This limits the in-depth development of enterprises. The fourth 
“The Knick-knack Peddler” painted by Li Song during the Southern Song Dynasty, portraying 
the commercial activities of the peddlers in ancient China.
 

 
Chapter 5 The Concepts of Economy and Wealth 
85
reason was the egalitarian attitude on property distribution and inheritance. 
 Confucius advocated: “Do not worry about poverty but worry about unequal 
distribution.” Poverty was not the problem, unequal distribution was. Th is did 
not advocate property equality for all. It implied for example that for offi  cials of 
the same level, property should be equally allocated.
The highest ideal of the small-peasant economy was equal distribution 
of land and taxes. Of course, in traditional Chinese society, this ideal was dif-
fi cult to achieve. However, relative equality or balance was enough to ensure 
social stability and maintain steady economic development. If this balance 
was  broken for any reason, the natural agricultural economy, which had a 
fragile foundation, would face a crisis. Sharing—an economic characteristic 
of  Chinese  people—was also stronger and more prominent, even when com-
pared with similar countries in the same period. Ancient China and Japan 
had many similarities in history and culture, and economic patterns were also 
very  similar. However, the inheritance of family property between the two was 
significantly different. In Japan, usually the eldest son of the family had the 
right to inherit, and other sons and daughters had to fend for themselves. Th e 
property accumulated by the previous generation could be more completely 
preserved for future generations, so it was not unusual for a family to retain its 
riches for two or three hundred years. In contrast, for ordinary Chinese fami-
lies, the eldest son did not enjoy any privileges upon division of property. If 
there were several sons, the property was divided into several parts. As a result, 
the property shared by each person was insufficient to make them free from 
Yangliuqing New Year painting, describing the scene of Chinese families celebrating Lunar 
New Year’s Eve during the late Qing Dynasty.
 

86 
CHINA’S CULTURE
poverty. Even an affl  uent family, aft er two or three generations, found the origi-
nal property would be exhausted completely. Th e fi ft h reason was that both the 
economy and people had no independent personality, and economic depen-
dence was prominent.
China’s traditional small-scale peasant economy has not undergone funda-
mental changes in the past 2,000 years: a family unit operates independently. 
However, the basis of ownership was historically weak because theoretically 
speaking, all land and property belonged to the emperor, who could freely dis-
pose it off . Th e powerful could conduct large-scale land acquisitions, and many 
people could lose their land, becoming employees or refugees. When land 
acquisition attained a certain level or was aggravated by natural disasters and 
foreign invasions, it inevitably resulted in war or insurrection. Th e outcome of 
a war would mostly result in new land distribution.
With regard to political and economic relations, politics revolved around 
the monarch, while the economy revolved around the offi  cials—in any case, the 
rich would inevitably be arbitrarily dispossessed by the offi  cial. Ancient China 
had many large cities, but their economic scale did not match other countries. 
Western scholars believe that the modern concept of a city should have two 
standards: one is that residents do not cultivate the land for a living but engage 
in industrial and commercial business; the other is that the city should have a 
legal personality and its own unique laws and systems. Measured by these two 
standards, ancient Chinese cities were mainly the residence of royal bureau-
cracy. Of course, the farmers were fewer, industry and commerce were sparse, 
and there was no independent legal status, nor did they have their own laws 
and systems. Th erefore, these cities rose or fell with changes in dynasties.
The sixth reason was that the traditional Chinese economy emphasized 
agriculture but restrained commerce, and there were official and commer-
cial traditions for this. Ancient China had a large population covering a vast 
amount of territory, so it could not maintain normal functions without busi-
ness. However, the most important and most profi table industries were govern-
ment-run monopolies, such as salt, iron, wine, and so on. Th is obviously was 
not conducive to economic development.
Traditional Chinese society had the following hierarchy: scholars, farm-
ers, artisans, and merchants. Th e status of the merchant was the lowest. Every 
dynasty pursued this policy with an emphasis on agriculture while restrain-
ing commerce. For example, during the Western Han Dynasty, long-distance 
sales merchants were not allowed to ride horses or ox carts and could not wear 
 elegant clothes. During the Jin Dynasty (265–420), when out on  business the 
businessmen had to wear one white shoe and one black shoe. Aft er the imperial 
civil examination system was introduced, merchants were prohibited from par-
ticipating; even wealthy businessmen were unable to change their social status. 
Many people preferred to farm and did not want to become merchants.
 

 
Chapter 5 The Concepts of Economy and Wealth 
87
All of the reasons stated above constrained and impeded the development 
and optimization of China’s economic structure. In short, China’s traditional 
economy was a loosely organized, natural agricultural economy with fragile 
foundations, but its social management system was holistic and integrated. It 
was very diffi  cult to make a breakthrough in this system as automatic advance-
ment to modernization is diffi  cult to achieve in this economic model.
First, it is diffi  cult to consciously conform to the opening-up requirements 
that arise. The management of the ancient Chinese economy was not com-
pletely closed, but basically each specifi c producer was closed, which could be 
summed up as “Grow old and die without having had any dealings with each 
other.” Traditional Chinese people did not want to leave their homes, and even 
those who did go out to earn a living would eventually want to return home.
Second, there was a lack of legal protection. The nature of a market 
 economy is characterized by a legal system, contracts, and regulation. Th e mar-
ket must rely on laws and regulations. Although traditional Chinese society 
did have laws, they were oft en associated with morality, decency, and propriety, 
as well as township folk customs. Futhermore, the issue of ownership was not 
clear. Th e feudal era, in fact, had property rights, but private property would 
often be confiscated. In addition, the development of a market economy in 
ancient China was imperfect.
As mentioned above, people’s thinking has long been limited; they often 
focused on production but not circulation; only aimed at working hard but 
“Silkworm Breeding and Weaving” (detail), Southern Song Dynasty, describing the whole 
production process of silkworm breeding and weaving silk through 24 scenes.
 

88 
CHINA’S CULTURE
not understanding the logistics; people only cared about food and clothing but 
never paid attention to capital accumulation. Th e important aspects of the tra-
ditional Chinese economy were farming, weaving, building houses, and start-
ing families.
Aspects Worth Learning from the Traditional 
Economic Life
China’s traditional economy and culture had many inadequacies, but were 
not completely useless. Otherwise, ancient China’s economy would not have 
achieved as much as it has. In fact, China’s traditional economic life has 
certain aspects that are worth mentioning. First was the optimistic attitude 
toward survival. The  Chinese nation went through thousands of years of 
training, developing a deep, optimistic, and uplift ing national spirit. Chinese 
people tenaciously try to survive under extremely diffi  cult conditions. Th ey 
like to enjoy their environment. Th e demands of the ordinary Chinese were 
not high; if they had a piece of land and the tax was not very high, they would 
quickly settle down to living.
Peasant families in a village in Jiangxi still maintain a strong tradition of agricultural civilization.
 

 
Chapter 5 The Concepts of Economy and Wealth 
89
As long as the state enacted benign policies, they could miraculously 
 disentangle themselves from poverty in a very short period of time.  Looking 
back at the Chinese history, the secret to the success of the most success-
ful dynasties was reducing taxes and relaxing strict policies. Unfortunately, 
 Chinese people were oft en denied such treatment.
The early Han Dynasty implemented recuperative policies to reduce 
 people’s taxes. Consequently, the state entered a period of affluence. At that 
time, Prime Minister Xiao He’s (257–193 bc) policies included reducing taxes 
and streamlining administration. His successor, Cao Can (?–190 bc), contin-
ued to follow Xiao He’s policies. Th is strategy laid the foundation for the pros-
perity of the Western Han Dynasty. Th is is reminiscent of the famous remark of 
the draft ers of the American Declaration of Independence:  “Th at government 
is best which governs the least.”
Second was hard work and addressing problems head on. The Chinese 
nation is a nation that knows how to endure pain. For thousands of years, the 
Chinese people lived in hardship, but quietly sacrifi ced for their nation. Today, 
in the market economy, people often disdain diligence because the market 
economy seems to encourage more risk-taking and speculation. However, it is 
not possible to build a modern and strong country without the love of toil and 
hard work of millions of people.
Today, many young Chinese engage in the challenging creative industry.
 

90 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Third was the emphasis on taking preventive measures and generating 
savings. It is said that an important reason for Japan’s economic success is that 
the savings rate of the Japanese is much higher than those of European and 
 American countries. China is a state that loves to save. Th ere is a folk saying: 
“Better spare at the brim than at the bottom.” Th is reminds people not to forget 
saving and to make preparations for unexpected situations that may arise. For 
many Chinese, their hard-earned money is not easily disposable.
In recent years, with the progress of a market economy, the younger gen-
eration has gradually accepted fi nance and consumption ideas from the West, 
such as spending fi rst and paying later, overdraft s, and so on. Many people buy 
houses and cars through loans and are ready to enjoy the prime of their life. 
However, their frugal parents cannot help but secretly worry one day that they 
should pay the full price for that kind of lifestyle.
Fourth was a realistic attitude to life and a fl exible mind.
Chinese people are not afraid of adversity, but this does not mean that they 
do not understand change. In fact, the Chinese are very good at survival. Th ey 
look down upon people who difficulties and do not seize opportunities. The 
Chinese have a quick mind and are good at bypassing diffi  culties, and can fl ex-
ibly overcome obstacles which seem impossible.
Cochin, India. The ﬁ shing net was ﬁ rst brought to India from China.
 

 
Chapter 5 The Concepts of Economy and Wealth 
91
Although the Chinese people were not good at economic and fiscal 
 management, most Chinese living abroad have accepted the local attitudes and 
become successful businessmen. Th e Chinese people are a powerful new force 
in the world economy. In the 1970s, China’s policy of reform and opening up 
also proved this point. 
Fift h is having an openness to new ideas and cultures. Historically, Chinese 
people’s awareness of opening up was not strong, but they did not lack toler-
ance. Although ethnic disputes sometimes arose, they tried to seek reconcilia-
tion, coexistence, and common prosperity. A major feature of today’s world is 
that all regions are progressing toward commonwealth, a feeling of community, 
and the development of free trade. Th is makes the world economy more color-
ful, more active, and more powerful. Having an open attitude toward others is 
a positive step for China and the world.
At present, China is still a developing country. However, the population is 
large, market potential is great, and opportunities are numerous. In the world 
economy, China has proven its importance. In the future, China will not just be 
a large country but an economic powerhouse.
 

 

6
93
6
Th ere are numerous traditions and customs in China and there is still a gold 
mine to be exploited. Th is is because the Chinese nation has a very long his-
tory and customs are deposits of national culture—the longer the history, the 
thicker the deposits. Not only do Chinese customs have a long history but also 
they are well preserved without any discontinuation. China is vast in geog-
raphy and varied in ethnic groups, and diff erent ethnic groups have diff erent 
 customs.
Chinese people are compatible with all kinds of cultures. They favor the 
golden mean, not affected by others; however, they do not favor extremism 
either. Foreign cultures entered China, which might have resulted in confl ict 
but ultimately they have survived and become new customs for the Chinese 
people. For example, in recent years, Christmas has been increasingly cel-
ebrated. Over a given time, such foreign festivals may become new Chinese 
customs.
Cultural Meaning in Ordinary Customs
Chinese customs are rich, like a huge mirror of treasure refl ecting all aspects 
of Chinese national history and culture. Ancient Chinese customs were greatly 
infl uenced by political factors.
Now, people enjoy full freedom in food and clothing. However, during feu-
dal times, every aspect of life was dominated by politics. Common people were 
Ordinary Life and Customs
Chapter 6
 

94 
CHINA’S CULTURE
called buyi (cotton clothes), describing the clothes they were allowed to wear. 
A feudal emperor not only had supreme power but could also enjoy exclusive 
clothing patterns (such as embroidered dragons) or could wear colored clothes 
(usually yellow). Th ese privileges were not for the ordinary people. Likewise, 
offi  cials at diff erent levels had their own unique style of clothing that could not 
be used by common people.
In addition to food, clothing, and housing, hairstyle was also influenced 
by politics. According to Confucianism, the human body is derived from the 
parents, no part of which should be diff erent from the original state at the time 
of death. One punishment for certain crimes was to remove a criminal’s hair. 
Also, if one wanted to become a monk, he would have to remove all his hair.
Certainly, not every custom was pleasant or beautiful. For example, during the 
early Qing Dynasty, rulers forced men to have a long queue or a pigtail braid. Th e 
Qing government completely transformed Chinese traditional masculine hair-
styles, with extreme approaches such as “off  with the hair or off  with your head”; if 
any man dared to resist the queue hairstyle, he would face the death penalty. Until 
the late Qing Dynasty, cutting the pigtail represented a new move of politics. In 
writer Lu Xun’s (1881–1936) works such as Th e True Story of Ah Q, Windstorm, 
and other novels, we can see the opinions of people  during the late Qing Dynasty.
The dragon symbolizes the emperor and his 
power.
The imperial robe of an emperor of the Qing 
Dynasty.
 

 
Chapter 6 Ordinary Life and Customs 
95
Chinese customs involved culture. Here, culture refers mainly to the tradi-
tional Chinese people’s social-psychological behavior.
One of the biggest features of Chinese traditional culture is belief in the homol-
ogy and coexistence of Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism. Moreover, these 
“The Immortals” (detail) from the Qing Dynasty, portraying Confucian and Taoist sages as well 
as Buddha, demonstrating the coexistence of the three religions.
 

96 
CHINA’S CULTURE
religions vary in the north and the south and according to diff erent ethnic groups. 
However, the Chinese can follow all or any of these religions and their customs.
Th e concepts of ghosts and gods in the Chinese religions are infl uenced by 
Taoism. People usually resort to ghosts and gods when they face diffi  culties in 
life. If they believe that certain ghosts and gods have caused diffi  culties in their 
life, they will invite other gods and spirits to drive them away. In traditional 
China, the art of geomantic omens was very popular. People usually invited 
fortune tellers to make a decision for them, for example, on whether to build a 
house, go out, marry, and bury the dead.
Chinese customs are also based on science. Th e Chinese are very particular 
about food and drink. Th ere are many related customs, some of which have a 
scientifi c founding. Th e Chinese have a deep love for alcohol and tea, and have 
made it into an art. Th ere are also many related customs; for example, drinking 
alcohol with arsenic sulphide on the fi ft h day of the fi ft h month of the Chinese 
lunar calendar and drinking alcohol with chrysanthemum on the ninth day 
of the ninth month of the same calendar year. Th e Chinese also have in-depth 
knowledge about planting, picking, making, and drinking tea. While  drinking 
Tea is the main drink of the Chinese people. 
The Chinese have developed a rich tradition 
of tea making and tea drinking.
Papercuttings used as window decorations are 
mostly used for adding a festive atmosphere.
 

 
Chapter 6 Ordinary Life and Customs 
97
tea, for example, one must use a particular quality of water to make a cup of 
tea, a particular vessel to hold the tea, strike a particular pose to drink the tea, 
use a particular form of etiquette to present the tea to guests, and drink a cer-
tain type of tea during a certain season—much of which actually has some sci-
entifi c basis.
These customs involve economics. There are many ancient Chinese cus-
toms that are products of traditional economic activities. For example, there is 
a custom in China of participating in weddings and funerals of relatives and 
friends and giving some money as an “off ering.” Th ere are certain rules as to 
how much to give and to whom, how to record the off ering, and how to accept 
it. Such rules are established by usage and custom, and generally people will 
observe them. To modern Chinese people, such an off ering can be stressful.
However, in traditional agricultural economic conditions, this was in fact 
an economic cooperative model. A small-scale peasant economy had a weak 
base and meager profits, so it was difficult to afford weddings and similar 
events independently. Th rough such contributions or “off erings” people would 
help each other fi nancially. Although this is a way of helping others, it is also a 
way of emotionally reaching out to others. Chinese customs focus on human 
relationships.
Art is also involved in Chinese customs. Th e customs are not only practical 
but also have an aesthetic character.
One of the most infl uential festivals among the Han clan is the Spring Fes-
tival. Some of the celebrations included New Year painting, paper-cutting, and 
writing or reciting couplets of poetry.
Chinese New Year painting is a folk art with a long history. Yangliuqing’s 
New Year painting is very famous and numbers among centuries of mas-
terpieces eligible to be displayed in museums and galleries. Paper-cutting is 
used to decorate windows. Paper cutters did not have to be scholars but they 
had to be skilled artisans capable of expressing beauty and imagery through 
their art.
A couplet is a special art form using Chinese characters and enhances the 
festival ambiance. No building—whether a palace, pavilion, or famous destina-
tion—is complete without a couplet. A good couplet—in meaning and in cal-
ligraphy—uses words that are suitable to local conditions. During the old days, 
many trades used couplets that had profound meanings. Some Chinese cou-
plets can even compete with classical poetry and are elegant works by famous 
masters, for example, the long couplets in Grand View Tower in Kunming, 
Yunan, and the long couplets of Qingcheng Hill, Sichuan.
Now, as people’s residential conditions have changed, New Year paintings 
and paper-cutting are fading from the family lifestyle, but couplets are still 
popular. Even today, during weddings, a paper-cutting artist is always present.
 

98 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Couplets have an all-pervading presence in traditional Chinese architecture, ranging from 
imperial palaces to common dwellings.
Customs are deposits of national cultures. Chinese customs are very diff er-
ent from Western cultures and customs; what is more, they are all similar to the 
customs of neighboring Japan.
Strong Sense of Confucian Culture
Just as Western customs are closely related to Christianity, Chinese traditional 
customs are strongly colored by Confucianism. Th e Westerners tend to favor a 
religious spirit, while the Chinese favor etiquette.
Chinese traditional customs are all inclusive, but they are tied by a 
standard ethical system. Th e Chinese ethical code comprises the imperial 
law, clan law, and family law. Even the emperor followed the ethical code. 
As mighty as he was, the emperor also had parents and children, so he had 
to live within the ethical framework. The founder of the Han Dynasty, in 
his fi nal years, was frustrated by the numerous customs and traditions for 
determining his crown prince.
Respect for the ethical code is respect for the family law and the family 
motto; the royal family motto was sometimes mightier than kingdom law. 
Th e common family motto would not override the law of the kingdom, but it 
was still binding. For example, Bao Zheng, a famous incorruptible minister 
during the Northern Song Dynasty, told his children and grandchildren to 
follow his family motto that required any descendant who became corrupt to 
be cast out from the family; upon death, this offi  cial was not to be buried in 
the family grave. Th is was a severe punishment that shows us how signifi cant 
family was.
 

 
Chapter 6 Ordinary Life and Customs 
99
According to the Chinese traditional culture, man is superior to a 
woman. In a family, the parents should be respected; in a kingdom, the king 
should be respected and even a king should respect his parents. Th e tradi-
tional Chinese ethical code is deeply rooted in every traditional family. Th e 
Chinese nation is a family-respecting and kinship-respecting nation. Chinese 
family relations focus on paternity, while Western family relations focus on 
conjugal relationship.
A Chinese child falls within this ethical custom even before birth. 
Upon birth, the child is treated differently according to its sex. For exam-
ple, a boy will have a family name, personal name, and alias, whereas a girl 
will have only a family name. Upon marriage, she will follow her husband’s 
family name. The difference is even more evident in education. A boy may 
go to school, while a girl needs to stay at home. Being uneducated, her 
future will be completely dependent on her future husband. In traditional 
Chinese society, the parents decided the matters of marriage. A man could 
have many wives, while women could have only have one husband in their 
lifetime.
Clay ﬁ gure of a female cook. Most traditional Chinese women devoted their entire life to 
cooking meals and doing housework.
 

100 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Th e modern Chinese have discarded this custom-themed Chinese culture. 
However, some deep-rooted ideology, such as male superiority, still remains. 
Even today, it is normal to fi nd many families wanting a son.
Th e deep-rooted traditional culture in every family gave rise to a peculiar 
phenomenon—a kingdom could be broken but Chinese culture could not 
because it was impossible to eradicate the Chinese family pattern. Sooner or 
later, invaders were infl uenced by the Chinese traditional culture and imper-
ceptibly became assimilated into it.
Changing Customs
Customs keep changing. Th ere keep good customs and bad customs. Th e good 
can raise a civilization, while the bad can ruin it. Changing a deep-rooted cus-
tom is never easy.
“Whiling Away the Summer” by Liu Guandao, Yuan Dynasty, describing the free and easy 
lifestyle of the celebrities in the Wei and Jin Dynasties. It is believed that the man in the 
painting is Ruan Xian, one of the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove.
 

 
Chapter 6 Ordinary Life and Customs 
101
Custom represents a stable lifestyle backed by a specifi c social and cultural 
system with an underlying economic pattern. If the economic pattern is not 
changed, the cultural system will hardly change and neither will custom.
Chinese traditional culture is slow when it comes to innovation. In her 
long history, China experienced three important periods of opening up and 
cultural integration; these were also the periods in which the social customs 
were transformed.
During the Spring and Autumn Period, as summarized by Confucius, 
“the system collapsed and the customs were corrupted.” At that time, the 
original order and customs of the Zhou Dynasty were disrupted and failed to 
survive. Confucius dreamed of recovering such customs, but restoration was 
a mainstream social movement then. During that period, the greatest resto-
ration was the Shang Yang Reform in the Qin Kingdom, followed by others. 
In the Warring States Period, a king of the Zhao Kingdom (about 340–295 
bc) advocated clothing reform and military reform. However, more than just 
clothing and warring arts in Central China were changed. Th e customs were 
also greatly changed in all the kingdoms and fi nally, a centralized Qin Empire 
was formed.
From the late Han Dynasty to the Wei and Jin Dynasties, social cus-
toms were transformed again. For example, one descendant of Confucius, 
Kong Rong (153–208), presented many surprising arguments. He publicly 
denied the spiritual basis of Confucianism, saying that children were not 
attached to their parents; they could be separated just as a bunch of fl owers 
separated from a vase. The Seven Sages in the Bamboo Forest disregarded 
many customs—they wore peculiar clothes, took peculiar medicines, lived 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
In the Three Kingdoms Period, seven sages—Ji Kang, Ruan Ji, Shan 
Tao, Xiang Xiu, Liu Ling, Wang Rong, and Ruan Xian—often met in 
a bamboo forest to chat, drink, and indulged in general merriment. 
They were called the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Forest. They were 
followers of Taoism and, because of political turmoil, their meet-
ings allowed them to dispel their feelings of depression, becoming a 
method of personal liberation during the Wei and Jin Dynasties.
SEVEN SAGES IN THE BAMBOO 
FOREST
 

102 
CHINA’S CULTURE
disreputable lives, and uttered untraditional words. Th eir rebellious ideas are 
infl uential even today.
Th e greatest transformation took place aft er the Opium War of 1840–1842. 
Western culture had a heavy impact on Chinese traditional customs. When the 
Qing government began to send students and offi  cials to visit or study overseas, 
these events introduced advanced technologies and fertilized new ideas. Th is 
was a fast-changing era. Empress Dowager Cixi (1835–1908) and others were 
also changing but not as fast as the reformists, who in turn were not as fast as 
the revolutionists. Finally, the Revolution of 1911 ended Chinese imperialism. 
At that time, social customs were radically transformed. Th e queue braid was 
cut off , and moreover, binding the foot was forbidden.
In the past, the most unbelievable custom was binding the feet of women. 
This custom was popular in China for nearly a thousand years. During the 
Ming and Qing Dynasties, this fashion was extremely popular, and a girl 
Empress Dowager Cixi and others pose for a photo, which was considered fashionable in 
the late Qing Dynasty.
 

 
Chapter 6 Ordinary Life and Customs 
103
would not be married if her feet were not bound; a girl with unbound feet was 
 considered ugly. Everyone was enchanted by bound feet, and some intellectu-
als even called themselves “learned scholars of foot-binding” and specialized in 
composing works for foot-binding appreciation. Th e Manchurian rulers pro-
hibited foot-binding among Manchurian girls, but that failed to limit the foot-
binding fashion among all Han girls. At that time, the Chinese female aesthetic 
attitude was extremely distorted. This cruel custom was ended in the early 
period of the Republic of China.
After Western customs were introduced into China, the social order 
became more open, and peaked around the May 4th Movement of 1919. Th e 
theme was democracy, science, and worldly customs. The most important 
change was that young people began to reject the ethical code and demanded 
freedom and marital autonomy. Th ese were the greatest challenges to Chinese 
customs. Some stalwarts of society were concerned about the accusations and 
objections against the ethical code.
Marital autonomy was an absolute challenge to feudalism. Marital 
autonomy would not follow “parents’ order, matchmaker’s words,” so pater-
nal power and clan power were aff ected; the freedom to choose one’s partner 
allowed sexual equality and thus released women from husbands’ authority. 
Marital autonomy became an epochal theme, reform began, and no power 
was able to stop it.
In recent years, reality TV shows have attracted a large number of girls who want to change 
their lives.
 

104 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Today, the Chinese people are undergoing yet another phase of profound 
reform and opening up. In the new market economy, many intrinsic Chinese 
traditions and customs can barely survive, and a new round of large-scale 
transformation of social tradition is inevitable.
It is never easy to change traditional customs and thinking styles. However, 
today, the Chinese people are becoming more tolerant of different customs. 
China is developing along a new road, and it is possible that Chinese customs 
will be radically changed to give rise to a modern civilization.
Lin Yutang, famous for works like My Country and My People.
 

 


7
107
7
Historically, Chinese science and technology has attained great heights. The 
history of Chinese science and technology mirrors that of traditional Chinese 
culture: the process of change is gradual and devoid of any major disruption, as 
if everything were taking its natural course at a slow and moderate pace.
From the Spring and Autumn Period until the Song and Yuan Dynasties, 
Chinese science and technology had always maintained the momentum necessary 
for sustained development but its progress was also highlighted by development 
booms during the Song and Yuan Dynasties. Its path of development was unique 
in the course of world history. It can be said that since the 6th or 7th century 
bc until the 14th century ad, Chinese science and technology was unmatched 
 anywhere in the world and that the Chinese people had made far-reaching 
 historical contributions to science and technology since the dawn of humanity.
However, over the following few centuries, when the West brought human-
ity the most brilliant of scientifi c and technological innovation, China did not 
develop a single invention of great historical signifi cance. Th is huge historical 
gap is worthy of deeper examination.
Scientifi c and Technological Achievements of 
the Ancient World
In general, Westerners did not know much about ancient Chinese science 
and technology. However, Needham (1900–1995) was an exception. He spent 
decades committed to studying the history of Chinese science and knew more 
Science and Technology
Chapter 7
 

108 
CHINA’S CULTURE
about the subject than most Chinese people. His summary and evaluation of 
the history of ancient Chinese science and technology were convincing.
Of course, the West in general still fully recognizes the Four Great Inven-
tions of ancient China. In their view, without the help of these Four Great 
Inventions, the West could not have been so successful in entering the modern 
era of technology. Francis Bacon, the British philosopher, evaluated three of 
China’s Four Great Inventions:
“We should observe the power, eff ectiveness, and consequences of 
each invention. The most famous examples are printing, gunpow-
der, and the compass. . . these three inventions changed the state 
A ﬂ ow chart of the papermaking process in the Han Dynasty.
 

 
Chapter 7 Science and Technology 
109
of things all over the world. Th e fi rst was used in manuscripts, the 
second was used in war, and the third was used in navigation, which 
resulted in countless changes. Th ese changes were so great that no 
empire, no school, no one famous person could produce greater 
power and infl uence to change the human race more than the three 
mechanical inventions.”
The book The 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Persons in History, 
written by the American astrophysicist Michael Hart, ranks the importance 
of famous historical figures based on their influence on human civilization. 
Portrait of Bi Sheng.
 

110 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Th ere are seven Chinese people among these 100: the top ranked is Confucius, 
ranked No. 5, followed by Cai Lun (63–121) of the Eastern Han Dynasty (25–
220), ranked No. 7. Cai Lun was the earliest inventor of paper technology and 
thereby the most infl uential of all.
In the top 10 of Hart’s list, there are four scientists or inventors in addition 
to Cai Lun: Sir Isaac Newton (1643–1727), ranked No. 2, Johannes Gutenberg 
(1400–1468), ranked No. 8, and Albert Einstein (1879–1955), ranked No. 10. 
Gutenberg’s contribution was the invention of movable type in the 15th cen-
tury, but this was created about four centuries later than a similar invention 
made by Chinese inventor Bi Sheng (about 970–1051). In any case, to consider 
Cai Lun, an ancient Chinese inventor who made a signifi cant contribution to 
human civilization, as comparable to Newton, Einstein, and other scientific 
giants is still a very high evaluation.
The Chinese people’s contribution to humanity’s technological civiliza-
tion is not limited to the Four Great Inventions. Scientific and technological 
achievements in ancient China had the following unique characteristics:
First, Chinese science and technology experienced comprehensive devel-
opment. Scientific and technological inventions of ancient China not only 
Movable earthenware type in an iron frame.
 

 
Chapter 7 Science and Technology 
111
lasted longer and were distributed equally, but also the Chinese people made 
 contributions in every aspect of science and technology.
Since the Spring and Autumn Period, China ranked at the top of the list in 
terms of development among the civilizations of the world. China had attained 
great technological achievements in agriculture, water conservation, metal-
lurgy and mining technology, energy development and utilization technology, 
construction, machinery, shipbuilding, weaving, chemical technology, and 
even in the academic fields of astronomy, mathematics, agricultural studies, 
physics, geology, chemistry, medicine, and more.
When making a horizontal comparison of ancient Chinese inventions with 
the West, we can see that for over 1,000 years, from the 2nd to the 15th century 
ad, China had been the leader in almost all areas of science and  technology. 
The ancient Chinese stone inscription of an astrological map made in 1247 according to the 
astronomical observation data of the Northern Song Dynasty, portraying 1,434 stars in total.
 

112 
CHINA’S CULTURE
In addition to the Four Great Inventions, which became the precursors of 
modern science in the West, China was also more advanced in using oil, coal, 
metallurgy, shipbuilding, chemistry, and other areas, which were subsequently 
dominated by the West.
Secondly, ancient Chinese science and technology had its own develop-
mental characteristics and made prominent achievements in astronomy, math-
ematics, agriculture, medicine, and several other aspects.
Ancient Chinese astronomy has a long history and considerable wealth 
of information has been accumulated. Over the course of the Spring and 
Autumn Period to the early Qing Dynasty, Chinese astronomers recorded 
about 1,000 solar eclipses and more than 900 lunar eclipses, as well as discov-
ered dozens of new stars. In 1054, the Taurus supernova explosion recorded by 
astronomers in the Song Dynasty was particularly important. China is also the 
world’s fi rst country to develop a satellite table. Th e star map found in the Dun-
huang Grottoes records 1,350 stars—this is the most comprehensive star map 
in human history before the 17th century.
The Chinese calendar is also among the best in the world. The ancient 
quarter calendar invented in the Warring States Period designated a tropical 
year of 365 1/4 days, only 11 minutes less than that of the modern Gregorian 
calendar. Today, China still uses the lunar calendar and solar calendar simulta-
neously. China’s lunar calendar is actually a combination of the lunar and solar 
calendars, which has contributed greatly toward Chinese studies of astronomy, 
agriculture, medicine, and military aff airs.
Prior to the Song and Yuan Dynasties, China’s mathematics had never 
lagged behind the world’s best, and some inventions actually led the world 
for a long time. Zhou Bi, Th e Nine Chapters, and other ancient Chinese math-
ematical masterpieces enjoyed a worldwide reputation. China also made great 
mathematical contributions in the studies of numeric systems, decimal systems, 
binary method, negatives, ratios, higher-order equations, Pythagorean theorem, 
An ancient large water conservation project in Dujiangyan, Sichuan, which still works.
 

 
Chapter 7 Science and Technology 
113
and the calculation of pi. Some mathematical historians believe that the contri-
bution of the decimal system, invented and improved by the Chinese, had an 
eff ect on human culture comparable to that of the Four Great Inventions.
Ancient Chinese people made an even greater contribution in the realm of 
agriculture. Th e ancient Chinese created a great and civilized country that lead 
the world in every respect and had its foundations in agriculture.
Ancient Chinese agriculture had already neared the limits of its develop-
ment in the prevailing conditions of the time. Some of the historic creations 
still play economically important roles today. For example, two great water 
conservation projects, the Grand Canal and Dujiangyan in Sichuan, were 
world-class achievements during their period of history. Dujiangyan was built 
in the middle of the 3rd century bc, 2,200 years ago, and it remains of practical 
value today—a rare feat in the history of human civilization.
Chinese Medicine is a science with unique efficacy and special cultural 
significance. The information contained within traditional Chinese medi-
cine is extremely rich. It not only includes medical theories, but also includes 
philosophical thought; it contains not only applicable technologies, but also 
biological sciences. “Classic of Internal Medicine,” “Typhoid” and other Chinese 
medical classics are immortal in the history of Chinese culture and literature. 
Th ey refl ect a unique form of Chinese thought that still retains special theoreti-
cal and cultural value today. “Compendium of Materia Medica,” conceived by 
the eff orts of Li Shizhen of the Ming Dynasty, is a classic masterpiece of Chi-
nese medicine that has had an enormous impact on world civilization.
It can be said that up to the Song and Yuan Dynasties, China had always 
been a great technological power. After the Song and Yuan Dynasties, the 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
Zu Chongzhi (429–500) was a distinguished mathematician and 
scientist of the Northern and Southern Dynasties. His main contri-
butions were in the fi elds of mathematics, astronomy, calendar meth-
odology, and mechanics. He calculated the value of pi to be between 
3.1415926 and 3.1415927, accurate to the 7th decimal. This record 
was not broken until the calculation by the 15th century mathemati-
cian, Casey. He also calculated pi in two fractional forms: 22/7 and 
355/113.
PI OF ZU CHONGZHI
 

114 
CHINA’S CULTURE
 scientific and technological levels in China did not significantly decrease; 
rather, they appeared to be lagging behind when compared with the West, and 
this gap continued to grow.
A Refl ection on the Limitations of China’s 
Scientifi c and Technological Development
Western civilization, since the beginning of the Renaissance and especially during 
the fi rst few hundred years aft er the 16th century, accomplished an endless array 
of scientifi c and technological achievements. Th e technological creations of this 
period far surpassed the sum of all those in previous human history. To much sur-
prise and disappointment, during this period the Chinese people did not create 
even one historically signifi cant invention in the fi eld of science and technology.
In his book Th e 100: A Ranking of the Most Infl uential Persons in History, 
Michael Hart mentioned a total of 37 important fi gures in the fi eld of science 
and technology, most of them belonging to the world of modern history—but 
in this historical period, there wasn’t a single signifi cant Chinese contributor. 
China had been an advanced scientifi c and technological power, but aft er the 
15th century, it lagged behind the development of the rest of the world. Since 
the 20th century, China has gained much ground, but there still exists a large 
gap when compared to developed countries.
Why would China’s situation change from advanced to backward? There 
were profound social and historical reasons, deep cultural reasons, and also 
reasons rooted in ancient Chinese science and technology. In all, ancient 
A process ﬂ ow chart of traditional Chinese medicine by people of the Ming Dynasty.
 

 
Chapter 7 Science and Technology 
115
 Chinese science and technological development faced restrictions and 
 repression in all four areas, and their negative impact ultimately resulted in the 
emergence of backwardness in Chinese science and technology.
Limitations of the Science and Technology Model in 
Ancient China
Why did China’s science and technology suddenly appear backward upon 
entering the 16th century? Did the West create a historic miracle overnight and 
the Chinese people simultaneously lose their own wisdom and creativity? In 
fact, China did not lose its former glory overnight, but there is a reason for the 
inherent weakness of modern Chinese science and technology.
Chinese scholars have compared the historical morphologies of  Chinese 
and Western science and technology. Through the statistical analysis of 
large amounts of historical data, they established three constituent parts of 
science and technology: theory, experiment, and technology. Th rough this 
model, they were able to prove that the morphologies of the Chinese and 
Western science and technology were significantly different (see the chart 
below). These differences had diverse effects on the scientific and techno-
logical development of the West and China.
By examining statistics, it is not diffi  cult to draw some basic conclusions:
First, technical factors that can promote scientific and technological 
progress are important. Within the structure of ancient Chinese science and 
technology, the proportion of technological innovation had been in a state 
of absolute superiority; thus Chinese science and technology made rapid 
 progress. From the 13th to 15th century, the sudden increase in the proportion 
of the technological innovation of the West enabled them to make signifi cant 
scientifi c and technological development in that era and established the proper 
conditions for future scientifi c and technological innovation to take off .
Structure of science and technology in China: 12th to 19th 
century
Age
Theory
Experiments
Technology
Northern Song Dynasty (960–1127)
 4
 6
90
Southern Song Dynasty (1127–1279)
19
 7
74
Yuan Dynasty (1206–1368)
 8
12
80
Ming Dynasty (1368–1644)
16
 3
81
Qing Dynasty (1616–1911)
40
  1
89
 

116 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Second, when scientific and technological development reaches certain 
historical levels, the technological advantage alone can no longer produce a 
qualitative leap in scientifi c development because the potential of the technol-
ogy itself has been fully exploited. Th e new historical leap requires coordinated 
development in theory, experiment, and technology so as to produce a new 
overall eff ect. Th is new structure is bound to raise demands for the reform of 
existing technology, or even demand a total rejection of the old technical sys-
tems and approaches. At the same time, new technologies require new theo-
retical and scientifi c practice as a guide and support. Th is qualitative change 
cannot easily be shown by statistics.
Since the 16th century, scientifi c theory in the West gained signifi cance. At the 
same time, the proportion of scientifi c experiments was growing rapidly. However, 
in China, the situation was different. Until the 19th century, the proportion of 
technology still maintained absolute predominance, while the proportion of sci-
entifi c experiments was pitifully low. Th e result was that although the technology 
was not completely backward, the overall level of technology lagged far behind.
Joseph Needham had proposed a formulation wherein the power derived 
from a steam engine was a function of water emissions and the capacity of 
the bellows. In theory, this makes sense, but in fact the steam engine is not 
the simple sum of water emissions and bellow capacity. If these elements were 
not supported by the necessary theory and experiments, there would never 
have been a steam engine. Th e invention of the steam engine not only needed 
the  technical concept of water emissions and bellows, but more importantly, 
it required essential theoretical guidance and experimental verification. Of 
Structure of science and technology in the West: 12th to 
19th century
Age
Theory
Experiments
Technology
12
90
 5
 5
13
21
23
56
14
 2
 1
97
15
 5
 6
89
16
47
20
33
17
61
22
17
18
31
20
49
19
33
29
38
 

 
Chapter 7 Science and Technology 
117
 particular  signifi cance was the discovery of the vacuum theory, which played a 
key role in the invention of the steam engine.
Th e technology-oriented model of ancient Chinese science and technology 
allowed it to enjoy outstanding technological achievements in a particular his-
torical period. However, because of the lack of a necessary theoretical and exper-
imental basis, its own unreasonable structure ultimately limited its development.
Th ird, only by achieving a rough balance between theory, experimentation, 
and technology could the structure of modern science and technology achieve 
maturity and a high operational status.
The Chinese nation has great talent and diligence. In almost all projects 
directly related to the use of manual labor, the Chinese people have always 
put forth an outstanding performance. Some Chinese traditional arts, such as 
embroidery, clay sculptures, and miniature buildings, are still amazing. But 
the Chinese people were often not good at using technology like the engine 
or transmission machines. The reason was that ancient Chinese science and 
technology did not focus on experimentation. Th e Chinese could rely on their 
wisdom and intellect to invent a technology, but few people attempted to sum-
marize or expand on the theory. Also, few people carried out further experi-
ments to improve and develop the technology.
 A sundial invented by ancient Chinese is a device that measures time according to shadows 
as the sun’s position changes over time.
 

118 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Take Chinese medicine, for example. One of the most authoritative books, 
Classic of Internal Medicine, has no basis in the study of anatomy. It was an 
outstanding work and great for the time it was produced in. However, this clas-
sic book has been used for over two thousand years without being replaced 
by a new medical theory. Herein lies the backwardness of Chinese medicine. 
Th is was probably not the result that the author of Classic of Internal Medicine 
would have wanted. Th ere have been instances of the study of anatomy in Chi-
nese medical history, but coming from a background of Confucian culture, 
such behavior was severely criticized and stopped. Without an anatomical 
base, traditional Chinese medicine lacked a suffi  ciently accurate understand-
ing of physiology; therefore, it also lacked development in cytology, neurology, 
cardio-cerebral science, as well as other areas of the modern medical system. 
Although its medical theory of holistic diagnosis and syndrome classifi cation 
was impressive, overall, there was still a wide gap when compared to the West-
ern medical system.
Traditional Chinese science and technology belonged to an empirical 
 system, emphasizing and focusing on experience. However, where experience 
was not possible, it appeared vague and absurd. Th is was the “inherent weak-
ness” of Chinese science and technology. Since modern times, aft er recognizing 
the importance of theory and experimentation, China’s technological level has 
Feeling of the pulse is one diagnostic method in traditional Chinese medicine.
 

 
Chapter 7 Science and Technology 
119
Acupoint location chart by people of the Qing Dynasty.
 

120 
CHINA’S CULTURE
once again experienced advancement by leaps and bounds, and has gradually 
narrowed the gap between the highest technological levels in the world.
Limitations due to China’s Natural Agricultural Economy
The basis of development in ancient Chinese science and technology was its 
natural agricultural economy, which consequently subjected it to constraints. 
Confined to the scope of this economic foundation, Chinese science and 
 technology was full of vitality and creativity; however, beyond this, it became 
weak. Many developments in science and technology were closely related to the 
natural agricultural economy while developments in other areas were poor.
The goal of ancient Chinese astronomy was to aid agriculture. The most 
familiar astronomical knowledge of time was not of the sky but of the Earth—
this was the discovery of the 24 solar terms in a year. China was the first 
 country to determine the Spring Equinox and several other important solar 
terms, and it soon formed the original system of 24 solar terms. Chinese people 
have traditionally been more dependent on the lunar calendar because it was 
more convenient for traditional agricultural practices. Th is aspect of Chinese 
astronomy made it diffi  cult to integrate physics and mathematics, but made it 
much easier to relate to agricultural activities and divination.
The Chinese invented the mill wheel early on. This water pumping device was used as an 
irrigation tool and improved over the following generations.
 

 
Chapter 7 Science and Technology 
121
The same applies to traditional Chinese mathematics. Mathematics in 
China has been fairly well developed and is of a world-class standard. However, 
Chinese mathematics failed to invent or introduce a system of symbols, a fl aw 
that bottlenecked its development. Chinese mathematics was good for calcula-
tion but poor for abstract thinking; so it was simply called arithmetic. Chinese 
mathematics also lacked a rigorous deductive system and oft en only  considered 
specific problems as its objects of study—it focused on the local issues but 
ignored the overall situation, so it failed to establish an abstract mathematical 
system. While Western mathematics moved toward strict interpretation, sym-
bolization, and theorems, the Chinese used most of their wisdom in measuring 
land, inventing and using the abacus, and other practical calculations. Th e fi nal 
reason was that the basis of traditional Chinese mathematics belonged to the 
natural agricultural economy, which did not require the higher mathematics 
required for astrophysics, and needed only land measurement and other simi-
lar practical issues relevant to an agricultural economy.
The central theme of a natural agricultural society was not to expand 
 production, but to satisfy consumption; not the cultivation of talent, but the 
stability of jobs; not opening up new industrial areas, but ensuring an agricul-
tural harvest; not improving the quality of life, but meeting the basic problems 
of food, clothing, housing, and household expenditure.
The abacus is a calculating tool invented by the ancient Chinese. Its history can be traced 
back to over 2,600 years.
 

122 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Any science and technology or practical skills associated with these features 
saw good development. For example, techniques of planting, breeding, cooking, 
brewing, and anything connected to food were very well developed in China. 
The ancient Chinese sericulture and silk industry, which was related to cloth-
ing, was also very advanced. China was the home of silkworms and mulberry 
trees and consequently also the home of silk. Th e most infl uential Chinese and 
Western economic and cultural channel was referred to as the Silk Road. Manu-
facturing technology and construction techniques relevant to housing were also 
fully developed in ancient China—the Great Wall, the Forbidden City, and other 
buildings were all masterpieces in the architectural history of mankind. In many 
similarly practical areas, Chinese science and technology was highly productive.
However, the role of the agricultural economy in the development of 
 Chinese science and technology was like a double-edged sword: on one 
hand it cultivated Chinese science and technology, but on the other hand it 
restricted it. In its long history of development, Chinese science and technol-
ogy unwittingly became the slave of an agricultural economy. It could be said 
that Chinese science and technology, which had infi nite vitality, had fi nally 
Structural diagram of a jacquard machine and a ﬂ ow chart of silk processing by people of the 
Ming Dynasty.
 

 
Chapter 7 Science and Technology 
123
been domesticated by the agricultural economy. It provided honest service for 
an agricultural economy, was well-behaved and obedient, just like livestock 
and poultry, but its evolutionary function and viability nearly disappeared.
Limitation due to Traditional Ideas
Chinese traditional ideas were largely the products of the natural agricultural 
economy and were characteristically conservative and closed. This feature 
caused the mentality of the traditional Chinese society to tend toward resting 
on its laurels, pursuing stability while avoiding excessiveness and transforma-
tion. Th is was undoubtedly a serious impediment to any scientifi c and techno-
logical take-off .
Confucianism and Taoism had the greatest infl uence on Chinese cultural 
traditions. Confucianism preferred moderation but not competition; Taoism 
advocated inaction and had no interest in competition. However, scientifi c and 
technological development required competition. Th e reason that the modern 
science and technology of the West made great achievements was that it was 
based on a market economy that had a competitive mechanism. In the develop-
ment of science and technology, there should not only be mutual competition, 
but also life-and-death situations. Today it has become more apparent that the 
power of capitalism is increasingly dominant.
The celestial globe of the Old Beijing Observatory was used by the ancient Chinese.
 

124 
CHINA’S CULTURE
The vitality of science and technology comes from continuous creation. 
In traditional Chinese culture originality was not particularly liked; instead, 
everything, every word, required a known source. For example, if one pub-
lished a new viewpoint, others would immediately ask where it came from 
and what its basis was. Traditional Chinese culture has a long history with rich 
experience, so new innovations were always perceived as being inferior to the 
old ways; the more infatuated the culture was with the classic, the more afraid 
it was to let its ideas go beyond them. Ancient Chinese intellectuals were good 
at description and commentary, but not good at creating original ideas and 
doctrines, and so it was with those involved with science and technology.
Some people say that traditional Chinese thought lacked a metaphysical 
quality. Indeed, a number of great thinkers appeared throughout modern West-
ern history; they served as spiritual mentors promoting the leap to modern 
Western science and technology. In contrast, the driving force pushing Chinese 
thinkers in the direction of science and technology was minimal.
In addition, traditional Chinese ideas highlighted the “Way” but didn’t 
emphasize evidence. Scholars spoke of the “Way,” the “Mind,” and the “Air,” 
but it was diffi  cult to grasp what the Way, Mind, and Air actually were. Confu-
cius, Laozi, and other infl uential Chinese thinkers agreed that people should 
not focus on specifi c scientifi c and technological experiments or things of that 
nature. When this way of thinking was refl ected in the scientifi c and techno-
logical fi eld, ancient Chinese science and technology showed skill in summary 
but weakness in analysis.
Because of lack of creative thinking, Chinese scientific and technological 
theory was less developed; because of lack of evidence, experimentation was far 
from developed; and because of lack of analysis, specialized division of labor 
was not completed. Such a structure of science and technology, lack of advance-
ment of theories, scientifi c experiments, and specialized division of labor made 
it diffi  cult to achieve modernization within its existing framework.
The Limitations of China’s Traditional Socio-Cultural Structure
Over a long process of accretion through the era of science in the Song and 
Ming Dynasties, China had formed a strict social and cultural structure. 
This cultural structure had a well-established theoretical basis, a complete 
 management system, a complete economic system, and a complete cultural 
protection mechanism. China then possessed concrete structural aspects: in 
social organization, it emphasized political bureaucracy; in economic opera-
tions, it adhered to self-sufficiency; in guiding its industry, it implemented 
a policy of emphasizing agriculture and restricting commerce; in its value 
 

 
Chapter 7 Science and Technology 
125
 system, it was committed to justice before profi t; in individual evaluation, it 
advocated moral priority.
All these aspects had a negative impact on scientific and technological 
development, and this negative impact resulted in broad structural eff ects. For 
example, the policy emphasizing agriculture but restricting commerce was 
not only a policy, but it also became a cultural tradition, making it diffi  cult for 
China to have sustainable commercial power. However, commerce was closely 
related to modern technology; restraining commerce was equivalent to sup-
pressing technology. Technology without a market caused the entire system to 
close in on itself.
In this way, it could only become a vassal of the traditional agricultural 
economy and could not evolve.
Today, after another major reform of ideas and systems innovation, the 
 Chinese people have abandoned the various restrictions and constraints imposed 
by traditional society on science and technology, thereby  re- establishing a 
new relationship between the economy and technology. Th e future of modern 
 Chinese science and technology lies in its high-level  modernization.
Chinese engineers conferring with foreign experts.
 

 

8
127
8
Chinese education has a remarkable tradition. In the earliest time of its history,  
there appeared a great educator: Confucius. Th e Chinese and Western  education 
systems have taken diff erent paths. Although the methods are  diff erent, it is dif-
fi cult to say which one is superior. Since the 17th and 18th  centuries, however, 
there were unprecedented achievements in education. At the same time, the 
 Chinese education system became rigid, lacked vitality, and fell behind the times.
Just as the Chinese economy and society must be modernized, the funda-
mental path of Chinese education must be modernized as well. Since the early 
20th century, especially from the late 1970s, the Chinese educational  system 
has become increasingly similar to the world educational system and its educa-
tional philosophy.
Changes in the Education System
Chinese schools probably emerged during the Xia Dynasty (2070–1600 bc) or 
perhaps even earlier. Aft er entering the Spring and Autumn Period, the Chi-
nese educational system experienced its fi rst true glory. Th e academic activity 
of that time was unprecedented: Confucius, Mozi, and others initiated private 
schools and established the trend.
Th e educational system developed at that time had distinct characteristics: 
innovative in form, progressive in thought, independent in academics, and sys-
tematic in expression. At the time, as the Hundred Schools of Th ought  contended 
for recognition, a large number of greatly infl uential theoretical writings emerged, 
Education
Chapter 8
 

128 
CHINA’S CULTURE
such as Th e Analects of Confucius, Mencius, Tao De Ching, Zhuangzi, Xunzi, Th e 
Art of War, Han Feizi, and Lü’s Spring and Autumn Annals, to name a few.
During the reign of Emperor Wu of the Western Han Dynasty, the impe-
rial government implemented a national policy of “following Confucianism 
alone and abandoning all other schools of thought.” Th ereaft er, the education 
of the Han Dynasty consisted mainly of the Confucian classics and systems of 
thought associated with the concept of Yin and Yang. At this point, the Chinese 
educational system had been unified and completed. The scope of the Han 
Dynasty education system was expanded, especially in areas directly linked to 
the bureaucratic administrative structure. Th is period has great signifi cance in 
the history of the ancient Chinese educational system.
“Fu Sheng Transmitting the Book of Documents” by Du Jin, during the Ming Dynasty, 
portraying the 90-year-old Fu Sheng imparting the Book of History to Chao Cuo.
 

 
Chapter 8 Education 
129
The Han Dynasty implemented the official selection system in which 
 eligible candidates were required to master knowledge of the classics, literature, 
ethics, military aff airs, agriculture, and so on, but the emphasis on the classics 
still remained dominant. Th e people of the Han Dynasty exerted great eff orts 
to collect and arrange the old Confucian classics, and established a  meticulous 
method of managing the style of their study. But because there was such a 
great emphasis on classics, their thought processes at the time were  inevitably 
 confined. The Han system of education was the first instance of the great 
 popularity of Confucianism in Chinese history; this period established the 
foundation of the traditional Confucian-based education system.
During the chaos that erupted at the end of Han Dynasty, the study of the 
Confucian classics was seriously threatened as Buddhism, Taoism, and mysti-
cism became prevalent. By the time of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, 
Buddhism had greatly developed. This era can be seen as a time of mutual 
growth and interaction among Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism. However, 
Confucian education still maintained a powerful force. With respect to impor-
tant issues, like maintaining the culture of the Central Plains, protecting the agri-
cultural economy, maintaining a stable society, and encouraging a unifi ed state, 
Confucianism still played a historic role that other doctrines could not replace.
During the Sui Dynasty, the entire country underwent unification and the 
imperial examination system was established. In the Tang Dynasty, further improve-
ments were made to the imperial examination system. The imperial government 
still adopted Confucian education as its core, but also gave adequate attention to 
legal studies, arithmetic, medicine, the science of books, and so on. It is particularly 
worth mentioning that those in the Tang Dynasty provided special education and 
training period for government offi  cials so as to meet the demands of maintaining 
a developed economy and prosperous industry and commerce. Th is can be consid-
ered as the vocational educational system of ancient China. In addition to the arts, 
the people of the Tang Dynasty also introduced martial examinations.
The educational system of the Song Dynasty inherited and developed the 
tradition of the Sui and Tang Dynasties, but special attention was devoted to the 
imperial examination and academies. Th e academy was not contrived  during the 
Song Dynasty, but at that time it was used to spread knowledge and thereby made 
a huge social impact. Th e Northern Song Dynasty had four famous academies: 
White Deer, Shi Gu (or Song Yang), Ying Tian, and Yue Lu. Th e academies of the 
Song Dynasty expanded upon the traditional Confucian education system as well 
as made some totally new contributions. Th e Four Books and Five Classics sys-
tem established by Zhu Xi stand as typical examples of that time. From the Con-
fucian classic, Th e Book of Rites, Zhu Xi extracted two books: Th e Great Learning 
and Doctrine of the Mean. Together with Th e Analects of Confucius and Mencius, 
these texts were known as the Four Books. Th is was actually an important struc-
tural transformation of the traditional Confucian education system.
 

130 
CHINA’S CULTURE
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
“Four Books” and “Five Classics” are Confucian classics. The Five  Classics 
refer to The Book of Changes, Collection of Ancient Texts, The Book of  Songs, 
The Rites, and the Spring and Autumn Annals. These are Confucian classics 
from the Pre-Qin period. Zhu Xi of the Southern Song Dynasty extracted 
Great Learning and The Doctrine of the Mean from The Rites and called 
them “Four Books” together with The Analects of Confucius and Mencius. 
The Yuan, Ming, and Qing Dynasties confi ned the scope for setting the 
examination paper for imperial examination based on these Four Books 
and fi nally, the eight-part essay system was formed. The Four Books have 
become the traditional basic textbooks in China and were compulsory 
books for every intellectual. Their position thus surpassed that of the Five 
Classics. Some people also called Four Books the Oriental “Bible” to indi-
cate their profound infl uence on Chinese traditional culture.
FOUR BOOKS AND FIVE CLASSICS
Yue Lu Academy in Changshan, Hunan, established in 976, is a famous ancient Chinese 
academy. The building we see today was built in the Qing Dynasty.
 

 
Chapter 8 Education 
131
The development of “enlightening literature” is another educational 
achievement of the Song Dynasty that is worth mentioning. China’s most 
famous piece of enlightening literature for children is the Three Character 
 Classic compiled by Wang Yinglin (1223–1296) during the Southern Song 
Dynasty (1127–1279). It contains plain language, rich content, and has a 
resounding eff ect when read aloud. Until the Republican Period, many rural 
schools used it as basic teaching material. Other such texts, like the Hundred 
Family Names and Children’s Reading Literacy, were also widely used pieces 
of enlightenment literature. Texts like these are still loved and treasured by 
 Chinese people today.
The Yuan Dynasty deprecated Confucian scholars and discontinued the 
imperial examination. Although the imperial examination was later resumed, it 
did not produce results of the same quality as in previous eras. Medical educa-
tion, however, was given great emphasis during the Yuan Dynasty.
Th e Ming and Qing Dynasties belonged to an era of autocratic implemen-
tation of the imperial examination. The biggest shortcoming of the imperial 
examination system of the time was the adoption of the eight-legged essay 
examination form, created personally by Emperor Taizu Zhu Yuanzhang 
(1328–1398) of the Ming Dynasty. Th e eight-legged essay was a rigid  format 
“Children Frolicking in School” painted in the Qing Dynasty, portraying a group of children 
frolicking in a country school while the teacher dozes off.
 

132 
CHINA’S CULTURE
that restricted the free creation of essays in the test. Because of this, the 
 imperial examination system lost its original progressive spirit and educational 
utility and became a tool for the implementation of autocratic thought in the 
Ming and Qing Dynasties. The imperial examination of the Ming and Qing 
Dynasties created a large number of characters similar to those depicted in the 
Qing Dynasty satirical novel Th e Scholars.
After the Ming Dynasty, modern science and thought were gradually 
introduced into China. China’s fi rst batch of enlightenment thinkers stepped 
onto the stage of cultural education during the late Ming Dynasty and early 
Qing Dynasty. Aft er 1840, it became too diffi  cult to continue the decadent and 
 backward imperial examination system as well as the Confucian education 
 system. In 1908, the late Qing Dynasty government ordered the abolition of the 
imperial examination system.
Aft er the Revolution of 1911, Chinese education entered a new historical 
period. China learned from the educational systems of Europe and the United 
States, and established a complete educational system extending from primary 
school to university. Th e most notable universities of this period were China’s 
Peking University and Tsinghua University. Prior to and following The May 
Fourth Movement, Tsinghua University, Peking University, Beijing Normal 
University, and other universities gathered many famous teachers, such as 
Chen Duxiu (1879–1942), Hu Shi (1891–1962), Lu Xun, Wang Guowei (1877–
1927), Chen Yinke (1890–1969), and other outstanding educators. Although 
these great scholars had diff erent political stances, as well as diff erent areas of 
expertise, each had its own unique discoveries and achievements. At that time, 
universities in China had neared if not attained a level of education comparable 
to the best universities in the world; the professionals in natural science, social 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
The Scholars was a long satirical novel written by Qing Dynasty author 
Wu Jingzi (1701–1754). It mainly described the daily life and vari-
ous experiences of the scholars who sought fame under the imperial 
examination system of the Qing Dynasty. Using a group of feudal lib-
erators as literary imagery, the novel vividly and profoundly refl ected 
the shortcomings of the imperial examination system and the political 
and social decay of the time.
THE SCHOLARS BY WU JINGZI 
 

 
Chapter 8 Education 
133
sciences, and other areas of study that received their education at these univer-
sities were also near if not at the same level of the most advanced academics 
in the world. Th is bright era allowed for a brilliantly creative period, the likes 
of which had not been seen in the history of the Chinese education since the 
Spring and Autumn and the Warring States Periods.
Unfortunately, due to the chaos of war and various social conflicts, this 
fl ourishing period only lasted for a short time.
Despite the rise and decline of traditional education and its achievements, 
China’s education has a long history and many great achievements. One aspect 
in which it greatly diff ered from from Western education was that China always 
 The Imperial Academy in Beijing, the highest educational institution during the Yuan, Ming, 
and Qing Dynasties.
 

134 
CHINA’S CULTURE
focused on  secular education and used Confucianism as its primary content. 
Th e  historical achievements of China’s education can be summarized according 
to four  basic aspects.
From the standpoint of education, China is a country that had outstanding 
educational professionals in every dynasty.
Confucius was certainly the greatest figure in the history of Chinese 
 education, and his position was most unique in China’s history. Gradually, his 
fame and infl uence grew until he fi nally became the model teacher for all genera-
tions. Confucius’s rich educational thought had infl uenced nearly all educational 
issues of that time. He put forth great maxims such as “Educate according to apti-
tude,” “Education for all,” “Teach with tireless zeal,” “Be well-informed,” “Be willing 
to learn from inferiors,” and “Learn and then review what you have learned from 
time to time.” His thoughts also promoted the equal importance of learning and 
thinking, turning from evil to good, and his moral ideals in particular, as well as 
the spirit of a studious life, admired and imitated by later generations. Th e Analects 
of Confucius, which recorded major quotes from his life, was highly influential. 
Many famous aphorisms from the book have become integral components of Chi-
nese culture.
Confucius was not the only great educator; Mozi, a contemporary of 
 Confucius, was also a popular educator with students far and wide. Xunzi and 
Mencius were among the famous educators of the time after Confucius. In 
addition, The Hundred Schools of Thought and their supporters also made 
their own contributions to education.
Since the Qin Dynasty, there were masters of education in every genera-
tion, such as Dong Zhongshu and Zheng Xuan (127–200) of the Han Dynasty; 
Han Yu of the Tang Dynasty; the two Chengs, Zhou Dunyi (1017–1073), Zhang 
Zai, Zhu Xi, and Lu Jiuyuan of the Song Dynasty; Wang Shouren and Li Zhi 
of the Ming Dynasty; Wang Fuzhi, Yan Yuan (1635– 1704), and Dai Zhen of 
the Qing Dynasty; Kang Youwei (1858–1927) in the late Qing Dynasty, and a 
large number of educators represented by Cai Yuanpei (1868–1940) during the 
Republican Period. Each had their own personality and specialization, but they 
all made outstanding contributions in their respective eras.
In the history of human education, the Chinese system is unique. It can 
be said that China’s educational thought has maintained a consistent lineage 
stretching back to the Han Dynasty. Th roughout its history, the Chinese educa-
tional system advocated Confucianism, emphasized ritual, and taught the Con-
fucian classics. However, the education system also experienced  several changes. 
Noteworthy elements of change included the private education system, talent-
based electoral institutions, and use of the imperial examination system.
Private education thrived in China during the Spring and Autumn and 
the Warring States Periods, as well as during the Song and Ming  Dynasties. 
 

 
Chapter 8 Education 
135
The Spring and Autumn Period was an open-minded era, a time when 
Confucianism was but one of the Hundred Schools of Thought competing 
to be heard. Confucius, Mencius, and Xun Zi were all intellectual giants 
of the period, which eventually brought about the dominance of Confu-
cianism. The systems of the Song and Ming Dynasties mainly focused on 
the accumulation of knowledge; therefore, their thinking was inevitably 
rigid. The Chinese educational system gained many valuable lessons from 
the existence of the private educational system: education is an endeavor 
that requires creativity; educational institutions and educators should give 
 students knowledge, encourage lively thought, and bolster the spirit of 
independent thinking.
 Confucius is the best-known educator of ancient China.
 

136 
CHINA’S CULTURE
The devlopment and improvement of a talent-based electoral system 
brought about a major transformation in the educational system of China. 
During the Qin Dynasty, there wasn’t necessarily any connection between 
education and government. Th ough there were many wise followers of Con-
fucius, they didn’t necessarily gain any recognized status within the adminis-
tration. Th e system implemented at this time can be described as a two-way 
selection system.
The Han Dynasty implemented the electoral system. Under this  system, 
local offi  cials elected talented persons to work in the central government; there 
were of course many variations of this selection process. The Han Dynasty 
established schools for offi  cials, but also allowed private education. Th e state, 
on one hand, employed the electoral system while, on the other hand, it estab-
lished both schools for offi  cials and private schools. In this way, there grew a 
system of offi  cial selection combined with education. Th is educational system 
closely linked education with the national administrative system and played an 
important role in the prosperity of the Han Dynasty.
As the Han Dynasty declined, so did the Confucian-classic-centered 
 electoral system. During the reign of the Th ree Kingdoms (220–280), Emperor 
Wendi (187–226) began to implement the ninth-rank system, which came to 
value family status over capability and virtue. Because ancestry was valued over 
talent, it became diffi  cult for other classes of society to succeed, and the  system 
quickly became a symbol of corruption among the privileged class. At this 
point, the electoral system came to an end and was replaced by the imperial 
examination system.
Th e imperial examination system was initially developed in the Sui Dynasty 
and later completed during the Tang Dynasty. Its special feature was selecting 
scholars through a nationally administered test; this system was an institution-
alized form of the Confucian aphorism “if one wants to be an  offi  cial, he has to 
study well.” Th is system was a vast improvement when compared to the elec-
toral system, which was based on personal recommendations and the prestige 
of one’s family. Because of this decisive systematic change,  numerous intellectu-
als, most importantly, impoverished intellectuals, were given the opportunity 
to join the national administrative system by means of the imperial examina-
tion. Th e imperial examination system uncovered a large amount of talented 
individuals during the Tang Dynasty, which made a signifi cant contribution to 
the prosperity of the Tang Dynasty. No wonder Emperor Tang Taizong happily 
said that thanks to the imperial examination  system, all the heroes of the world 
joined his administration. Th e imperial examination system closely linked the 
fate of intellectuals to the rise and fall of their country.
After the imperial examination system had been popular for nearly 
1,000 years, it underwent a terrible transformation during the Ming Dynasty. 
 

 
Chapter 8 Education 
137
During that period, Emperor Taizu Zhu Yuanzhang decided to use the eight-
legged essay to select scholars for public offi  ce. Th e eight-legged essay restricted 
and killed creative thinking; just like the old practice of binding the feet of 
women; this was a chronic problem of China’s feudal era. The eight-legged 
essay was just another kind of foot binding that inhibited Chinese intellectuals 
from understanding current aff airs and seeking the truth. At this point, China’s 
imperial examination system set out upon the road to its own death and was 
inevitably replaced by the Western modern education system.
Regarding the social view of education, China has maintained the cultural 
tradition of respect for teachers and knowledge since ancient times.
Confucius visited many countries in his time, and although he never found 
fertile ground for the implementation of his thoughts, wherever he went he met 
with kings and important persons. This reflects the social atmosphere of the 
time, which placed high value on scholars and particularly encouraged those 
educators who were passionate about teaching.
“The Imperial Competitive Examination,” from the Song Dynasty.
 

138 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Th e Han Dynasty Emperor Gaozu at fi rst despised Confucian scholars, but 
in order to consolidate his rule, he accepted the proposals of Lu Jia (about 240–
170 bc) and Shu Suntong and adopted Confucian rituals. During the reign of 
Emperor Wu in the Han Dynasty, Confucianism obtained dominant status and 
the ruling class greatly improved their attitudes toward teachers and education.
China has always respected teachers and knowledge. In theory, even the 
emperor had to respect teachers and Confucian scholars. However, respect for 
teachers was limited in China’s feudal era and the conception of knowledge was 
always pragmatic in nature.
In terms of the value of pursuing education, China’s traditional education 
emphasized the merits of being cultivated.
Confucianism stressed the importance of moral education and demanded 
that educators should fi rst and foremost practice ethics. In the course of Chi-
nese history, religion never attained the dominant position of power, but ever 
since the reign of Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty, Confucian moral doctrine 
took on religious significance throughout China. Over the following 2,000 
years, although there was fl uctuation, the goal of moral education became more 
pronounced. Th e Th ree Cardinal Guides and Five Constant Virtues of Confu-
cianism became the legislative basis and ethical foundation of ancient China.
Zhou Dunyi of the Song Dynasty was a philosopher of great virtue. His masterpiece “Love of 
the Lotus” is very inﬂ uential.
 

 
Chapter 8 Education 
139
Confucian education required that educators set a good example. 
 Confucius also held high expectations of himself. Among his students, Yan Hui 
(521–481 bc) attained the highest level of cultivation; it was said that his words 
and deeds were completely consistent with Confucian standards. Zeng Shen 
(505–435 bc) was also an excellent student, which was refl ected in his cultiva-
tion. Th e traditions of Confucian education were passed on from generation to 
generation. Th e knowledge and cultivation of many Neo- Confucian masters of 
the Song and Ming Dynasties were not the best of their time, but they had high 
prestige and infl uence and had an impact on future generations. One impor-
tant reason why they maintained their piety was their sincerity in protecting 
traditional moral principles. Zhou Dunyi wrote an essay entitled “Love of the 
Lotus,” which praised the lotus fl ower for its ability to grow in mud yet never 
be contaminated. Such a work can be seen as an expression of the Confucian 
masters’ ideal conception of the self and their high personal expectations in 
self-cultivation.
This pursuit of an educational system emphasizing moral cultivation 
played a signifi cant role in the consolidation of the feudal empire of the time 
and helped to sustain the normal operation of a natural agricultural economy. 
Later, however, its shortcomings were slowly exposed and in some cases, pro-
duced extreme dogmas that emphasized moral practices that nearly opposed 
human nature itself. For example, adhering to a maxim like “Death by star-
vation is preferable to the loss of chastity” could be considered “murder by 
morality.” Although morality is important, it should not exceed certain limits 
of human nature, otherwise it would oppose progress. Th is was a profound les-
son left  by the traditional Chinese educational system.
The Shortcomings and Defi ciencies of the 
Traditional Educational System
Chinese education and Western education developed along diff erent paths. 
Comparing the Spring and Autumn and the Warring States Periods with 
the ancient Greeks, their styles were diff erent and it is diffi  cult to say which 
one was superior. However, since the 12th century, Western education 
began to take on new directions and by the 14th century, which was during 
China’s Ming Dynasty, the European education system had adopted all new 
characteristics. With the rise of cities at that time, large numbers of guilds 
and guild schools appeared across Europe. Th ese schools focused on teach-
ing practical knowledge and technology, and their educational methods 
and content broke the barriers of traditional education—these were feats 
 

140 
CHINA’S CULTURE
 unattainable by the Chinese educational system in the years following the 
Song Dynasty.
By the 17th and 18th centuries, following the maturation of modern West-
ern civilization, the Western education system was developed. At the same 
time, China’s education system remained rigid, old-fashioned, and lacked both 
vitality and the spirit of innovation.
Th e reasons for the decline of China’s traditional education are complex; 
there were social reasons as well as problems with the educational system itself.
On the social side, China was mired in economic backwardness, political 
corruption, cultural decline, social instability, and so on. In this case, economic 
backwardness does not necessarily mean a struggling GDP, but mainly prob-
lems in the industrial structure.
Many history books and research projects have proven that China’s econ-
omy was not backward in the Song and Ming Dynasties. However, the data 
misses a crucial point. Since the 14th century, Europe had taken the route of 
the market economy; although its GDP was hardly higher than China’s, its 
structure was more advanced: the West had abandoned agriculture as the driv-
ing force of the entire society and economy, and replaced it with urban handi-
craft . Th is modern economic model nurtured strong social productivity.
During the Song, Yuan, Ming and Qing Dynasties, China’s politics became 
increasingly corrupt. Th e governments of the time felt humiliated when  they 
compared themselves to the outside world and practiced tyranny within their 
A private school during the late Qing Dynasty.
 

 
Chapter 8 Education 
141
own borders. In addition, through the years, the country as a whole became 
progressively more closed off  from the outside world. During the Yuan Dynasty, 
corruption reached an unprecedented level. During the Song and Ming Dynas-
ties, Neo-Confucianism was far less dynamic than the Confucianism of the Qin 
Dynasty and was out of date in comparison to modern Western philosophy.
The instability in the latter part of China’s feudal society was caused by 
both internal and external factors. Internal factors included natural causes and 
social causes. However, the main external factor of the instability was an inva-
sion by hostile forces. In 1840, British warships and artillery opened the doors 
of China as the ancient Chinese empire could not carry on. Chinese traditional 
education also came to an end.
In terms of the educational system itself, the fi rst and most crucial prob-
lem was its obsolete content. Chinese traditional education emphasized the 
Confucian classics, and aft er the Yuan Dynasty, only the Four Books and the 
Five Classics remained. These classics had their own value, but they could 
not replace modern science. Education should be an open system and each 
generation should have its own classics. Th e structure of China’s traditional 
education and teaching content also became increasingly unreasonable; the 
burden of the classics was overwhelming and there was no place for modern 
scientifi c knowledge. Th e educational methods were also backward. Western 
education was applicable to modern life and society; Western disciplines 
were full of practical lessons and scientific experiments were important. 
Western thought emphasized experimentation in the sciences, as well as the 
 importance of demonstrating theories—these things stood out as special 
facets of Western education. Although it cannot be said that such an educa-
tional system was perfect, in comparison, the Chinese traditional education 
revealed its fatal drawbacks through its lack of scientifi c experimentation and 
rational spirit.
The Chinese educational system had been closely related to the bureau-
cratic political system since the Qin Dynasty. Although the administration 
and the educators worked together, the administration ultimately maintained 
supremacy. The administrative institutions controlled all things, and all 
things followed the principles of Confucianism. Education could not be self-
determined, science could not be independent, and the status of educators and 
administrative officials could not be equal. This system obviously could not 
meet the demands of the times.
Th e Chinese traditional education system had a fi ne tradition but also had 
serious shortcomings and defi ciencies described above. Just as the Chinese econ-
omy and society had to be modernized, the Chinese education system also had to 
be modernized. Respect for teachers and dedication; using the new and upcom-
ing practices—these should have been the goals of Chinese education. Respect 
 

142 
CHINA’S CULTURE
for teachers means giving educators their rightful place in politics,  economics, 
and other aspects of society. Dedication means following the principles of educa-
tion itself as it naturally develops and avoiding excessive administrative inter-
ference. Using the new methods and all advanced human knowledge, culture, 
science, and technology as educational content, especially in the realm of higher 
education should be the goal. Keeping up with the needs of modern life and the 
economy, which means adjusting the teaching profession according to market 
demands and focusing on cultivation of practical and realistic human talent, 
would form an integral part of a modern education system.
Since the 20th century, Chinese education has mainly followed this 
 direction. From the 1970s onward, Chinese education made substantial prog-
ress by following this path.
Chinese readers in a bookstore.
 

 


9
145
9
In order to measure the achievement of a nation in arts and literature, we may 
use the most basic two standards: whether the subject and form are extensive, 
and whether the art forms are world class. According to these standards, Chinese 
traditional arts and literature have tremendous historical and artistic value. Th ere 
are unique creations in many forms of arts and literature, for example, poetry, 
prose, novels, drama, calligraphy, drawing, and painting.
Colorful Chinese Literature
Chinese literature is one of the most valued components of Chinese culture. 
China is a kingdom of poems. It is famous for the Tang poems, which are only 
one of the outstanding representations of Chinese poetry. Th e earliest classic 
Chinese poetry starts with Th e Book of Songs.
Chinese prose began long before; Pre-Qin prose is splendid, the pinnacle 
of Chinese prose. After Han articles and Wei and Jin essays, Tang and Song 
prose is another high point. Ming and Qing essays are somewhat interesting. 
Aft er Th e May Fourth Movement, Chinese literature was vulgarized, forming 
another peak of poetry and prose.
Chinese history of drama is shorter than in the West. It started in the Tang 
Dynasty, matured during the Song Dynasty, peaked in the Yuan Dynasty, and 
 survived through the Ming and Qing Dynasties. Modern drama was brought in 
from the West. In recent years, local drama, like the Kun Opera, has attracted 
Arts and Literature
Chapter 9
 

146 
CHINA’S CULTURE
new attention from China and the rest of the world. Modern Chinese drama is 
also infl uenced by traditional opera.
In form, the Chinese novel has two categories: classical and vulgar. The 
classical novel has its origin in Pre-Qin fables and Han and Wei biography and 
anecdotes, while the vulgar novel originated from the Tang variant and the 
Song story manuscripts. Th e Ming and Qing novels were the peak of artistic 
achievement both in classical and vulgar works, masterpieces of which are 
Romance of the Th ree Kingdoms, Outlaws of the Marsh, Journey to the West, A 
Dream of Red Mansions, and Strange Tales from Make-Do Studio.
Due to the intrinsic features of the Chinese language, there are some other 
unique forms of literature. For example, forms between poetry and prose—Chu 
songs emerging in the Warring States Period, longer prose written in the Han 
Dynasty. In addition, the couplet is an exclusive form of Chinese literature, 
which is witty and symmetrical not only in semantics but also in phonetics.
Chinese literature is extensive, deep, and varied. Take Tang poetry for 
example. About 50,000 poems are still in existence, whose styles are colorful and 
Murals from the Yuan Dynasty found in the Water God’s Temple in Hongdong County, 
Shanxi, portraying the performance of Za Ju.
 

 
Chapter 9 Arts and Literature 
147
personalized. Li Bai’s romanticism, Du Fu’s depth, Wang Wei’s leisure, Li He’s 
(790–816) charm, and other poets are also special, in numerous styles and schools.
Chinese prose is also colorful, in various styles and schools. It is believed that 
Pre-Qin prose had four styles or schools, just as Western classical  psychology is 
divided into four basic mental states. Th e four styles and their respective repre-
sentatives are: prudent Xunzi, aggressive Han Fei, eloquent Mencius, and imagi-
native Zhuangzi, much admired by Chinese intellectuals. Based on the four basic 
styles, each author interactively learned, integrated, extended, and created their 
works, and made Chinese prose the most charming fi eld of literature.
Th ere exists a large body of folk literature, mostly in the form of folk songs. 
Folk  literature is more vivid than intellectual, both in substance and form, and 
it refl ects more natural and bolder thoughts and emotions. For example, folk 
songs are more vivid and tangible than intellectual works in expressing love.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
The top four classical novels of Chinese classical literature are: 
Romance of the Three Kingdoms, Outlaws of the Marsh, Journey to the 
West, and A Dream of Red Mansions.
Romance of the Three Kingdoms is a historical novel that describes 
the military and political struggle among the three kingdoms of Wei, 
Shu, and Wu at the end of the East-Han Dynasty, during the period 
of three kingdoms. Outlaws of the Marsh describes the peasant war 
launched by Song Jiang and others at the end of the Northern-Song 
Dynasty and creates the memorable characters of the Mount Liang 
heroes, such as Wu Song, Lin Chong, Lu Zhishen, Li Kui, and so on. 
Journey to the West is a mythological novel based on the story of 
the monk Xuan Zang’s acquiring the sutra, and describes the story 
of Tang Seng, Sun Wukong, and others going to the west for the 
Buddhist scriptures and defeating various monsters. A Dream of Red 
Mansions was created in the middle 18th century, and describes the 
process of the decline of the feudal bureaucratic Jia family and the 
romantic tragedy between a young man and woman.
The four novels are representative works of Chinese traditional 
literature. Known to all in China, they deeply infl uence the thoughts 
and values of Chinese people. Now, they not only belong to China, 
but to the whole world.
THE TOP FOUR CLASSICAL NOVELS OF 
CHINESE CLASSICAL LITERATURE
 

148 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Chinese literature is famous for its great works in every era, and the art is 
representative of every period in China.
Chinese classic literature is not lengthy. Tang and Song prose, though 
 excellent, can be counted in hundreds of words, some even in dozens of 
words. For example, Zhou Dunyi’s masterpiece “Love of the Lotus” is just over 
a  hundred words long. Chinese literary history is populated by numerous 
famous works, such as Zhuge Liang’s (181–234) Memorial on Going to War, Tao 
 Yuanming’s Returning Home, Wang Bo’s (650–676)  Preface of Teng Wang Attic, 
Su Shi’s Ode of Chibi, and others. Their  influence is no less than the  longer 
works. Long works such as Romance of the Th ree Kingdoms, A Dream of Red 
Mansions, and others impart more than their content. Studies on the  latter have 
become a specialty school—Red Studies—involving many energetic  experts, 
just like  Western scholars of Shakespeare’s works.
Chinese literature has its own historical rules. Its direct origin is the 
 literature of the Spring and Autumn and Warring States Periods, including 
“Grand View Garden” (detail) of the Qing Dynasty, depicting the golden era of the Jia Family 
according to A Dream of Red Mansions.
 

 
Chapter 9 Arts and Literature 
149
Pre-Qin works represented by the history record Zuo’s Commentary on the 
Spring and Autumn Annals. Poetry is marked by the Book of Songs, in addition 
to Qu Yuan’s (about 340–278 bc) Chu-style songs which are representative of 
 southern literature, while the former depicts northern Chinese culture. Th ese 
two great books infl uenced their literary descendants.
Longer Han prose is bombastic and exaggerated, and its meticulous form 
can perhaps be a fl aw. Despite the over-exaggeration, it is an important style 
of Chinese literature. Sima Qian’s (145–c. 86 bc) Historical Records, is not only 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
This is the collection of 24 ancient Chinese histories, from the 
 Historical Records, the History of the Late Han Dynasty to the History 
of the Ming Dynasty. Such histories were “offi cial histories” prepared 
by royal scholars, biographically telling stories covering more than 
4,000  years. Twenty-Four Histories covers ancient Chinese politics, 
 militarism, thought, culture, astronomy, and geography, and they have 
high  academic value and cultural status.
TWENTY-FOUR HISTORIES
An illustration of Romance of the Western Chamber, portraying heroine Cui Yingying’s bold 
pursuit for true love and the ideal marriage. Here, she is reading a letter from her beloved.
 

150 
CHINA’S CULTURE
a great work of historiography, but also of prose. As the opening work of the 
Twenty-Four Histories, this work is demonstrative, leaving an unusual eff ect on 
descendant literature.
In the Wei and Jin and the Northern and Southern Dynasties, Chi-
nese  literature was in an era of consciousness. Folk songs experienced great 
 development during this period and were geographically distinct: romantic in 
the south and straightforward in the north. In this period, parallel prose was 
popular, particularly detailed about parallelism and rhyme, showing a  tendency 
toward formalism. Intellectuals began to explore poetic rhythm, which 
 prepared the way for the development of Tang poetry.
Tang literature was at its historical peak in Chinese literary history. So far, 
it is unsurpassed in quality though not in quantity.
Song poetry opened up new avenues for both long and short poems. Th e 
poetry was good for discussion and reasoning, therefore not purely poetic. Th e 
longs and the short were features of Song poetry, and rivaled Tang poetry. In 
the Song Dynasty, the storytelling novel was vulgarized, spawning Ming and 
Qing vulgar novels.
During the Yuan Dynasty, poetic drama was most developed. Yuan drama 
made up for the shortage of Chinese drama in classic literature and produced 
many masterpieces. Famous dramatists Guan Hanqing (about 1220–about 
1300), Wang Shifu (1260–1336), and others could rival Quyuan, Sima Qian, Li 
Bai, and Du Fu. For example, Wang Shifu’s Romance of the Western Chamber is 
a treasure of Chinese literary history.
Ming and Qing literature peaked in the novels Romance of the Three 
 Kingdoms, Outlaws of the Marsh, Journey to the West, Plum in the Golden Vase, 
and A Dream of Red Mansions. Th ese are not only gems in Chinese literature, 
but also immortal works of human literary history. Ming drama also gave birth 
to new developments and produced the legend form, with masterpieces such as 
Th e Palace of Eternity, Peony Pavilion, and Peach Blossom Fan, which signaled 
the peak of the development of Chinese drama.
A Comparison of Chinese and Western 
Literature
Chinese traditional literature is independent and distinct from the litera-
ture of the West.
Take poetry, for example. Chinese poetry is different from the Western 
form in two respects: language and preference. Th e Chinese language is very 
diff erent from Western languages and poetry in the form that depends most on 
 

 
Chapter 9 Arts and Literature 
151
language. It is said that poetry is untranslatable. It is true that translated poetry 
loses its original essence.
With regard to creative preferences, Western poetry prefers to tell stories, 
while Chinese poetry is prone to express emotions; Western poetry  discusses, 
while Chinese poetry depicts. A narrative poem is not considered ordinary. 
Chinese poetry has a more personal feeling, with personal trials represented. 
Chinese people love poetic scenes. The Chinese narrative poem is not as 
long as Western epics. Even Bai Juyi’s narrative poem “ Everlasting Regret” is 
more  lyrical than narrative. Chinese poetry lacks epics like Homer, Dante’s 
 (1265–1321) La Divina Commedia, and Goethe’s (1749–1832) Faust.
Chinese prose is more depictive and lyrical than poems. It does not lack 
discussion or reasoning, like Mencius’, Xunzi’s, Han Yu’s, and Su Shi’s. However, 
generally speaking, Chinese prose is good at recording people, events, scenes, 
“Lady of Guoguo on a Spring Outing” (detail, a copy of the Song Dynasty), portraying the 
scene of a spring outing of Lady of Guoguo and her followers. Lady of Guoguo was the 
sister of Concubine Yang. 
 

152 
CHINA’S CULTURE
and emotions, particularly, in the Historical Records and other historical prose. It 
is close to nature and humanity and less rational or logical than  Western prose.
Chinese classic novels are good at third-person narration; the author is a 
sober and objective observer. Few of them were narrated in the first person, 
and even when based on the author’s personal experience, the author would 
behave like an onlooker and retell the story with the  background of another 
epoch, another place, and from the perspective of another person. For example, 
A Dream of Red Mansions was written with great emotion, but the author was 
still sober and detached with few expressions of sentiment.
The narrative sequence of the Chinese classical novel is rigidly linear 
with few fl ashbacks, unlike Western novels whose conventional style contains 
fl ashbacks. 
The tragedy Peach Blossom Fan being performed on stage.
 

 
Chapter 9 Arts and Literature 
153
These two features imply that the Chinese novel cannot be so direct, 
 passionate, and personal. It is simply linear in plot; however, it is worth reading 
carefully.
Chinese classic drama always puts a happy end to a tragedy. For example, 
Hong Sheng’s (1645–1704) legendary drama The Palace of Eternity, depict-
ing a king’s love story with his concubine was a tragedy, but in the latter half, 
the author made their souls live together in the kingdom of heaven—a happy 
 ending. In fact, this story is still a tragedy.
To be precise, there is no comedy in China either, except for some  comedic 
elements. Serious drama is most suitable to traditional culture. On the one 
hand, the story and characters should conform to an ethical code; on the other 
hand, the audience would expect some solace with a good ending. Compared 
to Shakespeare, Moliere (1622–1673), and other greatest Western dramatists, 
Chinese dramatists developed along a diff erent road.
The May Fourth New Culture Movement was a great ideological and 
 literary revolution in Chinese history. It called for democracy and science, and 
criticized Confucianism, the core of traditional Chinese culture. At that time, 
a vulgar literature movement was launched by Hu Shi and Zhou Shuren. Th e 
 history of Chinese classic literature ended around Th e May Fourth  Movement, 
but Chinese literature is still developing. Under the influence of Western 
 literature, Chinese literature became very diff erent from the classical one.
In this new era, there were a group of modern literary works, represented 
by Lu Xun, in addition to Lao She (1899–1966), Ba Jin (1904–2005), Cao Yu 
(1910–1996), and others. Th eir new literary creations have lasting infl uence.
Unique Chinese Arts
Besides literature, there are many wonderful arts in China, representing the 
Chinese spirit and the national style.
Architecture
Ancient Chinese architecture is a symbol of traditional culture (especially 
 ethical concepts), science, art, and utility, covering royal buildings, civil 
 buildings, gardens, public buildings, religious buildings, and ethnic minority 
buildings with underlying folk customs, culture, art, and aesthetics. Simply 
from an aesthetic point of view, it is dazzlingly all-encompassing.
Traditional buildings embody a philosophy of divine–human harmony. 
Western buildings are represented by stone religious buildings with high spires 
 

154 
CHINA’S CULTURE
The Temple of Heaven in Beijing. Its round Hall of Prayer for Good Harvests and square walls 
reﬂ ect the ancient Chinese people’s idea of a round sky and square earth.
Orthographic projection of the Forbidden City in Beijing.
 

 
Chapter 9 Arts and Literature 
155
Hall of Supreme Harmony in the Forbidden City is a place for holding court and grand 
ceremonies.
and tall windows. Chinese buildings are mostly built with wood, like the all-
wooden Hall of Annual Prayer or Th e Temple of Heaven in Beijing. Chinese 
buildings, especially royal buildings, extend over one level and connect many 
spaces together, mainly featuring divine–human harmony and nature.
Traditional Chinese buildings also embody Confucian ethical concepts. 
Th e standard of conduct and the essence of the Book of Changes are followed 
throughout the buildings. Layout is special in royal buildings, such as the 
 Forbidden City, including the Ancestral Temple on the left, Land and Crops 
Altar on the right, Temple of Heaven in the south, Temple of Earth in the 
north, Solar Altar in the east, and Lunar Altar in the west, Positive Solar Gate 
(Front Gate) in the front, and Bell and Drum Tower in the rear. Th e main body 
of the Imperial Palace is on the mean axis of the city. The Hall of Supreme 
 Harmony is the highest, mightiest, and solemnest building of the cluster.
Ancient buildings also embody the culture of hierarchy. Royal buildings 
are superlative and the largest. Even the tile color is exclusively royal.  Offi  cials’ 
buildings are second to royal ones, while civil residences are the lowest in 
the hierarchy and the smallest. Even civil residences had diff erent classes, for 
example, in a Beijing courtyard house, the northern house is the upper house, 
where the master of the family resides; the eastern and western houses are 
second to the upper house, where the elder brother (western) and the younger 
brother (eastern) reside; the southern house is the lowest level, where the 
 servants reside or it is used as a warehouse. The door, garden, kitchen, and 
 toilet are constructed in order according to the Eight Diagrams.
Chinese architecture is influenced by traditional agro-economy, paying 
special attention to the “wall.” Walled courtyards are an old tradition. When 
Westerners fi rst came to China, they found it strange that all schools, stores, 
and residences were walled. Chinese walls tell of a culture that is closed to the 
outside and connected on the inside. The Jia’s mansions in A Dream of Red 
Mansions exemplify this.
 

156 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Sketch map of Beijing’s residential quadrangle.
The Summer Palace.
The Master-of-Nets Garden in Suzhou, Jiangsu, 
during the Qing Dynasty. A masterpiece of the 
private gardens of Southern China.
 

 
Chapter 9 Arts and Literature 
157
Classical architecture is in high taste. It is symmetrical, except for a natural 
garden. Building artists would integrate the philosophy of divine–human har-
mony into the garden, for instance, in pursuit of natural happiness. In addition, 
ethnic buildings were featured, so were religious buildings.
Calligraphy
Chinese characters play a dual role in use and appreciation, and the latter is 
calligraphy with brush pen.
Chinese writing is based on ideographs, from bone inscriptions to Qin 
unified standard writing. Such writing is used for practical purposes; from 
late Han and Wei and Jin, calligraphy was developed and became a large 
class of Chinese traditional art, very different from other cultures. Famous 
 calligraphers include Wang Xizhi (303–361), the Saint of Calligraphy. Chinese 
calligraphy peaked during the Tang and Song Periods. Ouyang Xun (557–641), 
Liu Gongquan (778–865), Yan Zhenqing (709–785), Monk Huai Su (737–799), 
and Zhang Xu in the Tang Dynasty; Su Shi, Huang Tingjian (1045– 1106), and 
Mi Fu (1051–1107) in the Song Dynasty; and Zhao Mengfu (1254–1322) in late 
Song-early Yuan, were all outstanding. Further, in the Ming and Qing  Periods, 
Traditional Chinese writing implements.
 

158 
CHINA’S CULTURE
 calligraphists were still emerging. From Wei and Jin to Ming and Qing,  Chinese 
calligraphy developed both in practice and aesthetics.
Aft er the creation of the Chinese Republic, calligraphy brushes went into 
decline, and in modern times people rarely write with a brush. Since the 1990s, 
the personal computer became a common thing and now some people rarely 
use a pen;  however, as an art, Chinese calligraphy is surviving and winning 
increasing international appreciation.
Chinese calligraphy is a special art of lines. Th ey are not lines, but fairies. 
Such fairy lines are also used in traditional drawing.
Drawing
Chinese drawing has a long history from an unknown beginning. In the Han 
Dynasty, cloth drawing, lacquer drawing, wall drawing, brick drawing, and 
other decorative drawing emerged, and some have even survived till now. Wei 
and Jin and Southern and Northern intellectuals and offi  cials created drawings 
and developed drawing theories as an art form.
Tang drawing peaked with, for example, Wu Daozi (c. 685–c. 758), and Yan 
Liben’s (c. 601–673) fi gure drawing. Tang landscape drawing was divided into 
two skilled schools, colored and black-white. Flower-bird drawings started too. 
Song intellectual drawing, academic drawing, and folk drawing were rivals, and 
were another peak of Chinese drawing.
Song landscape and flower-bird drawings belonged to a higher realm. 
Yuan, Ming, and Qing landscape drawings were thriving in more schools and 
appreciated by more experts. The Ming and Qing intellectual artists began 
to break tradition and present bright and peculiar artistic features. At that 
time, Western painting was also introduced in China, under whose infl uence 
 Chinese drawings entered into a new era.
The preface to the “Orchid Pavilion Collection” by Wang Xizhi. A treasure of ancient Chinese 
calligraphic art.
 

 
Chapter 9 Arts and Literature 
159
Traditional Chinese drawing is not based on anatomy and perspective 
 studies and is thus distinct from Western drawing. Chinese drawing is not 
 Western realism. In Western painting of the 19th century, French painter 
Ingres’s (1780–1867) masterpiece “Las Meninas” was criticized for the longer-
than-real spine although it looked more beautiful. Conversely, Chinese  artists 
justifi ably make such distortions or modifi cations for the sake of  resemblance 
to the soul, which may have some common ground with Western modernism 
emerging in the 20th century.
“Rare Birds Sketched from Nature” by Huang Quan of the Five Dynasties (907–960), is a 
masterpiece of the ﬂ ower-bird works of ancient China.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
This is a school of Chinese drawing, mainly of Song imperial artists 
and their works. Such artists were professional, exclusively serving the 
imperial purpose by mainly representing fl ower and bird,  landscape, 
palace life, and religion in magnifi cent and detailed drawings that, at 
the same time, were not personalized. In Chinese drawing  history, 
this school of drawing was the opposite of intellectual drawing 
(by intellectuals and ministers).
SONG ACADEMIC DRAWING
 

160 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Chinese classic drawing has many unique aesthetic aspects and  special 
techniques, with meanings that are almost unfathomable without an 
 understanding of traditional Chinese culture and an integrated survey of the 
arts. For example, there is a rule called “blank counts as ink,” that is, when a 
Chinese drawing is made by a brush pen and ink, some of the blank space will 
serve as elements of the drawing. Th is idea is full of dialectics.
Dramatic Art
As mentioned earlier, Chinese drama is an inclusive performance art. 
Yuan drama was the fi rst peak, then Ming and Qing drama developed, and 
late-Qing drama peaked with Beijing Opera, which is both national and 
typically traditional.
“Luo Xia Gu Wu Tu” by Tang Yin of the 
Ming Dynasty. It is an ink and wash painting 
complete with a poem and a seal on 
the upper left and represents the literati 
paintings.
A ﬂ ower-bird painting by Zhu Da, is a 
masterpiece of the impressionistic style 
in China that had great inﬂ uence on later 
generations.
 

 
Chapter 9 Arts and Literature 
161
A common painting portraying people watching a Beijing Opera performance in the late Qing 
Dynasty.
The Beijing Opera performance of “Farewell My Concubine” by Mei Lanfang and Yang Xiaolou.
 

162 
CHINA’S CULTURE
The characters in traditional Chinese drama included kings,  generals, 
 ministers, intellectuals, and beauties, mostly related to feudal ethical codes, some 
of which are not acceptable to modern Chinese people. Excellent  programs are 
always favored, for example, Beijing Opera wins extensive  audiences, from late-
Qing royalty and nobility to Republic of China  politicians, celebrities, and to the 
People’s Republic of China leaders and personnel, as well as  numerous common 
people. Despite diff erences in their political, cultural, and other  outlooks, one 
thing they have in common is that they love Beijing Opera. Th is is a strange cul-
tural phenomenon, refl ecting the multilevel charm of Beijing Opera.
Beijing Opera is presented in a very special form. Its performing systems 
include Mei System, named aft er Mei Lanfang (1894–1961) who was China’s 
most influential Beijing Opera artist. Compared to the Western Stanislavsky 
(1863–1938) System and Brecht (1898–1956) System, the Mei System stresses 
more on coordination in the relationship between player, character, and audi-
ence. In the Mei System, players are not only attached to characters but also 
directly connected with the audience. Particularly in clown performances, the 
player will speak modern words to engage the audience. Chinese national dra-
matic art is unreal, ideographic, and programmatic.
It is unreal for there is no real thing on the stage, except for some simpli-
fi ed and symbolic props. In traditional stage drama, there are only a desk and 
two chairs, which may serve as a mountain, a bridge, or a pavilion if required. 
In order to perform martial art, the player will pile several desks up and stride 
over them beautifully. A player may also hold a horsewhip to show that he is 
driving a horse; hold a paddle to signify boating; erect two flags to indicate 
they are on board; players can also perform fi ghts in  darkness.
It is ideographic for the player to wear facial stage make-up. Different 
make-up represents diff erent personalities. For example, Zhang Fei is smiling, 
for he is frank and comic; Xiang Yu is crying, for he is a failure.
Two ﬂ ags stand for vehicles—this shows the 
ﬁ gurative nature of Beijing Opera.
The types of symbolic facial make-up in 
Beijing Opera.
 

 
Chapter 9 Arts and Literature 
163
It is obligatory for the main actions to follow a strict program, and this 
rigidity extends to every action, every eye expression, and every stage line, 
each following the preset program. In addition, the music is also performed 
pragmatically. Such rules are easy to teach and learn, and perform and 
 understand.
Chinese traditional drama has feature performances. In addition, there are 
other Chinese arts, like folk music, dance, speaking, acrobatics, martial arts, 
and handicraft s, all with a long history and outstanding contributions.
Since the Ming and Qing Dynasties, Western cultures have been infl uenc-
ing traditional Chinese arts, including traditional drawing, sculpture, drama, 
music, and dance. Some impacts are acute and some chronic. On one hand, 
such new forms of art may take some time to be used in the Chinese cultural 
environment; on the other hand, whether or not they are acceptable to Chinese 
people will be known in time. Rural Chinese people have made considerable 
achievements in many exotic arts, such as Western drama, fi lm, and Western 
music.
Murals of Dancers (Ji Yue Tu) from the Mogao Grottoes in Dunhuang, portraying the dancers 
playing the reverse Pipa with music.
 

164 
CHINA’S CULTURE
Opening up and reform means experimentation within Chinese arts that 
may result in prosperity for the arts. Th e May Fourth New Culture Movement 
and the Opening-up and Reform policy that begun in the late-1970s have 
brought the benefi ts of modernity. We follow the traditions and we learn from 
exotic elements; furthermore, we create and reinvent. Th e progress of the arts is 
dependent on opening up and reform.
 

165
INDEX
B
Bao Zheng, 52, 98
Beijing Opera, 52, 160–162
Buddhism, 7, 19, 21, 28, 32, 43–44, 47, 49, 58, 
60, 62, 65–66, 68–69, 72, 95, 129
C
Cheng-Zhu Lixue, 33–34
Confucianism, 3, 5, 7, 15, 19, 23–24, 26–28, 
30–35, 37–39, 41–44, 46–49, 57, 60, 62, 65, 
68–69, 72, 94, 95, 98, 101, 123, 128–129, 
134–135, 138, 141, 153
D
Dai Zhen, 58, 134
Dong Zhongshu, 31, 40–41, 51, 134
E
Empress Dowager Cixi, 102
F
Five Constant Virtues, 30–31, 34, 37–43, 138
Five elements theory, 33
Four Great Inventions, 108, 110, 112–113
G
Great Wall of China, 4
Gu Yanwu, 33
H
Han Dynasty, 11, 19, 24, 27, 31, 34, 40, 53, 57, 
62, 77–79, 86, 89, 98, 101, 108, 110, 128–129, 
134, 136–138, 146–147, 149, 158
Han Feizi, 25, 55, 128
Han Yu, 28, 39, 136, 151
Huang Zongxi, 34
Hundred Schools of Th ought, 18, 25, 
134–135
J
Jin, 11, 28, 32, 44, 49, 53–54, 57, 62, 86, 
100–101, 128, 145, 150, 153, 157–158
Joseph Needham, 116
K
Kun Opera, 145
L
Laozi, 17, 21–23, 26–27, 29, 35, 49, 124
Legalist Th ought, 26
Li Hongzhang, 13
Li Shimin, 54–55
Li Zhi, 34, 134
Lin Yutang, 104
Lu-Wang Xinxue, 33–34, 49
M
Mencius, 15, 17, 25–26, 30–31, 38–39, 41–44, 
47, 128–130, 134–135, 147, 151
Ming Dynasty, 4, 7, 20, 26–27, 31, 46, 49, 58, 
77, 113–115, 122, 128, 131–132, 134, 136, 
139, 149, 160
Mozi, 17, 25, 127, 134
N
Northern and Southern Dynasties, 11, 28, 32, 
62, 72, 113, 129, 150
O
Opium War, 12, 102
P
Peking University, 132
Q
Qin Dynasty, 11–12, 39, 134, 136, 141
 

166     INDEX
R
Reform Movement of 1898, 13
S
Shang Yang, 57, 103
Sheng Xuanhuai, 13
Sino-Japanese War, 13–14
Song Dynasty, 28, 32, 34, 39, 44–45, 53, 58–59, 68, 
77, 81–82, 84, 87, 98, 111–112, 115, 129–131, 
134, 137–138, 140, 145, 147, 150–151, 157
Spring and Autumn and Warring States 
Period, 11, 148
Sui, 28, 57, 79, 129, 136
Sun Yat-sen, 56–57
T
Tang Dynasty, 11, 19, 21, 32, 39, 54–55, 57–58, 
60, 68, 78–81, 129, 134, 136, 145, 157
Tang poetry, 146, 150
Taoism, 7, 15, 28, 32, 43–44, 49, 58–60, 65–66, 
68–69, 72–73, 95–96, 101, 123, 129
Th ree Cardinal Guides, 30, 34, 37
W
Wang Bi, 28–29
Wang Fuzhi, 34, 134
Way, 7, 10–11, 14–15, 17–20, 24, 26, 33, 51, 62, 
97, 124–125, 136, 150
Wei, 11, 28, 32, 44, 53, 55, 57, 60, 72, 100–101, 
145–147, 150, 157–158
Western Zhou Dynasty, 11, 24
Westernization Movement, 12–13, 28
X
Xian (Chang’an), 79
Xinhai Revolution/1911 Revolution, 12, 57
Xunzi, 18–19, 26, 48, 128, 134, 147, 151
Y
Yin and yang, 33, 128
Z
Zhang Zai, 39, 43, 134
Zhang Zhidong, 13
Zheng He, 82–83
Zhu Xi, 34, 39, 47, 68, 129–130, 134
Zhuangzi, 15, 21–22, 26, 35, 44, 49, 128, 147
 

