
For your convenience Apress has placed some of the front 
matter material after the index. Please use the Bookmarks 
and Contents at a Glance links to access them. 

 
v
Contents 
About the Author .............................................................................................................vii 
Acknowledgments............................................................................................................viii 
Introduction........................................................................................................................... x 
Chapter 1: Benjamin Fried, CIO, Google, Inc. ............................................................ 1 
Chapter 2: Tony Scott, CIO, Microsoft .......................................................................33 
Chapter 3: Monte Ford, Senior Vice President and CIO, American Airlines, Inc./ 
AMR Corporation...............................................................................................47 
Chapter 4: Mittu Sridhara, CIO, Ladbrokes plc ........................................................71 
Chapter 5: Steve Rubinow, Executive Vice President and CIO, NYSE Euronext........87 
Chapter 6: Lewis Temares, CIO Emeritus, University of Miami..............................113 
Chapter 7: Mark Mooney, Senior Vice President and CIO, McGraw-Hill Education..133 
Chapter 8: Dan Wakeman, Vice President and CIO, Educational Testing Services ..151 
Chapter 9: Lynne Ellyn, Senior Vice President and CIO, DTE Energy ........................173 
Chapter 10: Becky Blalock, Senior Vice President and CIO, Southern Company,  
Atlanta.............................................................................................................191 
Chapter 11: Ken Bohlen, Vice President and CIO, Arizona Public Service  
Company (APS)................................................................................................211 
Chapter 12: Roger Gurnani, Executive Vice President and CIO, Verizon...................231 
Chapter 13: Ashish Gupta, Managing Director of Service Design,  
British Telecom (BT) ........................................................................................253 
Chapter 14: Joan Miller, Director of ICT, the UK Parliament.......................................277 
Chapter 15: Vivek Kundra, First CIO of the United States of America ......................299 
Chapter 16: Paul Strassmann, Former CIO for Kraft Foods Inc., Xerox Corp.,  
U.S. Department of Defense, and NASA..........................................................309 
Index 
........................................................................................................................343 

 
x
Introduction 
For the past two generations of human civilization, we have been told that 
we live in an “Information Age.” And for at least one generation, we have 
been told that our business organizations, our government agencies, and 
our day-to-day social lives depend more and more critically on computer 
technology.  We no longer express any surprise about how rapidly technol-
ogy is changing and evolving because it’s something we all experience: every 
one of us has his or her own “war story” about how primitive things 
were—even a short five years ago. 
Nowhere is this more evident than in the office of the Chief Informa-
tion Officer of today’s organizations. Ironically, that title did not even exist 
when I finished college and entered the workforce back in the Paleolithic 
Age of the 1960s. But those were the days when companies thought they 
were in the “widget” business—whether the widgets were automobiles or 
toasters or some other tangible product. Today, even the most Luddite 
executives realize that information technology (IT) is what connects their 
organizations and its products/services to the marketplace and the custom-
ers and their assortment of laptops, tablets, and smartphones. Equally im-
portant, IT is the “electricity” (or, as U.S. federal government CIO Vivek 
Kundra puts it, the “digital oil”) that keeps their “factory” running 24 hours 
a day, seven days a week. 
Consequently, CIOs are becoming an increasingly critical executive in 
both private-sector and public-sector organizations.  As I confirmed in the 
interviews presented in this book, they almost all have a title of “Vice Presi-
dent” or better; many of them report directly to the CEO or COO of the 
organization; and some are members of the board of directors of their 
organization. At the same time, they are often difficult to identify and 
sometimes extremely difficult to track down and contact. Of course, it’s not 
so easy to pick up the phone and make a direct call to the CEO of a large 
organization, either; but I was surprised to see how many companies had 
no public information about the identity, or even the existence, of their 
Chief Information Officer. 

 
xi 
Indeed, I was surprised by how many CIOs were uninterested in talking 
to me about their opinions of how IT was being used to make their organiza-
tions more productive, more competitive, more efficient. After all, “informa-
tion” is the middle initial of their abbreviated title; and, as one CIO put it, a 
more appropriate title might even be “Chief Communication Officer.”  
After several such unsuccessful efforts to contact CIOs within various 
Wall Street banks and financial services organizations, it finally dawned on 
me: in some of these organizations, strategic use of IT really is considered a 
competitive advantage. If these firms really do believe that to be the case, 
why on earth would they want to share that competitive advantage with any-
one else? Why would they want to discuss it? Why would they even want to 
acknowledge its existence? It would almost be like the CIA or the National 
Security Agency opening all their secret files for public review and discussion. 
At the same time, the secretive “closed” approach towards IT that 
these organizations exhibit reminds me of “closed” countries now experi-
encing turmoil on the world scene where attempts to shut down the Inter-
net essentially shut down the country’s economy. Wall Street firms are not 
the CIA, and in the long run, I believe their attempts to seal themselves off 
from the increasingly interconnected, Internet-enabled world will prove to 
be a failed strategy. 
Meanwhile, some organizations are clearly proud of what they’ve done, 
and what they plan to do in the future, with information technology. They’re 
not going to share their “secret sauce” proprietary algorithms (for example, 
Google didn’t offer to share its page-ranking algorithm with me any more 
than Coca-Cola would have shared the detailed recipe for its soft drink) and 
they’re not going to deposit all of their software in an open-source code 
repository. But they realize that their employees—who often number in the 
tens of thousands, sometimes even the hundreds of thousands—represent a 
society of their own, and that it’s a positive thing to encourage their employ-
ees to interact with customers, suppliers, vendors, and business partners in 
the outside world. 
Equally important, most of the companies I spoke with have finally ac-
cepted the wisdom of The Clue Train Manifesto: The End of Business As Usual 
[Perseus Publishing, 2001], which comprises 95 theses describing what the 
authors (Rick Levine, Christopher Locke, Doc Searls, and David Wein-
berger) felt was the new “reality” of the networked marketplace. A decade 
ago it sounded quite radical to suggest that “Markets do not want to talk to 

 
xii 
flacks and hucksters. They want to participate in the conversations going on 
behind the corporate firewall,” (thesis number 62), or that “Companies 
need to realize their markets are often laughing at them,” (thesis number 2). 
But today, more and more companies realize that the best way to confront 
these theses (which have turned out to be realities, not abstract theories) is 
to be honest and open, and to be pervasively and intimately involved in the 
activities of their markets and their customers.  As Messrs. Levine et al 
prophesied, this cannot be done by having “flacks and hucksters” talk at the 
marketplace, but by having everyone, from the clerk to the executive, talk 
with the marketplace—via Twitter, Facebook, smartphone, blogs, wikis, and 
whatever new forms of interaction may come along in the next few years. 
Clearly, all of this involves the IT department within an organization, and 
thus requires the vision, strategy, and leadership of the CIO and his or her 
team. But it doesn’t tell us what the CIO does on a day-to-day basis. As I 
learned from my interviews, those duties usually break down into three ma-
jor categories, the first of which can be described metaphorically as “keep-
ing the lights on.” I must confess that I didn’t give this area much thought 
when I began the CIOs at Work project because I started my own IT career 
in the 1960s, when most organizations operated fairly straightforward main-
frame computers in locked, air-conditioned, heavily secured data centers. As 
we moved into the 1980s and 1990s, of course, companies began acquiring 
thousands of desktop and laptop computers, and their solitary mainframe 
centers evolved into increasingly scaled-down, distributed, interconnected 
computers in every country, every manufacturing center, every sales office, 
and every nook and cranny of the organization. But my understanding was 
more intellectual than visceral. It didn’t really make an impact on me. 
Today, it’s common to see CIOs overseeing an IT infrastructure that in-
cludes tens of thousands, perhaps even hundreds of thousands, of comput-
ers and servers and computerized gadgets—as well as thousands of applica-
tions and mind-boggling amounts of data. Bits and pieces of this infrastruc-
ture can, and do, break down from time to time; but as a whole, it’s “mis-
sion critical” in the sense that if you turn off the computers (or, equiva-
lently, turn off the network that connects them), you might as well turn off 
the electricity and send everyone home.  It would be a sublime understate-
ment to say it’s a non-trivial task to keep all of this running smoothly; and 
what surprised me, consistently, was how calm and matter-of-fact today’s 
CIOs are about this part of their job. 

 
xiii 
Perhaps because of my own career in the field, my “gut instinct” was that 
CIOs would be spending the majority of their time working with their peers 
and counterparts in the various business units of the organization, looking for 
ways to make the business more efficient, more productive, and more com-
petitive. Part of that, of course, includes making the IT department itself 
more efficient, productive, and competitive by accomplishing more work 
with fewer people, and by carrying out system development projects in a 
fashion that’s consistently on-time, under-budget, and free of the software 
bugs that drive everyone crazy. And because computer hardware is still an 
expensive part of the IT budget, CIOs are looking more and more closely at 
the benefits of virtualization and cloud computing—indeed, those technolo-
gies are a “done deal” in the majority of organizations that I interviewed. 
But simply making existing business processes more productive and effi-
cient is apparently not as exciting as it once was. After all, business organiza-
tions have been using computers, for almost 50 years now, to make the 
number-crunching, paper-pushing, mundane operational activities of the or-
ganization less time-consuming and expensive. There is always more that 
can be done, of course, but the main emphasis today seems to be shifting 
the IT emphasis from inside the organization to outside the organization—to 
connect the organization’s employees, processes, and data more intimately 
to the consumers, suppliers, partners, and other organizations with which 
the business interacts.  
Of course, improvements in these areas are not being carried out by 
the CIOs on their own, nor are they being carried out by brilliant IT techni-
cians working on behalf of passive, technology-illiterate business people. 
More and more often today, the people in the business units are almost as 
computer-savvy as the people in the IT organization. They, too, are part of 
the “digital nation” that has been using computers since birth.  Indeed, many 
of them learned to program when they were children, just as our IT wizards 
did, but then they decided to focus their energies on marketing, or manufac-
turing, or finance, or genetic engineering.  
As a result, the most exciting part of the CIO work that I saw during 
my interviews involved true partnership efforts between IT professionals 
and business-unit professionals—as well as external customers, suppliers, 
and business partners in many cases—to find completely new things for the 
business, which simply did not exist before. New markets, new customers, 
new ways of interacting with existing customers, new products, new fea-
tures for existing products … the possibilities seem endless. And, of course, 

 
xiv
when these partnership efforts do conceive of new things to build, make, or 
do, everyone wants the IT department to carry it out as quickly as humanly 
possible. If there was ever any doubt in my mind that the “agile” approach 
to systems development would be widely adopted, it was certainly dispelled 
after the first one or two interviews that I carried out. The “waterfall” de-
velopment approach may not have disappeared entirely, but it has certainly 
moved into the distant background. 
Throughout my interviews, I asked CIOs what excited them most about 
new technologies and new developments they anticipated in the next few 
years—and I then turned the question around and asked them what their 
biggest concerns were, what kept them awake at night. Many of the answers 
were predictable: everyone agreed that we have only begun to see the im-
pact of “mobility” as we continue building smarter and smarter handheld 
devices, at prices that can be afforded by people all over the planet. And 
everyone is concerned about security, ranging from terrorist attacks to tra-
ditional cyber-security to “inside-job” attacks.  Almost all of the CIOs are 
already adopting the technology of virtualization, and most of them agree 
that “cloud computing” is a tidal wave that may or may not be sufficiently 
“bulletproof” (in terms of security, privacy, and reliability) to use for mis-
sion-critical applications, but which will eventually be a pervasive, if not 
“universal,” technology. 
Some of the CIOs’ responses surprised me, though they often reflected 
trends that are visible all around me, and which I should have noticed a long 
time ago. Shortly after the September 11 attack on the World Trade Cen-
ter, for example, I remember hearing my New York City friends and col-
leagues reacting angrily to policy statements from their employers that busi-
ness-supplied cellphones and BlackBerries should only be used for business 
purposes and not for personal use. “If there’s another attack,” one friend 
said to me, “my first priority is not my company, but finding out whether my 
family is safe. If my company is going to insist on these ridiculous rules, then 
I’m going to need a second cellphone for my own personal use.” 
At the time, I remember thinking that this was an extreme but per-
fectly understandable response, and that it was a response to a localized 
phenomenon, not an indicator of a general trend. But that was ten years 
ago and now it is a general trend—not so much because of crises and ter-
rorist attacks (though Hurricane Katrina, the Haiti earthquake, the tsunami 
in Japan, and dozens of other events have certainly reinforced the trend), 
but simply because people know they have more powerful technology 

 
xv 
available to them at home, and at affordable prices, than they have in their 
workplace. 
That being the case, I was fascinated to hear how the CIOs of major 
companies are reacting to the trend. After all, a corporate ultimatum of 
“Thou shalt not use consumer devices!” is not likely to succeed. So what do 
the CIOs say to the employees who bring smartphones into the office, who 
have two BlackBerries (to ensure that the corporate security people don’t 
spy on their personal e-mail messages), and who have far more powerful 
desktop PCs at home than the ancient clunkers they use in the office?  
Equally important, how are the technology vendors reacting to this 
trend? As several CIOs lamented to me, they used to expect the vendors 
to come to them first, because technology was sold en masse to large com-
panies, which then allowed some of that technology to “trickle down” to 
the worker bees at the bottom of the corporate hierarchy. Now, many of 
the vendors (think Google, Apple, Microsoft, and several others) are ap-
proaching the consumer market first … and then waiting to see if a grass-
roots revolution causes the technology to trickle up to the top of the cor-
porate hierarchy. 
In addition to hearing their reactions to current trends, I was also inter-
ested in the advice that CIOs had to offer about education (is a computer-
science degree better than a broad, liberal-arts degree?), project/work as-
signments, reactions to the corporate environment, mentors, and the skills 
needed to move up the career ladder to a CIO position. Here again, some 
of the responses and comments were predictable, while others definitely 
were not.  If you’ve been dreaming of being a CIO someday but lamented 
the fact that you don’t have a master’s degree in software engineering from 
MIT or Carnegie-Mellon, you may be surprised at what the CIOs have to 
say in this area. Similarly, if you thought that your master’s degree in com-
puter science from Cal Tech or Stanford would guarantee you such a job in 
the future, you may also be surprised. 
My final question to the CIOs was: what’s next? The answers were cor-
related fairly closely to their ages: those who were approaching retirement 
typically viewed the CIO position as the culmination of their career and 
looked forward to a semi-retirement role as a consultant, professor, or 
board member. Those in the middle of their career were generally enthusi-
astic about their current position, and had mixed reactions to the idea that 
they might someday be promoted to an even higher position, such as CEO. 

 
xvi
And those who were relative youngsters, still in their twenties or early thir-
ties, generally relished what they were doing and looked forward to the ex-
pansion of challenging assignments as they work to make their organization 
all that much more productive, efficient, and competitive. 
All of this was quite thought-provoking to say the least—especially for 
someone like me, who has already spent 45 years in the IT industry. My only 
regret is that I didn’t conduct these interviews right after I graduated from 
college—it might have sent my career off on an entirely different direction! 
And I think the same possibility exists for today’s readers of this book, 
whether they are in their twenties, thirties, forties, or older. The sixteen 
CIOs interviewed in this book represent hundreds of years of experience. 
Read what they have to say and benefit from their experience! 
 
New York, NY 
Ed Yourdon 
June, 2011 
  

C H A P T E R 
1 
Benjamin Fried  
CIO, Google Inc. 
Benjamin Fried is Chief Information Officer of Google Inc., overseeing the 
company's global technology systems. His extensive hands-on experience 
in technology includes stints as a dBASE II programmer, front-line support 
manager, Macintosh developer, Windows 1.0 programmer, and UNIX systems 
programmer. Prior to joining Google, he spent more than 13 years in Morgan 
Stanley's technology department, where he rose to the level of Managing 
Director. During his time there, he led teams responsible for software development 
technology, web and electronic commerce technologies and operations, and 
technologies for knowledge workers.  
Ben received his degree in Computer Science from Columbia University. 
 
Ed Yourdon: Let’s start by asking about any role models or any early 
heroes or mentors that may have influenced you to get where you are now. 
Benjamin Fried: I think there have been a lot. I’ve only had maybe four 
major employers in my career, three or four employers, but a lot of role 
models. I think I’ve been lucky in that in every job I’ve been in, there’s been 
one or more people I’ve been able to look up to and learn from. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Fried: Kind of different depending on the situation. When I was working 
my way through school, I was spending a lot of time reading, guess what? I 
think it was classic computer science texts. 

Chapter 1 | Benjamin Fried 
CIO, Google, Inc. 
2  
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Fried: And everything from reading [Brian] Kernighan and [P.J.] Plauger’s
Elements of Programming Style [McGraw-Hill, 1978], the books of the Bell
Labs guys, [Donald] Knuth’s Art of Computer Programming [Addison-Wesley,
2011], and the stuff he did. Did you guys [Bell Labs team and Ed Yourdon]
publish together? I thought I remembered. 
Yourdon: Well, because it took two years to get my books out—in
fact, because of Bill Plauger, we had the first nonacademic UNIX license
in the country. 
Fried: Really? 
Yourdon: And I said, “Is it free?” And [Plauger] said, “Of course not, it’s
$10,000.” That’s what UNIX cost in the ’70s, which he loaned us, interest-
free. That’s why I thought, “This guy is serious.” And we got a typesetter,
on loan, and we were in the publishing business with TROFF. 
Fried: Wow. Really? Wow. The typesetter’s workbench? Is that what it
was called? The document workbench? Impressive. 
Yourdon: Yeah, but the book that he and Brian Kernigan wrote was
certainly one of the major books in the field. 
Fried: Yeah. I’d say that, the corpus of books that came out of Bell Labs—
Brian’s and Rob Pike’s and others—were really influential, as well as Knuth’s
books. I guess I had a lot of time when I was a kid. I spent a lot of time
teaching myself computer science in high school and in college, and so I had
a bunch of academic and computer science heroes and people that I learned
from. And then in jobs, there was always someone who was a mentor or
someone I could look up to and learn how they were doing something,
trying to understand what they were doing. I was very, very lucky. I spent
almost 14 years at Morgan Stanley, in one place, and I think I learned a lot
there about operating in a big company—what it means, the differences
between great engineering and providing a great service. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Fried: And a whole lot about how … “reality” is a better way of putting it,
but that great engineering without the ability to communicate and
understand what people want [or] understand how to negotiate and
compromise and discuss and so on … the great engineering on its own does
you very little good if those other skills aren’t there, and there were a lot of
people I saw who were able to work with that. So, I have a lot. It’s hard to 

CIOs at Work 
 
3  
pin it down to just one, but there’ve always been people who I’ve looked up 
to for things. I think that’s just … part of my personality. 
Yourdon: Okay. That’s good. And how did you end up here? You were at 
Morgan Stanley for a long time. 
Fried: Well, I was lucky enough that I had several friends who joined here, 
some of whom joined the place fairly early on, in 2000, 2001 or something 
like that. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Fried: As Google grew and grew, they said, “Oh, you should come and 
interview.” Even in 2004, for Morgan Stanley I worked on building a lot of 
the technology that was used to run Google’s IPO, which was interesting. I 
met a bunch of people who worked at Google, visited Google a bunch of 
times as part of that. And then in 2005, my name was submitted again … 
after the IPO experience, I came and I met a lot of people here. It was 
really, really interesting, but at the rate Google was growing at the time, 
they said, “You seem like a really interesting person. You know, we don’t 
have a job for you, we don’t have a particular role we’re trying to fill, but 
come on, come through the process, and if it works out, we’ll figure 
something out.”  
And meanwhile, I had a great job at Morgan Stanley, where I knew what I 
was . . . and I thought, you know, this is a small company … they’re 
growing. That’s great, but they don’t really know what they want me to do. 
And so it wasn’t that interesting. Then, although in retrospect it was 
probably a mistake, but in 2007 … the same recruiter called me back up 
and said that [the Google] CIO was moving on to a different role. … They 
said, “We are looking to find a replacement … and we thought, maybe 
that’s something you’d be interested [in] talking to us about.” … [T]hat 
began a long process of many, many interviews and I thought, well, they 
have a job for me now. And that led to my meeting with a lot of people 
here and ultimately getting the job. 
Yourdon: Now had you been a CIO at Morgan Stanley? 
Fried: No, I wasn’t. I was not. And I honestly never thought I would be—
this is probably an important thing to know about me—I had never thought 
I would be a CIO. I thought [about] the roles probably, the traditional CIO 
roles, even in Wall Street, where technology is this incredibly important 
part of competitive advantage and they’re very, very aggressive about 
pushing the envelope. I had never thought I’d be a CIO anywhere. 

Chapter 1 | Benjamin Fried 
CIO, Google, Inc. 
 
4  
I was really interested in the engineering and computer science parts of IT. I 
thought of myself as someone who was the gearhead in the back, who was 
the person trying to bring engineering and computer science and so on into 
industry and that I thought I’d always probably be, as I was at Morgan 
Stanley in my last role, a direct report to the CIO but with more of a 
technical focus to my job. But it was the way that the CIO role was 
constructed at Google—I thought, well, that’s a CIO job I might actually 
like, I might actually be qualified for. 
My observation was, and maybe it’s a bit cynical, was that most CIOs carry a 
heavy burden because they’re typically one of, if not the largest cost centers 
in their organization. Because so much of their jobs is operations, 
operationally oriented and execution-oriented. It’s this combination of 
things: you always have to be super, super good at kind of understanding the 
financial picture of IT because it’s such a big expense. You have to keep 
systems running really, really well all the time because the company depends 
on it, and that’s incredibly important. But I didn’t find the operational part of 
it alone to be that compelling. And then, finally, you’re only as good as your 
execution, right? 
And I thought that those three—you know, any two of them were kind of 
interesting, although I hope our CFO would forgive me for saying this—this 
“running the books part of it” was by far the least interesting. I saw a 
number of CIOs on Wall Street and in other industries who I almost felt 
had a bulls-eye painted on their back as a result of being the large, 
enormous cost centers. And I thought, I just don’t want to have to worry 
about those things. You know, my passion and my excellence is in 
computer science and engineering and in building things, and in solving 
problems. And in building software and doing systems infrastructure and 
that kind of stuff. And I thought, CIOs don’t get to spend a lot of time on 
that stuff. They manage big portfolios, etc., etc., etc. But they spend a lot of 
time on governance, they spend a lot of time on things that are important, 
but not interesting. 
But Google has constructed the CIO job, because Google views IT as an 
engineering discipline. . . I report to an SVP of Engineering, who reports to 
the head of Engineering and Research, and I sit in an engineering executive 
group with the people who run Google Search and Google Apps and 
Google Enterprise and Ads. I thought, while I think of this as an engineering 
discipline, this seems really interesting to me, and they have a strong, strong 
belief in building software. 
I think the other trend I’ve observed is that there’s a lot of great IT 
departments and great CIOs who are really all about buying things, which is 

CIOs at Work 
 
5  
great. That’s fine, it’s one of the ways IT can be transformational, but not so 
much—you know, buying is great, but building is also where my passion is. I 
think it’s part of the advantage I can bring to the table: I can help; I can 
create an environment to manage engineers well. So Google defined the IT 
job very, very differently. There’s a real strong belief in building software. I 
thought of it as engineering—whereas at Morgan Stanley, I was kind of the 
gearhead in the back. I thought that at Google it would be the nontechnical 
skills that I had acquired at Morgan Stanley that would serve this engineering 
function. I thought they were asking me to serve really, really well—the 
ability to negotiate, create forms for governance, the ability to communicate 
well. I thought it was interesting that at the same time I’d still be able to 
kind of exercise my interests and passions as an engineer and someone with 
a computer science degree, too. 
Yourdon: Okay. Well, that’s a good answer. But, clearly, one of the 
things that distinguishes Google and Microsoft from the typical “XYZ 
widget company” is that you guys are not in the business of building 
widgets or tangible things. You’re in the software product business—
products or services. 
Fried: Yeah. 
Yourdon: So you tend to give a different kind of answer than I have been 
getting . . . [last week] I spoke to the CIO of a utility company. They’re in 
the business of making electricity. Now, clearly it depends a lot on IT, but 
historically, they still go back to the days when they thought of themselves 
in the business of distributing electricity around the country. And that leads 
into my next area of questions of, basically, how does IT and the work 
you’re doing as a CIO make Google more successful, more competitive, 
given that you’re in the business of building software and services? 
Fried: That’s a really interesting question because, I’m not responsible for 
any Google products. I have peers who are responsible for all the 
products…. Yet at the same time I think IT here plays this incredibly 
important role in a number of ways. I think one of them is—I actually think 
a lot of this ties to the mission of IT, but I think it gets lost in the noise of 
the other parts of the conversation with CIOs—what’s amazing about 
technology is its ability to transform a company. To do things to a company, 
to be an influencer on an organization. And I think what’s great about IT is 
that having technologists at the center of a company who can fuse the 
understanding of a company, what differentiates it and what it seeks to be, 
with the opportunities of technology and understand what this incredibly 
rapidly moving, advancing area can apply to it. 

Chapter 1 | Benjamin Fried 
CIO, Google, Inc. 
 
6  
That’s this amazing opportunity, and what does that mean for Google? 
There are a few ways in which I think IT is important at Google and 
differentiates it. Number one is that we’re a very young company and 
founded by people who grew up in the Internet Age and who are 
obviously all computer scientists. And there is this deep-seated cultural 
belief here that we want to change the company very, very quickly. In all 
kinds of ways we want to change it at a moment’s notice and we don’t 
want the company to… 
I think all too often CIOs or companies make a decision that they will 
embody some best practices implemented by their ERP vendors or 
something like that: “We’ll, we’ll adopt the HR processes and technologies 
provided by the products that we bought to solve these problems.” 
Whereas I think Google starts by asking itself and frequently re-evaluating: 
“What do we want to be and how does, what does technology need to do 
to support that?” So as material examples of that, we have very unusual 
hiring practices in Google Engineering. Hiring managers actually have very 
little voice in hiring the people who work for them. There are standards set 
for Google software engineers, there is standard training for interviewers, 
there are panels that aren’t composed of people or are primarily not 
composed of people in the hierarchy of the job that you might move into. 
Yourdon: And by the way, did I read somewhere correctly that you had 
75,000 applications in one week recently? 
Fried: Yeah. . . that is true. We have a corpus of millions of resumés, 
millions of job applications, I should say, that have come to us over time. 
We get many, many, many thousands of applications every week, sometimes 
every day. That in itself is a unique problem, I think, or a rare problem. I’m 
sure Walmart has some version of that, too, right? But we hire people in 
different ways. We value very much having an unbiased evaluation of 
someone’s skills as an engineer before we decide to place them into a job, 
and in fact, typically, people are made an offer to be a software engineer and 
then after they accept that offer are they placed into a job. 
Yourdon: Oh, okay. 
Fried: So, this idea of a consistent bar and the processes that support that 
and that maintain high standards—these are very, very important. So we 
hire people, and then there’s a series of reviews and approvals of offers to 
make sure that we’re hiring people in consistent ways and keeping 
consistent standards. That’s interesting. 
Yourdon: Well, this sounds like it might be part of an answer to this 
question I had raised, which is how do you use IT to be more competitive? 

CIOs at Work 
 
7  
And part of it is, “We hire the best damn people in the universe.” 
Fried: But I think it’s interesting that what we decided is, “Here’s what it 
means to hire the best people. Here’s how we have to do it. And now let’s 
build the software that will make this process work.” 
Yourdon: Oh, okay. 
Fried: And similarly, we have, I’d say, unusual approaches to performance, 
and to how we do 360-degree performance management. We both 
incredibly value the signals about someone’s performance that come from 
360-degree evaluation while at the same time understanding the enormous 
impact it makes, it takes on a company to have everyone doing evaluations. 
Everyone has to stop what they were doing and do these other things. Not 
only that, but we’re always trying to tune it. What can we do to create 
better signals about how people are actually performing and how they need 
to improve, and so on over time. So the performance management systems 
here are very much tuned to these ideas of the skills that we value and to 
making it incredibly easy to produce these signals about people’s 
performance and capabilities. And we change what we want to measure 
and how we measure it and how we’ll gather information every 
performance management cycle. By the way, we have four performance 
review cycles a year. 
Yourdon: Is that for everybody? 
Fried: At least in engineering. I don’t know what the other departments do. 
But I think that that’s unusual. And, similarly, we take differing approaches 
to how we do compensation management. And how we compensate 
people, and interesting approaches to the philosophy and different kinds of 
components to the compensation. These are all places we’ve defined to get 
to the question of what is the role of IT at Google? 
One of the roles is to enable Google to be the kind of company that it 
wants to be without the constraints created by pre-existing systems and to 
allow us to rapidly change. This element of allowing the company to rapidly 
change and redefine what it wants to be is prevalent in other parts of what 
we do, too. So the people who provide technology support, fix your laptop 
when it’s got a problem, giving you software and so on, that’s also part of 
my organization. And that same philosophy of allowing the company to 
change rapidly is embodied in how we do end-user support. 
Often I’m seeing end-user support to be considered an activity where you 
rapidly try to manage as many costs out of it as possible, get it down, limit 
options, get it down to basic scripts, offshore as much of the work as 

Chapter 1 | Benjamin Fried 
CIO, Google, Inc. 
 
8  
possible, and get it so it can be done by people who don’t need to have a 
deep understanding so that you don’t have to pay them for that. Whereas 
our approach is: technology is always changing; we want to be able to 
make rapid changes to the technology environment here for a whole host 
of reasons. Sometimes it’s because we want to experiment with new 
Google software before we give it to other people. Sometimes it’s 
because we’ve observed that the world has changed or security 
requirements change rapidly and we want to implement those changes 
really, really quickly or we want to . . .  
So the computer support people that we hire are generalists with deep 
skills. And the general approach is that the person you bring your problem 
to—and usually it’s in person, it’s a place we call it TechStop—bring your 
laptop and then you can ask them a [question]. 
Yourdon: Like the Apple Genius Bar? 
Fried: Yeah, exactly, they should be able no matter what it is, that person 
should work with you and solve your problem with you, and they should 
have the skills, not that they can necessarily do it all themselves, but they 
can figure it out with you. They call upon other specialists. And that’s a very 
different model. It allows us organizationally to rapidly change the 
environment. There have been numerous cases where we’ve had products 
that we experimented on with Google, we got a lot of feedback on and we 
decided not to ultimately launch and maybe we shut them down. And being 
used in some cases by thousands of people, and we wanted to rapidly go 
from having thousands of people using them to shutting them down and 
moving on. That’s one of these cases where having generalists in the 
support organization has allowed the company to move really, really rapidly 
and change rapidly. So I think that that’s also an element of what IT is. I 
mean, I’m very fundamental now. When I think about IT, I think it’s about 
maximizing the productivity of your people in any number of ways. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Fried: So that philosophy and approach is that people who work at Google 
can choose to have a Linux machine or a Macintosh or a machine running 
Windows. And that’s because we believe you probably know how you can 
be most productive, and we want to give you the toolset that will make you 
most productive. And, I think that’s a very different kind of social contract 
from what you see in many other IT shops, where the philosophy is more 
along the lines of, “We’ve made a set of decisions that we, the IT leadership, 
believe are optimal and we will educate you, support you, and so on around 
the set of decisions we’ve made for you,” whereas we believe, “You 

CIOs at Work 
 
9  
probably know how to work best.” That doesn’t mean you go and buy a 
computer at Best Buy and bring it in to work. We do purchasing, we 
support Mac OS and Windows and Linux here, and we have teams who are 
experts in it, but by trying to give you a toolset that is one you would 
choose to use, the difference in the social contract is also that because 
you’ve made a choice about how you want to work, you probably don’t 
need the same kind of support as if we’ve given you one way of doing it 
that’s our way, not your way. 
Yourdon: Good point. 
Fried: So, users end up getting more personally involved in solving their 
own problems because there’s some level of recognition that, “Well, I 
chose this.” 
Yourdon: Right. 
Fried: “I wanted to use a Mac,” or “I thought Windows was best for me.” 
And I think that recognizes the fact that there’s something you’ll refer to 
later on, one of the great generational differences we’re exposed to is now 
it’s not just the first generation of people who grew up with computers in 
the workforce. But it’s the first generation of people who grew up with 
computers and with the Internet and with e-mail and with instant messaging 
are in the workforce. Whereas when I first entered a large enterprise in 
1994 or something like that, expectations were completely different. People 
often first saw a laptop when it was given to them [through] work. Or first 
saw Windows when they got it at work. 
Yourdon: Yes. 
Fried: And the best computing experience you could expect to have would 
be the one that your company provided for you. But that’s all changed. 
Yourdon: Oh, absolutely. There’s no question. 
Fried: And, you know, we very consciously recognize that IT has a different 
role as a result of those changes, and I think that the role is about enabling 
the individual. It’s about creating maximum individual performance. It’s 
about allowing users to choose how to work. It’s about enabling an 
organization to rapidly change what it wants to be and kind of what’s 
important to it. I think that the opportunity that CIOs have, that 
technologists have, is to use technology to positively differentiate the 
organization that you’re part of. That isn’t just about competitive advantage. 
Competitive advantage and making your company more competitive is part 
of it, but there are lots of ways in which organizations, nonprofits, 
governments, and companies want to be different. They all have some sense 

Chapter 1 | Benjamin Fried 
CIO, Google, Inc. 
 
10  
of identity or they have some sense of individuality and identity. And I think 
we have to recognize that technology should be a part of it. It often is. 
Every company has some piece of internal technology that’s become a noun 
or a verb that’s entered the language, the jargon of that company. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Fried: And I think that’s in part evidence that technology can have these 
sorts of roles. What IT leaders need to do is recognize that that kind of 
differentiation is really important. It could be about making your company 
more competitive and productive or profitable. But it could just be about 
accentuating the differences that define your organization. And I think that, 
having CIOs, having IT departments at the center of a company that can 
recognize and enhance and create those opportunities, is kind of the core, 
the core of what IT’s mission should be, and it’s the only thing that will be 
durable given that the technology landscape is only accelerating the rate at 
which it changes. 
Yourdon: Yeah, that certainly is true. Let me ask a related question if I can. 
You said that you’re not responsible for the Google products per se. But 
obviously the Google products run on server farms of hundreds of 
thousands of servers in various places. Are you responsible for that kind of 
day-to-day operational aspect of it? 
Fried: Uhh, no. There are one or two small corner cases where we are, 
but we don’t operate those servers. It’s relatively well known that Google 
designs and builds its own servers. And I have a team that’s responsible for 
the supply chain and inventory and asset management of that manufacturing 
and repair and deployment work. 
Yourdon: But in terms of keeping the lights on, that’s not your job? 
Fried: No. I have groups that are responsible for keeping the lights on for 
things that operate what Googlers use. 
Yourdon: Right, like her laptop [pointing]? 
Fried: Her laptop or maybe even the server that it might be talking to. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Fried: The servers that drive things that Google “corporate” uses, yes. The 
things that drive Google commercial products, no. 
Yourdon: Okay, and that’s what I would have expected. I scribbled down a 
word also that came from Microsoft’s Tony Scott and I’d be curious to see 

CIOs at Work 
 
11  
whether you were involved in [it]. His word for it was “dogfooding.” And 
I’m sure you know what that means. 
Fried: Yeah. I know what that means. 
Yourdon: Do people look to you and your IT department as the first 
dogfood eaters for some new product that may be coming out? 
Fried: Dogfooding is an enormous landscape within Google. And there’s a 
bunch of different flavors of it. It’s an incredibly important part. I’ve seen 
others refer to it as “drinking your own champagne” and “eating your own 
cheese.” But I’m a partner in a sausage-making company, so, maybe “eating 
your own salami.” So dogfooding is an incredibly important part of what we 
do. But there’s a bunch of dogfooding that happens without us. Keep in 
mind that Google is predominantly a consumer products company, a 
consumer services company. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Fried: And so in the realm of the consumer services that we offer, often it 
makes the most sense to have an un-intermediated conversation between 
the product management and engineering teams responsible for those 
services and people who work at Google who can evaluate them as 
individual consumers would. You know, one of the differences is … 
Microsoft has an incredibly large portion of its business devoted to serving 
enterprises, large and small, right? We have an important enterprise 
division. It’s not as large a percentage of what Google does as it is at 
Microsoft and what they do. 
Yourdon: Though it’s growing rapidly. 
Fried: Yeah, it is. It’s growing tremendously; it is thriving. We all think it’s 
an incredibly important part of what Google does, and where Google 
products are doing things that relate more to enterprise uses or 
organizational uses of technology, my organization is much more directly 
involved in dogfooding and providing feedback. 
Yourdon: That would make sense. 
Fried: And we also often get involved in looking at how we can come up 
with enterprise uses of consumer technologies, and we’re willing to be 
fairly experimental in trying out dogfooding enterprise uses of technologies 
that we’re aiming at a consumer audience. Because I believe this is one of 
the interesting opportunities and missions of my organization because of 
the company it’s situated in. Because one of the macro factors that made 
me believe Google was an incredibly important company was the 

Chapter 1 | Benjamin Fried 
CIO, Google, Inc. 
12  
dominance of consumer IT over enterprise IT that’s come about in the last
10, 15, 20 years. 
I think everyone has observed or recognized that technologies often started
out serving corporate purposes that had buying power and moving their
way out to the consumer. I think that that’s changed with the likes of
Google and a few other providers, whereas now you have all this innovation
and R&D going into consumer products that find their way into enterprise
uses. And, honestly, a lot of what Google Enterprise does is take Google
consumer offerings and make them viable inside an enterprise. And it’s
hugely successful for that. There are a lot of reasons why. You asked what
are the great macro phenomena affecting technology. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Fried: I think that this is one of them. This is the one that I think is
probably the most important. The rise of consumer-driven technology,
consumer-driven computing, consumer-driven software-as-a-service
offerings. I think that because there’s this motion from consumer to
enterprise, I’m very focused on having my organization be in the avant-garde
of trying to understand where there are new enterprise uses for previously
consumer offerings. As one example, we’ve spent a fair amount of time
trying to take Google’s consumer video chat product and turn it into
corporate videoconferencing. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Fried: And we now actually do that in partnership with the corporate
videoconferencing group, the product group at Google who are doing that.
But it’s something we’ve been working on for a long time. It’s one of these
things that, if you think about it, seems quite obvious. So, you asked about
dogfood, and I monologued on you for a long time. 
Yourdon: Well, I see the distinction you’re making between dogfooding of
things that are either already in the enterprise or moving in that direction,
as opposed to consumer products. 
Fried: No, we do often find ourselves in the position of having to provide
some amount of question and answering for people who are dogfooding
consumer-oriented products, They may just walk up and say, “I don’t
understand why this isn’t working,” or “I can’t do this,” or whatever. And so
you have to have support—this gets to the idea that there’s so much
technology entering the environment that’s experimental, having support
people who can react to that and learn on their feet is really, really 

CIOs at Work 
 
13  
important. I don’t know how we would survive if we tried to move to 
script-based, outsourced, level-one kind of support. 
Yourdon: That certainly makes me realize a question that I would not even 
know how to ask a lot of the other CIOs that I’m talking to. For me, one of 
the things that I found so intriguing about Google [is that] for a period of 
ten years or so … every one of your products [was] a beta product. 
Fried: Yeah. 
Yourdon: And that you’re proud of it. Now I think that’s begun to change 
a little bit, but what that says, on so many different levels, is just mind-
boggling, and I always thought that it was just a stark contrast from the old-
fashioned IBM model … or actually it was a German company that I 
remember. Ten, fifteen years ago, I was over there consulting for them 
about a software engineering tool. And I’ll never forget a project manager 
who said, like the old TV commercial, “We ship no product before it’s 
ready.” And I said, “By the time you do, no one’s going to care anymore.” 
And he said, “I don’t care.” You know, it’s this Teutonic kind of mindset. 
Fried: Yeah, the precision engineering. 
Yourdon: And you guys totally reversed that. Does that reflect an IT 
culture that is still a big part of Google? 
Fried: I think you touch on that when you asked about agile. You have an 
interview question about agile methods. 
Yourdon: Yes. 
Fried: I had looked at that question as a great observation. … [T]here’s 
a document I believe called “Ten Things We Know to Be True”1 trying 
to describe Google’s core values, and one of them is the value of this 
idea of launch and iterate. That great products often become great 
through triangulation. 
Fried: And those are my words, not, not the words of the authors. But this 
value of launching and iterating—releasing what you think is right, what you 
think is good, getting data… We have a deep, deep belief in being data-
driven in our decision making, including decision making about even subtle 
features about applications. There’s a story somewhere—and I’m sure this 
frustrated the user interface people to no end—that we actually did 
experiments to understand which color blue in an icon people responded to 
                                                
1 Google, “Our philosophy: Ten things we know to be true.” 
www.google.com/about/corporate/company/tenthings.html. 

Chapter 1 | Benjamin Fried 
CIO, Google, Inc. 
 
14  
the best. And the UI designer probably was not happy [about] who thought 
this was an expression of their artistic creativity. But there was actually data 
that we could get about which color blue people clicked on more, or were 
responding to more, and that was how we made a decision to do that. And 
so this idea of being data-driven, of realizing that the world is changing, you 
can’t be perfect, and you have to launch and change and change and 
change—and have an environment where you can do that—is absolutely 
core to us. 
There’s a very deep part of the understanding reflected in the question that 
you asked, which is that Google is predicated on the notion of software as a 
service, where we’re running the software on servers that we control and 
we deploy it on a timeframe of our choosing—whereas all traditional 
technology companies are predicated on the idea of software that 
customers installed on their laptop, or on their personal computer, or in 
their own data center. 
And the pain of doing software installation, doing upgrades, and the 
necessity of it, all the difficulties in it lead to a “better get it right” mentality. 
I don’t think it’s even consciousness so much, but I think it finds its way in 
the DNA and the muscle memory of organizations even if consciously they 
understand that it’s a web world and even traditional downloaded, 
traditional shrink-wrapped software can be updated through Internet 
downloads. But there is this very deep industry muscle memory that comes 
from customer installation, whereas we don’t have that. We’ve virtually 
never had that. We have a small number of things that people install on 
their computers, but even the products like Chrome that you do install are 
essentially designed to give you the always up-to-date model of software 
and service of the software you installed yourself. 
Yourdon: That is true. Fascinating. Well, I’ll have to give some more 
thought to that. I might come back to you with a follow-on question or two.  
You had already started touching on a couple of things on my next major 
area: what are the significant new trends that are likely to influence Google 
and ultimately all of us over the next few years? 
Fried: So … thank you for such good questions.  
Yourdon: Any one of these could keep us going for quite some time. 
Fried: So the technology trends that I see shaping the next few years. The 
one that was the most educational to me was understanding the 
domination of consumer-oriented technology over enterprise technology 
coupled with the enormous economies of scale only available to enormous 

CIOs at Work 
 
15  
software-as-a-service providers like Google. You know, these terms like 
the “cloud” have been hijacked by everyone. They can mean almost 
anything. 
So the … phenomena we’ve already talked about: the fact that personal 
expectations of technology and the role of technology [are] defined by 
people’s expectations outside of the workplace, instead of people’s 
experiences inside the workplace. I think that that’s number one, and there 
are all kinds of interesting corollaries from that. And often you’ll find the 
most advanced technology people encounter now is their home 
technology. The best computer they use is the computer they bought, not 
the computer that their work provided to them, as companies have had to 
do things like go from three-year depreciation cycles to four- and five-year 
depreciation cycles. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Fried: And personal computer equipment, more and more consumers 
would never stand for having a five-, four-, or even three-year-old computer. 
But then the expectations extend to these free software-as-services, 
software as a service powered by ads and other mechanisms. Those 
offerings—like Gmail—could never be successful if you had to have an 
enormous customer support organization around them. So … this is an 
interesting observation and this is what makes it such a powerful force in 
the enterprise, that traditional enterprise software is incredibly complicated 
and feature-rich because enterprises have asked for all those features, but 
the result of that is you can never separate yourself from an incredibly 
expensive support cycle around those things. Outlook is an incredibly 
complicated piece of software. It does many things that many, many 
enterprises have wanted for a long, long time. Microsoft is doing all the right 
things, it’s being responsive to their customers’ needs, they add features to 
it. But the net result is a piece of software of such enormous complexity 
that it’s almost unimaginable that you would not need a support 
infrastructure for it. On the other hand, with Gmail, you don’t really need 
it—many, many millions of people use Gmail on their own without any 
customer support, every day. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Fried: So that allows you to do something different. So part of the changing 
world of technology and the scale parts are just—without going into the 
numbers—because Google has so many computers and such large data 
centers, you can’t get the pricing of computers and … resources that we 
get if you’re not of the size we are. It’s just not the same, and I worked at a 

Chapter 1 | Benjamin Fried 
CIO, Google, Inc. 
 
16  
large Wall Street bank that had a lot of very advanced computing, and we 
got great pricing from our vendors, but we were not comparable to the 
kind of pricing that Google gets at all. 
Yourdon: Well, the thing that you just said a moment ago, I’ve not heard 
yet from any other CIO. And I think I’m going to have to keep it quiet and 
see if they volunteer it. 
In terms of the fundamental worldview change of free stuff: I’ll tell you just a 
quick story because it’s in the news right now. In 1992 I was in Cairo at a 
conference with my friend Tom DeMarco, and he and I turned out to be the 
only Americans there. Somehow I got into an argument with somebody 
who was saying, “Why doesn’t Microsoft provide more support in Africa for 
its stuff?” And I, being the smartass that I am, said, “Well, if you guys 
weren’t stealing so much software, maybe they would.” And he said, “You 
don’t understand. One copy of Microsoft Word is the annual salary of a 
university-educated person here, anywhere in Africa.” 
Fried: Yeah. 
Yourdon: And he said, “How can you possibly think that we’re going to 
pay full price for that?” And, of course, now, they’ve got Google apps. 
Fried: I had a lot of “Aha” moments just like that over the last ten years 
prior to my joining Google. I had a very similar moment. It’s fascinating you 
described that. Morgan Stanley was considering buying a company in China, 
and I don’t have the precise numbers in my head, but consider these to be 
directionally correct. We looked at all the costs, the books and all that. We 
got a lot of pushback from the business development people trying to do 
the deal. It looked like the cost of one Morgan Stanley PC plus all the 
infrastructure required to support it was about equal to the average annual 
salary of the employees of this company, right? And that furthermore, if we 
wanted to take a Morgan Stanley front-line technology support person and 
move them, and put them there, then those costs, that person’s salary and 
the cost of putting them there, were greater than the combined payroll of 
this entire sixtyish-person company. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Fried: And this is not in any way a commentary on Morgan Stanley 
having bloated costs. It didn’t. It reflects exactly the phenomenon that 
you observed. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 

CIOs at Work 
 
17  
Fried: Meanwhile I saw the rise of, “Well, if I was doing this from scratch, I 
would just get an Internet connection or I would just get a computer that 
could connect to the Internet and then I wouldn’t have to worry about 
having a private network and having to provision file servers and print 
servers and a whole personal computer software stack in the developing 
world.” The thing that I thought was a great opportunity for this Google-like 
world we were in was that all of these companies trying to find new sources 
of revenue in the developing world, being faced with first-world cost 
structures. It struck me as this incredibly important impediment that was 
actually probably slowing down things like business development and 
revenue opportunities in the developing world. 
What I really wanted to be able to do was have the technology offered and 
say, “All right, you want to open an oil exploration office in Kyrgyzstan,” or 
“You want to try to do something in Ho Chi Minh City, right? You know, all 
we need for you to go out there and be successful is an Internet connection 
and some very basic personal technology and you can have everything you 
need: apps and telephony and videoconferencing and everything, but at 
reasonable costs.” And allow companies, these first-world, cost-driven 
companies to actually be far more experimental on how they approach new 
markets, and I think they can be. 
Yourdon: Well, in terms of the next few years, though… We kind of 
drifted off. Do you see just more of this phenomenon that we started 
experiencing in the last couple of years or any radical changes? 
Fried: I think that these changes are a tidal force, but they have not yet had 
their full effect because there’s been a tipping point that hasn’t been reached 
due to what I believe to be generational demographics. 
Yourdon: Really? 
Fried: You still have enough decision makers in large enterprises who 
are—you know, either IT decision makers or the people above IT decision 
makers—who arose through the previous mindset, one of those “my 
vendors comes to me, I tell them what I want, they try very hard to sell to 
me, my wants go into their R&D, the money I pay them funds that R&D,” 
right? I think that generationally you have people who grew up in that 
model: “I control everything that my people use. I build our data centers. I 
work with software vendors that do exactly what I tell them to do because 
I’m paying them and if I didn’t pay them and the other people like me didn’t 
pay them, they wouldn’t do that.” 
Yourdon: Yeah. 

Chapter 1 | Benjamin Fried 
CIO, Google, Inc. 
 
18  
Fried: And I think that generationally, there’s a generation of decision 
makers, check writers, who are still of that mindset. But the world’s 
changing around them, and I feel that the water’s rising around them, and I 
feel that at some point either they will start to retire or there will be 
companies that are able to move to this new model and demonstrate 
competitive advantage that these other companies don’t have that will cause 
a tipping point. It seems to me this is inevitable. I couldn’t tell you exactly 
when, what it is that will cause the tipping point.  
It’s interesting—when I joined Google, I couldn’t have predicted the 
emergence of Chrome OS, for example, but I think the idea of a personal 
computer that has no state on it, that you never have to worry about having 
viruses, that is always up to date, that you never have to worry about the 
data that enters and leaves your company as a result of its being on it, that 
is incredibly easy to support because it’s just running a browser, and that is 
furthermore lower cost because not only is the hardware needed in it to 
run a browser really well, that’s incredibly appealing to a CIO, right? It 
eliminates so many of the security concerns; it dramatically reduces support 
costs; it dramatically reduces equipment costs. Maybe that will be a tipping 
point. That will be one of these things I couldn’t have predicted… that as a 
tipping point and people being attracted by that model will lead them to 
more rapidly embrace this pure web delivery, software-as-a-service model.  
I don’t really know. But I couldn’t predict when it’s going to happen, but I 
do still feel that these are tidal forces that will change our industry. It’s just a 
matter of when. In the same way that the first Apple IIs entered industry to 
do real work, and came on a typewriter budget. 
Yourdon: Yeah, exactly. 
Fried: But at some point then it became IT’s business to provide 
microcomputers, right? It will happen. I don’t know when. But the 
fundamental truths of what’s driving it are, are inescapable. 
Yourdon: I also usually like to ask about what you think are the most 
significant landmarks looking back over the last five or ten years that have 
radically changed the way we do things. You know, I tend to think of 
Google itself. 
Fried: Yeah. 
Yourdon: Just the original Google search engine as an example, and the 
Internet and the Web, obviously—but are there any other not-so-obvious 
things that you can think of while you were growing up or in college, or the 
first five or ten years out of college? 

CIOs at Work 
 
19  
Fried: I don’t know if I have any new things to report that others won’t 
have observed. The creation of the ARPANET, the creation of DARPA, 
without which we wouldn’t have had the ARPANET, without which we 
wouldn’t have had the NSFnet, without which we wouldn’t have had the 
Internet, without which we wouldn’t have had Google, right? 
Yourdon: Yeah, that’s true. That is a good point. No one has mentioned 
that, and that obviously is a social or human creation, that led to all this 
other stuff. 
Fried: And there’s this other unique—I’m a big fan of Steven Levy’s book, 
Hackers [Doubleday, 1984]. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Fried: There was this unique point in time where our culture was created 
that we now see evidenced in Linux and open-source software—and in a 
dramatically lower cost to compute that comes from that. And as a result 
now people talk about open-source hardware as well, but this notion that 
people should be able—if you believe what Levy has in the book, it came 
out of this belief that computers should be open, that anyone should be able 
to use them and experiment with them and learn to program. 
It strikes me as we’re all kind of lucky. Everyone in the industry or affected 
by the industry is lucky that that ethos took hold there and installed the 
ability to create the Free Software Foundation. I think you can connect the 
dots there to open-source software, free software. The Free Software 
Foundation, open-source software, Linux, a whole bunch of things came 
from this interesting and unique place and time. Like I said, we’re lucky. If 
things had been a little different, we might not have had that. Some of that is 
open funding, Cold War–driven open funding, large, large checks being paid 
to research universities to support computing, giving great access to people. 
It’s interesting when we can see such good coming out of things like the 
Cold War. I think part of it is this ethos that emerged at MIT, some of 
which came from the fact that a lot of these people were originally model 
railroad hobbyists and… 
Yourdon: TMRC, it was called. Tech Model Railroad Club. 
Fried: Yeah. So, there have been these major junctures in the road, right? 
Timesharing, the personal computer, computer connectivity, inter-computer 
connectivity, Multics led to UNIX led to Linux—we’re incredibly lucky that 
that happened. We’re incredibly lucky that Steve Jobs visited PARC. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. [laughter] 
Fried: And, you know, they thought they were onto something there. 

Chapter 1 | Benjamin Fried 
CIO, Google, Inc. 
 
20  
Yourdon: Now there’s one last aspect of that, which occurred to me just a 
minute ago and I’d like your take on it. Arguably, one of the next steps along 
the way of from Multics to UNIX to Linux to whatever is epitomized by 
Wikipedia, is described by a couple of books that you’ve probably heard of. 
One is called Cognitive Surplus, by Clay Shirky [Penguin Press, 2010]. 
Fried: Clay—I found him fascinating. 
Yourdon: There’s apparently a new YouTube video, which I haven’t seen 
yet, called “Minds for Sale,” which talks about the next aspect of everything 
we’ve already discussed: we’ve got six billion people on this planet now with 
lots of available brain power that they’re willing to contribute for good 
causes, whether it’s Wikipedia or Linux or whatever. And we now have this 
incredible Internet infrastructure that supports it. Is Google tuned into that? 
I mean, you guys are making wonderful products, but are you trying to take 
advantage of that phenomenon? 
Fried: I think it’s easier for me to be a departmental spokesman than a 
company spokesman. We believe democratization of access is an incredibly 
important part of our mission. If you look at what we’ve done with Android, 
for example, in creating an open-source phone operating system, which will 
be the dominant computing tool of this next generation. To make them 
actually be phones that interact with the Internet really, really well; that are 
open; that people can collaborate with; that run really good software. So we 
really believe that we have a role to play there. We believe that the Internet 
is something that we need to do our part to get in and make better. I think 
that the belief that you expressed there about creating the opportunity for 
the world to collaborate with itself and for a community to find itself and 
for the cognitive surplus to be created—these are concepts that I believe in 
many ways are echoed fundamentally in other things that we do. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Fried: I never heard us state, “These are our explicit goals of Google as an 
organization,” but I do see very similar principles in all of these things that 
we do, and so many of these things that we do right. I mean, making a great 
free web browser. Making a great free smartphone operating system. In 
general, we have a deep, deep belief in things like the power of the Internet 
for collaboration. And if you look at, the major metaphor change, the 
paradigm—after Thomas Kuhn2 and all, I hate to use the “p” word—but I 
                                                
2 Note: Kuhn is the author of the book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (University of 
Chicago Press, 1996). 

CIOs at Work 
 
21  
think the paradigm change of our productivity applications, like Google apps, 
is that the first principle is that people collaborate on these things. It’s not 
features. They’re designed first around allowing people to work together—
that documents whatever flavor are a product of collaboration. So it starts 
with making collaboration work. 
Yourdon: That’s a good point. 
Fried: I’d say that I see those same values expressed in a different way. 
We believe that we have this incredibly significant enabling role in 
enabling responsibility. 
Yourdon: Well, let me turn 180 degrees around now and ask about that 
“dark side,” about the problems and concerns and issues that you see 
confronting us in the IT world and that keep you awake, if anything keeps 
you awake, at night as a CIO. 
Fried: I have three small children, so they’re keeping me awake. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Fried: But I’d say the first one for me is security. It’s the downside of the 
interconnected world we live in. The opportunity for compromise, for 
attack, I think one of the metaphors for the second half of the 20th century 
and now for this 21st century, is that society trails technology. Society 
evolves slower and the conventions of society and its mechanisms evolve far 
slower than technology does across a broad landscape in technology. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Fried: And I think this is true in these areas related to information security, 
information warfare. These things are deeply concerning to me, because, the 
technology’s evolved at such a rapid rate and these are powerful, powerful 
tools with a powerful, powerful ability to be misused, with many, many 
opportunities for attack. I’m really concerned about vulnerabilities and 
people’s ability to take advantage of them. Yeah, security worries me. 
Google’s security and the world’s security worries me. One of the lessons I 
took away from the attacks on Google that were spoken of so much in 
January of 2010 was the power of organizations with significant resources at 
their disposal. The attack surfaces of the software and internetworks that 
we use today are broader than we could have imagined; that even very, very 
significant users can be vulnerable; that there are very, very, very 
sophisticated attackers out there. 
I’ve always tried to stay abreast of the literature, but I’ve found attackers to 
be way more sophisticated than I had thought. And the general level of 

Chapter 1 | Benjamin Fried 
CIO, Google, Inc. 
22  
awareness in the industry in the broadest sense of the word—not just the
technology, but industry’s ability to recognize that this was taking place and
respond to it was very far behind the state of the art of the attack. The
state of the art of the defense and companies’ abilities, organizations’
abilities to respond was very far behind, very, very far behind. So, not much
keeps me up at night. Not as much as it probably should keep me up at
night, but I do find security to be one of these, these big things that we all
need to spend time thinking about. 
Yourdon: And, of course, every single CIO has said the same thing, in
maybe slightly different ways. But I’m particularly interested given what you
were saying earlier, that you are so influenced by the consumer level of use
of technology and obviously consumers, generally speaking, are far less
sophisticated about security issues than your typical big company. 
Fried: Yeah, exactly. It’s interesting. There’s a whole set of technology
offerings these days where “bring your own computer to work” is the part
of the meme. And, one of my concerns about it is it makes security
presumptions that are very much more backward-looking than forward-
looking. Attacks that we know of in the past, really we think we can
defend against, right? In the same way that we think that anti-virus is dead,
we just don’t want to actually announce that it’s dead, right? But the
traditional signature-based anti-virus is a technology that is just of minimal
protection today. 
I worry that’s there’s the same retrospective element of the security
propositions made by these “bring your own computer to work”
technology offerings. So I do have some concern that the end state of the
domination of consumer-oriented technology is one that somehow makes
enterprises vulnerable. Maybe not ours so much. We’re very lucky in having
the most impressive computer security organization I’ve ever encountered.
And we’re very, very lucky—we’re certainly not invulnerable. We have
many, many very, very deep and capable thinkers. So there is this set of
concerns I have that one recognition of the dominance of consumer-
oriented technology is let them bring their own technology to work, let
them bring whatever they want—it could lead to a world of less security
because we don’t know what the set of attacks might actually be specifically
against “bring your own computer to work” sorts of offerings. Honestly,
we’ve only begun to explore the possibilities for evil of these enormous
botnets. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 

CIOs at Work 
 
23  
Fried: I mean, the largest distributed computing environments in the world 
are these botnets. Wait till we get a few world-class distributed computing 
people and a few world-class malware hackers together in thinking about 
what they can do with hundreds of thousands or millions of interconnected 
machines and, uhh, eww. Scary. 
Yourdon: It is scary. 
Fried: Anyway, you can’t let yourself be driven off by that. One has to 
develop a plan of action and follow it as opposed to just let these things 
dominate one’s nightmares and one’s dreams. But of the things that worry 
me, I’d say security is one, is definitely one of them. It’s the one that’s most 
industry-specific. 
And there’s a bunch of things that keep me up at night I’d say, or I spend a 
lot of time thinking about that. I think other CIOs probably do, too. You 
know, do I have the right kind of governance, the right mix of governance 
for my organization. Do we provide the right set of services for our 
customers? Are we engaging with them correctly? Those things definitely do 
sometimes keep me up at night. They’re common concerns among the 
people with my title. 
Yourdon: One of the other common concerns that I’ve heard from a lot of 
the CIOs is the following: They say, “Here I am, running the technology part 
of our business and I’ve got a whole bunch of business peers around me that 
are responsible for various products or various services, and they’ve risen 
to their position of authority because they’re very good, obviously, but also 
because they have very strong personalities. And they feel that obviously 
they know how to run their business better than anybody else and, in fact, 
they even think that they know how to run my business in IT better than I 
do. And since my technology pervades everything they’re doing, I find myself 
butting heads with these people quite a lot—either trying to persuade them 
to do something that I think they need to do, or trying to prevent them 
from doing something that I think would be a disaster. And, of course, I 
can’t order them because I’m not their boss. So the problem or the concern 
is: how do I influence these other peers of mine about issues of technology 
that I probably do know more about, whether or not they believe me?” 
Fried: Yeah, so, I think it’s one of the great universals. If you want to talk 
about larger-than-life personalities, I think Wall Street probably has a 
disproportionate number of them. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Fried: And I did work in Wall Street for many years…  

Chapter 1 | Benjamin Fried 
CIO, Google, Inc. 
 
24  
Yourdon: And that’s where I first heard the concern… 
Fried: Wall Street has this particular flavor of the problem as well, that you 
may have a profit-generating line of business that can just hire and [better 
pay] the people it wants to do the very, very specific sorts of things it wants. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Fried: There’s the whole class of people called “quants,” who are people 
with computing skills who sit next to traders and other people and make 
bets and kind of assist them in the technology to do that. And in fact, at 
hedge funds, typically those people may be the traders in a Wall Street 
bank, they might sit on the side. So anyway, that’s one of these concerns 
that we had on Wall Street, but I think it’s a universal. I think it’s always 
been there. It’s been there for a very long time. In one way or another it 
always will be there. 
I do think that that problem is getting worse as a result of the rise in 
consumer technologies because at least 30 years ago, maybe IT was the first 
person to put a computer on your desk, whereas nowadays that’s not the 
case. You go home and buy your own computer and have your own 
opinions about the stuff. So I think that those people are more empowered. 
I think that CIOs have a forward-looking problem, which is that this model 
of the software enterprise hardware R&D cycle that I’m participating in and 
deploying to my users is going to be rudely interrupted by the person 
whose opinions were all generated by modern technology. And it grows 
rapidly at the top and they didn’t actually use any of the things I provided, 
right? You’re not needed, and I didn’t use you. You’re not needed. 
Yourdon: Arguably that’s been going on since the introduction of the PC. 
Fried: Yeah. 
Yourdon: But not to the extent that it is now. 
Fried: Exactly. And it’s certainly with people buying Apple II+ on their 
typewriter budgets so they could run Visicalc, so they didn’t have to rely on 
the overnight cycle of the mainframe to do the books. But it’s gotten tons 
worse. The set of activities that people can perform without needing central 
IT offerings has grown. So it’s one of the hardest parts of the CIO’s job. On 
the other hand, here are my beliefs about it. There’s always going to be 
some technology among your client organizations. It’s a question of how 
much and what, and the number is never really going to be completely zero, 
and generally you shouldn’t expect it to be. It’s a question of how much 
technology they’re going to want or have or control. You have to think 
about what’s right for them as part of it. The other thing I think is that at 

CIOs at Work 
 
25  
least in the United States, in a post–Sarbanes-Oxley world, you look at the 
scandals of the last 12 years, you look at the regulations that have come up 
in the world, and enterprises are more regulated than they were before and 
that, literally mandates having more standards than would be maybe 
necessary, and so when CEOs and CFOs can go to jail because their 
attestation about the accuracy of the books and records of the company 
was incorrect, that has certain repercussions for what happens with 
technology. So, I think CIOs have overplayed that card, to tell you the truth. 
Yourdon: Oh, okay. 
Fried: But that said, it’s a changing reality that does define certain hard 
limits to the parameters of what organizations can do on their own. And I 
think that the final piece of it is, the thing that is painful but good, is that it’s 
far better to have technology offerings that win on their merits rather than 
are forced upon your users. 
Yourdon: Good point. That is a good point. 
Fried: Now, it’s difficult in conversations about matters of security. At 
some point you may need to get the CEO or top corporate leadership 
involved in setting the parameters or frameworks around things like 
security, around protection of physical security, computer security, 
protection of intellectual property. Things like that you probably need to 
have corporate policies on that that need to be centralized in their 
enforcement. But in general, it’s better that you woo and win your 
customers. It’s probably better that way. The environment is harder for 
you to do that, to woo and win, than to be the sole provider. That’s not 
to say that it’s efficient or good to have multiple competing providers for 
the same set of things. But it’s as they say, better to win in the 
marketplace of free ideas. 
Yourdon: Okay, interesting. One last question in this area, and then I’m 
going to go on to the generational thing. This whole question that I had 
about agile development: since the CIO is usually the one that’s in charge of 
developing new at least internal systems, this transition from a waterfall 
approach to an agile approach has initially been seen just as a methodology 
issue, but the more I see it, the more impact it seems to have on how you 
go about managing people and organizations. A lot of CIOs that I’ve spoken 
to say that that’s been a problem for them. And, of course, everything you 
guys do, I suspect, has this overwritten thing of this agility on it, so maybe 
that’s just part of your DNA. 
Fried: I’d say it is part of the DNA. So, in general, it’s the right thing to do, 
right? Especially for internal software, I think that it’s much better to start 

Chapter 1 | Benjamin Fried 
CIO, Google, Inc. 
 
26  
off with the implicit assumption none of us really know what it is we need 
to do here, but let’s do enough so that we can actually define based on 
evidence and feedback and data what it is that we need to build. Build a 
front, build a slice of the application front to back—does this solve the 
problem, is that what you wanted to do? You know, observe how it works 
and either change that piece until it does what you want or if it was right, 
then move on to the next piece. I think that it solves a huge number of 
problems for us, which is … like waiting for Godot, waiting for the software 
to appear, in the traditional waterfall model. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Fried: And that’s just not acceptable. I mean, business changes faster today 
than it did 30, 40, 50 years ago when this was considered to be state of the 
art, and we have to realize that with long, long delivery cycles, no one can 
actually assure you in most cases that the software at the end of that 
delivery cycle will need to do the things that it needed to do on the day you 
kicked the project off. So, it’s absolutely necessary. That said, here are the 
things that are hard about it. On the one hand, there are large classes of 
users I experience who don’t want to look at just a single front-to-back slice 
of something even if you’re on a weekly release schedule and they can see 
another version of the thing, a week from Wednesday. There are a lot of 
people who are just more comfortable seeing the whole thing. 
Yourdon: Mmm. 
Fried: I think that in technology we’ve generally embraced and understood 
the advantages of this, but I think our users are catching up to it, especially 
being agile in the early parts of the development of an app, when you really 
don’t have very much to show, but it’s even more critical that you take 
those agile approaches. I think that that’s part of it. I think that a more 
recent conclusion that I came to about agile methodologies is that it’s easy 
for them to devolve into a rapid-release cycle that doesn’t actually appear to 
change much. So there’s a whole art in planning the scrum, in understanding 
what goes into the next release, and I’d say that it’s very easy to embrace 
the philosophy and embrace the rapid release and all that comes with it, but 
if you don’t also embrace the notion of focusing on what’s going to change, 
rapid releases that don’t seem to actually have any difference to your end 
user produce an interesting pathology that is obvious when you think about 
it, but you might not have expected when you went down this path. 
Yourdon: You keep mentioning this point about getting real feedback with 
real metrics. So we’re beginning to see agile projects in regulated industries 

CIOs at Work 
 
27  
with distributed project teams and all kinds of things where people had 
previously said, “Well, that will never fly.” 
Fried: “That will never happen.” 
Yourdon: And it is, it is. 
Fried: That’s really comforting. That’s great to hear. I guess another 
pathology of agile—and an IT framework in particular, as opposed to a 
product framework—I think is your users can become kind of pixel-
level negotiators. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Fried: It doesn’t actually work well if users are telling you what color to 
make radio buttons or “that needs to be left-adjusted not right.” But it’s all 
too easy for agile to enable that because you can make the turnaround so 
rapidly, so it’s another pathology to avoid, that there has to be some kind 
of art to avoiding. I’m not a dilettante about any particular agile 
methodology so much as the overall results that you get. I also think I’m a 
big believer that enabling rapid releases produces a result in tooling and 
testing that ultimately leads to higher-quality results. In order to be able to 
release rapidly, with any quality at all, you probably have to embrace 
automated testing. 
Yourdon: And regression testing and so on. 
Fried: Exactly. Unit regression system testing, smoke testing—all these 
things have to happen as part of the release cycle. As a result, you get to a 
better state in terms of quality than you would without a significant 
investment otherwise. 
Yourdon: So, let me go on to the generational issue. Is there anything else 
you would like to say about the good things or bad things of the whole 
generation of workforce, whether we call them digital natives or whatever, 
that are not just coming into your IT department, but they’re coming into 
the entire workforce—with their toys and gadgets and their social media? 
Fried: And with a different set of expectations. And they don’t want work 
to give them a cell phone, right? Or work to give them a separate 
smartphone. And the technology is still catching up to that—catching up 
rapidly but still catching up. It’s not just Google and the consumer 
landscape. It’s other companies, too. Tablets are redefining people’s 
expectations of what their personal technology’s going to be. So I think you 
probably phrased the situation more articulately than I do. I think there’s 

Chapter 1 | Benjamin Fried 
CIO, Google, Inc. 
 
28  
another generational concern that you hint at in your questions here. That 
is the decreasing number of computer science graduates. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Fried: It’s a huge problem for us. And I think that academia has struggled 
with what the answer is, with what to do about it. You know, trying to 
make computer science more relevant to practice or specializing it, changing 
the curricula. I’ve never attempted to validate this, but one theory I’ve had 
for some time is that there was certainly a point where studying computer 
science was a way of getting access to technologies that were otherwise 
impossible to get access to. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Fried: And I think a number of people kind of entered the field—they 
were curious, they had heard about computers, they entered, they took a 
class because they were curious about it, and they got hooked, whereas 
today you don’t need to take a class to get a deep exposure to computers. 
I met a surprising number of people who were great programmers, great 
software engineers, but who hadn’t majored in computer science because, 
why would I? I can just go do that on my own. I don’t really need that. I 
think that this generational change in access to computing may be also 
partially responsible for the difficulty in attracting people to the discipline. 
Yourdon: Hmm. That’s interesting. 
Fried: And it’s demystified it. And I think the mystique was, for some, part 
of the attraction. I think I was always interested in it, but one of my first 
jobs was working in the university computing center at Columbia and it was 
all about—that was the only place in the world where I knew there was an 
Imagen laser printer that I could possibly get access to—and getting access 
to a laser printer, too. Access to technology that was unavailable in any 
other way was one thing that drove me into, uhh, the discipline. And it’s not 
needed anymore. But that’s a very, very deep problem that we have because 
we need a lot more computer programmers than we’re producing. 
Yourdon: Well, there’s a variation on this: the superficiality and glibness of 
the current generation with regard to technology. Of course, you have 
access to whatever you want on the Internet, but it’s something I’ve noticed 
having written a whole bunch of books: nobody wants to read a book 
anymore. Nobody wants to spend more than ten minutes focusing 
intellectually on anything. Nicholas Kristof wrote something saying that in 
today’s world you could never read War and Peace because who’s got time 
for a 1200-page book, whether it’s a novel or a computer science book? 

CIOs at Work 
 
29  
Fried: Yeah. 
Yourdon: Who’s going to read Donald Knuth’s four volumes? 
Fried: Yeah, I just got the new one, the 4A just came out, right? So, that’s 
interesting. There had been this period of time when many of us had 
thought or hoped that the prevalence of e-mail would lead to a second 
great, generation of letters, of people of letters. But of course, what 
happened instead was instant messaging and tweets and so on—more and 
more sharding of one’s attention. I think it’s a trend that technology’s 
created. On the other hand, I was incredibly skeptical of e-books. I didn’t 
want others recording in their logs what I was reading, and I liked the idea 
that books represent the cash of ideas. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Fried: Right? They are—cash, not cache, right? Books are liquid, they are 
untraceable, and they represent the ability for people to transfer and share 
ideas and thoughts, and they have all these properties that cash has and is 
this great and enabling thing. So on a personal level I was very suspicious of 
e-readers, because it seemed to violate these cash-like principles that I 
thought were important to books. But then, I got an iPad, and the 
convenience—I just read more, I actually read more books, and not all 
small books, you know? But I read a lot more after I got that than I ever 
had before. 
Yourdon: Hmm. Interesting. 
Fried: And so I have some hope. I have some hope that I didn’t have 
before. And I see it, not just in me, but my son is six and, you know, highly 
digitally enabled, enough to make us all kind of uncomfortable. 
Yourdon: Hmm! [laughter] 
Fried: He just goes and starts reading books on the iPad or Google books 
on my iPhone—we’ll be in a restaurant or something and he’ll be bored and 
he’ll read Google books on my phone. He just read a book called I Am 
Number Four [by Pittacus Lore (Harper, 2010)]. It’s a book aimed at teens. 
He read it all, on his own, over the course of several weeks. He found it on 
my phone with the little screen here and he read it, the whole book! 
Yourdon: That’s amazing. 
Fried: You know, interspersed with many other things. It definitely sharded 
his attention, but like that gives me hope. And he knows how to find other 
books in the Google Books apps and download the free ones and ask me if 

Chapter 1 | Benjamin Fried 
CIO, Google, Inc. 
 
30  
I’ll type in my password so he can download a paid one, and I think he reads 
more than he would otherwise. 
Yourdon: There’s a collaboration aspect to that that just terrified me when 
I saw it on my Kindle. You’re reading along in the book and all of a sudden 
you see this thing saying, “Ten other people thought that this phrase was 
really significant.” And I thought, “Well, I don’t care what they thought.” I’m 
not sure that’s a good thing, but it’s obviously, it’s a part of the process. 
Fried: Yeah, it’s a—I have a friend who’s responsible for the whole digital 
books thing at Amazon, and I should talk to him about it, because some of 
these things are distracting. Get a dictionary, right? So double-click on a 
word and you get a definition. 
Yourdon: That part’s good. 
Fried: Like for my son, he’s in first grade—who knows how much of the 
book he read he was able to figure out on his own, or he wasn’t able to 
figure out on his own? Things like that are, are game-changers. I wonder 
what the Folger Library editions of Shakespeare are going to look like in this 
digital era, right? 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Fried: You know, you won’t have the facing page with the kind of “this is 
what they mean.” You can just kind of integrate it. And the e-reader can 
integrate it into the text in new ways that are probably less intrusive.  
Yourdon: Let me ask you just one last question, and it’s the obvious kind 
of final question: where do you go from here, you know? Or if you have any 
plans or dreams or thoughts? 
Fried: No, no plans or dreams. My last job I thought was a great job and 
could have been the last job I ever had. And then they called me here and I 
thought this was an amazing thing that I wanted to try, the only CIO gig I’d 
ever heard of that sounded appealing to me. So I don’t know… 
Yourdon: Well, that’s fair enough. You know, when I interviewed the CIO 
from Detroit [DTE] Energy last week, she said she had never gone looking 
for things, but opportunities always presented themselves, and so she had 
no idea what the next opportunity would be, but she had an existence proof 
that there would be one, at some point. 
Fried: I’m sure those things will emerge. By personality, I’m someone who 
tends to spend a lot of time thinking about how to make things better. So I 
always tend to think that there’s more opportunity than what I’ve been 
doing, and it’s been good for my career. It’s worked out, right, so, we’ll see. 

CIOs at Work 
 
31  
I don’t have an aspiration to politics or anything like that. Google is a unique 
company at a unique point in its history at a unique place in time, and I’m 
thrilled to be … here in that place in that time. 
Yourdon: Well, you’re very much at the crest of the tidal wave, so, you 
know, you might as well stay on top as long as you can. It makes sense. 
Fried: It’s pretty all-consuming. 
Yourdon: I can imagine. Well, thank you. Listen, I really appreciate 
your time.  

C H A P T E R 
2 
Tony Scott 
CIO, Microsoft 
Tony Scott joined the Microsoft Corporation in February 2008 as Corporate Vice
President and Chief Information Officer. Under Scott's leadership, Microsoft IT is
responsible for security, infrastructure, messaging, and business applications for all
of Microsoft, including support of the product groups, the corporate business
groups, and the global sales and marketing organization. Scott champions IT as a 
value-added business for Microsoft and works with all the company's groups to
identify opportunities, structure IT solutions, and deliver measurable returns to the
business. Scott is also the executive sponsor for Microsoft's Operational Enterprise
Risk Management efforts and supports the integration of management principles
from the Quality & Business Excellence team, which drive continuous and
breakthrough process improvements across the company.  
Before joining Microsoft, Scott was the Senior Vice President and Chief Information
Officer for The Walt Disney Company, where he led planning, implementation,
and operations of Disney IT systems and infrastructure across the company. He
also held the position of Chief Technology Officer, Information Systems and
Services, at General Motors (GM, where he was responsible for defining the
information technology computing and telecommunications strategy, architecture,
and standards across all of GM's businesses globally). Previously, he was Vice
President of Information Services at Bristol-Myers Squibb, and his professional
experience has also included assignments at Marriott International Inc., Cadre
Systems LLC, Sun Microsystems Inc., and PricewaterhouseCoopers. 

Chapter 2 | Tony Scott:  
CIO, Microsoft 
 
34  
Ed Yourdon: Let me just ask the basic questions about how you got 
started in the field after college. Did you start right off in IT or did you start 
through another path? 
Tony Scott: I graduated high school in 1970, and there was a belief at that 
point that because of advances in technology that somehow the work week 
was going to be significantly reduced. 
Yourdon: Ha-ha. 
Scott: And that what we would all struggle with was going to be how we 
were going to use our leisure time, you know, that we were all going to 
have this abundant amount of time on our hands. So that’s the career I 
started off in. It was called Parks and Recreation Administration. The 
discipline was called Leisure Studies and it was going to help us figure out 
how to use all of our spare time. 
Yourdon: Did you have any role models or heroes that you were sort of 
looking to as you went through this early stage? 
Scott: I worked in the field and actually did a lot of leadership training, 
because part of the Parks and Recreation core discipline was all around 
developing leaders and people who could lead activities, in the spirit of 
“what are we going to do with all our free time?” And so in that discipline I 
had a number of role models. One was a guy named Rick Bunch, who was 
actually the first guy who got me to come work for him in that field.  
Yourdon: Well the obvious next question for me is to ask you then is how 
you got from that kind of start into the computer field and into IT? 
Scott: Well, what happened was after two years, I figured out that this was 
pretty much not going to happen. If anything, the result of all this technology 
is that people are not likely to reduce their work week; they are likely to 
just take on more work. That was my conclusion, so I changed fields kind of 
by accident.  
I had moved, by this point, from the University of Illinois in Champaign to 
Silicon Valley. And I began to work in Silicon Valley—still working for the 
Parks and Recreation Department, but I began to see and meet people in 
technology. People who work for HP, people who worked for some of the 
chip companies, Texas Instruments, and various others. So my general 
awareness of technology started to ramp up pretty significantly. And finally 
the critical event was that I decided to get married and my wife-to-be also 
worked in the Parks and Recreation Department. They had a rule that they 
didn’t allow two people that were married to work in the same department, 
so it meant that one of us had to find another job. So I ended up taking a 

CIOs at Work 
 
35  
job with Marriott … which was opening a theme park called Marriott’s 
Great America in Santa Clara, California, in 1976. 
Yourdon: Oh, I’ve been there. We may have been there at the same time. 
I was doing work at Amdahl at that point. 
Scott: I was on the team that opened that park in 1976. The area I was in 
charge of was Games and Arcades. It was all electronic pinball machines and 
arcade games, you know Pong, and all the racing games and Atari was one of 
the big suppliers. You’ll probably remember all this. 
Yourdon: Yes, absolutely. 
Scott: Well, it turns out that the theme park industry had a couple of 
pretty big problems to solve in terms of managing its business. One was that 
these are very labor intensive businesses and a reliance on part-time labor, 
much like a McDonald’s for its restaurants, its retail stores, its games and 
arcades, its rides. You need labor to run all these things. And the amount of 
labor you need is highly dependent on how many people are going to show 
up to the park on a given day. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Scott: And also the time of day they are going to show up. And your 
profitability is highly dependent on whether you correctly forecasted your 
labor needs on that given day. So right around early ’78, as I had gotten a 
year or two of experience under my belt in this business, I got put into 
another position, which was to do planning and forecasting for the business. 
And I discovered a little company called Apple Computer. They had an 
Apple II+ computer, and it could be programmed in BASIC and Pascal and 
all kinds of things. 
I thought, hmm, I wonder if we could write software to do attendance 
forecasting and help with planning. And as a benchmark I bought a time 
share service from Computer Sciences Corporation [(CSC)], which was 
selling labor modeling software to toll roads and telephone companies and 
other entities who had similar kinds of problems that needed to be able to 
accurately forecast the amount of labor they were going to need based on 
external forecasts and projections, and so on.  
So I got the CSC terminal and understood how their particular software 
worked, and we began to develop sophisticated computer models with CSC 
to help us better forecast the labor and attendance, and in parallel to 
developing, writing software actually on the Apple II to do the same thing. 
And within about three or four months, discovered we were beating the 

Chapter 2 | Tony Scott:  
CIO, Microsoft 
 
36  
pants off of the CSC program on a pretty regular basis in terms of doing a 
better job and so on.  
I didn’t do this by myself. I had some people from the IT department. They 
were better at programming, and I was better at sort of figuring out the 
math behind some of the stuff. But anyhow, I taught myself to program. 
They would write the basic program and I would tweak it, you know, and 
put in some of the math models and all that sort of stuff. To the point 
where we bought a whole bunch of Apple II computers and a Corvus disk 
drive and started using the Apples for lots of things. Um, created a bunch of 
different databases, and we just got hooked. And so everything just sort of 
took off from there.  
Eventually I went to work for Sun Microsystems, finished my degree, 
finished college at the University of San Francisco in information systems 
management, and went to law school at Santa Clara University while I was 
at Sun. Then I worked for Pricewaterhouse, and Bristol Myers, and General 
Motors, and Disney and then here. But it all started with the need to solve 
some attendance, forecasting, modeling, and labor scheduling kinds of 
problems that were real business problems that I was confronted with. 
Scott: That is the long story. 
Yourdon: Yes, but it’s a fascinating one, and interesting for me. Like I said, I 
was in the same area at about the same time, and had Apple II computers 
for my own kids. Well, at the end of your story, you’re here now obviously 
at Microsoft.  
What you do as a CIO at Microsoft. What duties and activities that the job 
entails—is there some way you can summarize what your key 
responsibilities are as CIO at Microsoft? 
Scott: Sure, I divide it into three big buckets. In the middle it is the sort of 
the same thing any CIO at any large company would do. We have any 
number of internal systems that we run the business on, and so in our case 
that includes sales and marketing systems, financial systems—we have 
probably the same collection of systems and software that any other CIO at 
any other company would have. We have payroll, you know, blah, blah, blah. 
Yourdon: Sure. 
Scott: And in that sense, I wear about the same hat and shoes and 
everything else and have the same concerns and issues as any other CIO. 
What makes this job different are two other pieces. On the left-hand side, 
we work very closely with our product groups, and it starts with defining 
what the product is going to be in the first place, all the way through.  

CIOs at Work 
 
37  
Once we are into the development process, IT supports a lot of the 
product tooling the product team uses to make the product. So code 
source repositories, code signing technology, all kinds of things to help build 
the product and quality check and that kind of stuff all sits in IT at Microsoft. 
And then we also play an important role which is: once a product is in its 
early stages of development and is complete enough to start deployment, 
we start deploying it internally at Microsoft in small quantities initially—and 
then as the product matures and gets closer and closer to its release date, 
we have typically broadly deployed it inside Microsoft. It even has its own 
name: we call it “dogfooding.” 
Yourdon: Oh, yeah. That phrase has been around for a long time. 
Scott: And so we are the number one filer of bug-fix requests and 
enhancement requests and so on, more than all the rest of Microsoft 
customers combined because of that important role. But we are also one 
of the groups that signs off and says that the product is ready to ship, so 
it is a little bit of an usual role for an IT organization, and particularly one 
we take seriously. So that kind of on the left side of the main role … is 
pretty classical.  
On the right-hand side, I also spend—and my teams spend—a fair amount 
of time with our customers. Virtually every customer who comes to visit, 
to do an executive briefing, or whatever, wants to know how Microsoft 
does IT. It really is: “how do you use the products for Microsoft, how do 
you integrate them together, what lessons have you learned with whatever 
the latest is?” 
Clearly that is one of the focuses of the dialogue with customers, but they 
are also very interested in how we do governance, our IT lifecycle 
management process, how we’re organized, our internal metrics of success, 
things like that. We aspire to be a trusted advisor on how to do IT and the 
question I proposed not only to myself, but to my organization—we aspire 
to be the world-class benchmark for IT, and we ask ourselves every day: if 
not us, who would it be? And if not here, where else could any IT 
organization aspire to be that? And if not now, when? You know, that kind 
of thing. We seek that role, we practice it every day, and we get a lot of 
very positive feedback from customers in terms of the value they get out of 
that dialogue. 
Yourdon: You know 30 years ago, it would have been IBM’s role to do 
that sort of thing. Do you think that what you described represents kind of 
a technology shift that everybody assumes that they will be using Microsoft 

Chapter 2 | Tony Scott:  
CIO, Microsoft 
 
38  
products and the distributed kinds of computing tools rather than main 
frames today? 
Scott: I think that’s one of the elements of it. Certainly Microsoft has a 
breadth of products that probably no other tech company has today. 
Yourdon: That is a good point, yes. 
Scott: And it is a leader in several of the areas in terms of where people 
want to go—whether it is cloud or whether it is mobile or any of those 
kinds of things. We’re in the game in a whole bunch of different spaces that 
not many other companies are. So I think that’s one element of it. And our 
sweet spot is certainly central to where most IT organizations are, and I 
think that’s a part of it as well. 
Yourdon: I’ve obviously been following many of the things that Microsoft 
has been doing in the marketplace, and I would imagine you can just give me 
a general answer on a lot of these topical issues, like cloud computing and 
so on, you’ve got or Microsoft has got white papers or position papers. Do 
those tend to come from your group or are they influenced by your group?  
Scott: Well, it is really collaboration. Just like the dogfooding and things I 
was describing earlier. For example, cloud computing group, we have played 
a key role in helping shape the product from an architecture perspective 
and from the perspective of, “here is what CIOs are going to look for in 
terms of capability, and manageability, and how they think about the 
business case for the cloud and so on.” We have been one of the major 
contributors to that whole discussion for sure. 
Yourdon: Ok, well that is very interesting. Maybe one last thing. One of 
the things I am quite interested in myself is the generational issue. How is 
the up and coming generation of kids coming out of college viewing IT and 
technology, as opposed to my generation or yours?  
Scott: We do think that relevance to Gen whatever-it-is—the millennials, 
or whatever you want to call them today—is something that is certainly 
relevant. So we do a lot of work with customers in terms of our own 
models around that.  
Yourdon: One of the big topics obviously is social computing. How do you 
think about that? And should you think about that as a CIO? 
Scott: We have a really good model that we use that essentially evaluates 
anything like that along two different vectors. One is value and one is risk. 
And depending on where you fall in that matrix, you can either embrace it, 
ignore it, manage it, or exploit it—those are the four different ways we 

CIOs at Work 
 
39  
think about it in that space and each of those strategies would have a certain 
set of characteristics and an external company might choose to put a 
specific technology in a different place in the matrix, which is fine. 
But what we have given them is a model to say here is how you can think 
about this stuff, and you can make your own judgment call based on your 
company profile and your regulatory environment, and so on, which bucket 
you will put things in. And it is leadership like that that we think is a role 
we can play in terms of helping develop useful models and frameworks for 
the industry. 
Yourdon: I’ve got a bunch of questions that I can’t avoid asking because I’m 
sure everyone will want to know—and that is the question of whether Bill 
Gates or Steve Ballmer hired you or promoted you into your position, or 
whether you have any other tidbits, you know, about them that you want to 
talk about. 
Scott: Well, I actually worked for Kevin Turner, who was our Chief 
Operating Officer at Microsoft, but Steve was a part of the interview 
process, and I’d actually worked with Bill on a number of different things 
even before coming to Microsoft—so it’s probably the only job where I’ve 
gone into the job knowing the senior executives and the company 
reasonably well before coming to take the job. All the other times, it’s 
pretty much an interview and then a surprise as to who the execs are and 
all that stuff. 
Yourdon: Well, being interviewed by the COO is a good enough big name 
for anyone, I’m sure. Was there anything else unusual about the interview 
that got you into Microsoft?  
Scott: Well, when I interviewed with Steve three years ago, the obvious 
question is, how do you see the future? I still have the little piece of paper 
that Steve sketched out where the company was going from a cloud 
perspective and phone and all that sort of stuff—so I have to say, it was 
pretty impressive. And I was impressed at the time with the plans, and I’ve 
been impressed with the investment and the subsequent realization of the 
vision that Steve laid out a couple of years ago. 
Yourdon: Very impressive. Well, that leads to a related question. If you 
had one piece of advice that you could give to aspiring CIOs, whether it was 
somebody who was dreaming one day of being the CIO of Microsoft or 
possibly the CIO of any other organization, what would that one piece of 
advice be? 

Chapter 2 | Tony Scott:  
CIO, Microsoft 
 
40  
Scott: Well, it’s probably the lesson I’ve learned over and over and over 
again—which is, nothing is ever as good as it seems to be or as bad as it 
seems to be. Every time as I’ve gone into the role, I heard about all the 
things that are broken and all of the things that are going well, and there’s 
usually a little exaggeration on both sides, in terms of how bad it is or how 
good it is. 
Yourdon: Well, that’s certainly interesting advice. Another related thing—
and these are little segués in a sense—I’ve now talked to maybe a half a 
dozen CIOs, and one thing I’ve heard in common from almost all of them is 
the importance of the team that they’ve assembled to just help them get 
through the day. I’m curious as to what kind of key qualities you look for in 
someone who’s going to become a member of your team that you work 
with on almost a day-to-day basis. 
Scott: Sure. I think there’s three in particular that I look for. One is just 
pure leadership capability. These are big, complex, challenging, physical 
organizations that we’re managing, and to do that well, you need a lot of 
leadership capability. You have to have somebody who enjoys that role and 
who sees as a core part of their being developing other leaders in the 
organization. So leadership is probably the number one thing that I look for.  
Two, I think you need to be technically astute and competent, especially if 
you’re working in a technology company like Microsoft. There’s a whole 
set of things that we do every day where technology does make a 
difference, and being technology-literate and making the right choices is 
fundamental to what we do. And these are big architectural decisions that 
we end up making, and so that skill is pretty important. And probably the 
third one that I look for is just basic integrity in terms of not only telling 
the truth, but representing the truth and dealing with people and situations 
in a very honest, transparent, straightforward sort of way. People that can 
uphold our values and represent them well, so that integrity factor is 
critical in all of our leadership roles, if not in life, then certainly in 
leadership roles people play.  
Yourdon: I heard a variation on that yesterday from a CIO whom I 
interviewed who said one of her key things is that everyone on her team, 
has each other’s back, so to speak. They realize that they all have to 
succeed, and so rather than the competitive backstabbing that you might 
allow or even be expecting in some situations, her team won’t let any other 
member of the team fail if they get into trouble or get overloaded. And I 
guess you could argue that’s one aspect of integrity. 
Scott: Well, I think it’s also part of leadership. 

CIOs at Work 
 
41  
Yourdon: Yeah, good point. 
Scott: Part of what I look for there is an element of that, where we all have 
to work closely together to succeed, and it’s not even about our team 
winning . . . especially at Microsoft. It’s about Microsoft winning, but also 
enabling people in the world to reach their potential, to paraphrase our 
mission—and that’s a fairly lofty thing for us to shoot for, but we all carry 
that weight. You know, at Microsoft in particular, if we all don’t do our jobs 
well, we’re hindering the world from reaching its full potential in a certain 
way, so we have to shoot for a pretty high goal, I think, and that usually 
means more than just individuals winning. It means a broader purpose. 
Yourdon: Ahh, good point. Are you guys helping out in Egypt at this point? 
Maybe that’s a little off target, but, boy, that’s amazing watching. I’m sure 
you and everybody else are just glued to the television to see what’s going 
to happen there. 
Scott: Yeah, it’s pretty incredible. Well, I think what you’ll see when all the 
dust settles, what we’ve seen over and over and over again is, our 
Microsoft team is in there as quickly as possible helping rebuild and re-
establish the necessary infrastructure for a country or a region to function. 
So whether it’s an oil crisis or tsunami or floods or snowfall or 
earthquakes, Microsoft always responds and is there to help rebuild, at the 
earliest possible opportunity. 
Yourdon: You know, I hadn’t thought of that, but I now recall seeing a 
similar thing from the CIO of FedEx and the CIO of Delta Airlines about 
what they had to do immediately after—well, not even after, but in the 
midst of—Katrina, and basically, any high-technology company these days is 
going to need to and want to step in to help out with whatever rebuilding of 
whatever infrastructure they’re involved with given a natural or political 
disaster. So, I guess that’s something that every CIO has to be prepared for. 
If you turn on the news and see that all hell’s breaking loose in some part of 
the world you never cared about, it may still have a huge impact on what 
you have to do tomorrow morning. 
Scott: Sure, exactly.  
Yourdon: That’s very interesting. Okay, another very interesting question. 
I’m sure you and every CIO I’ve spoken to ends up having to interact with a 
lot of very strong-willed peers who may not be in your empire itself, so to 
speak, but literally peers in other business units—or, in your case, product 
groups. They think they know how to use IT. They not only know how to 
do their job, they probably think they know how to do your job better than 
you do, and you can’t boss them around, because they don’t report to you. 

Chapter 2 | Tony Scott:  
CIO, Microsoft 
 
42  
How do you go about influencing these people and get them to do what you 
think is right and to avoid doing what you think is wrong? 
Scott: Well, I use a principle I learned many, many, many years ago when I 
was a playground leader. And I was taught this by another playground 
leader. If you’re leading kids’ activities on the playground, there’s always 
some kid hanging on the sideline. Maybe he’s a bully or maybe he just wants 
to tease or be disruptive or whatever. And the technique that I was taught 
was put him to work, make him a solution rather than a part of the 
problem. And I’ve followed that principle throughout my career, and so if 
you have somebody who’s strong-willed or has a strong opinion, first of all, 
they might be right and you have to consider that possibility. 
Yourdon: Sure, yeah. 
Scott: But second of all, put them to work and get them engaged and 
make sure they’re a part of the solution. And so what I’ve found is that one 
of two things happen. Either they get engaged and contribute, or they shut 
up very quickly and run the other way, and one of the two doesn’t happen. 
Yourdon: Of course, one thing that’s different about your peers and which 
you would also find in other computer companies or high-tech companies, 
but which I don’t see in some of the other places, is that your peers in the 
product groups or business groups, are presumably all extremely proficient 
with technology. It’s not just that they’re stock traders or automobile 
designers. Obviously, all of these people know a hell of a lot about IT, so 
that you’re in even less of a position to boss them around and tell them that 
you’re the only person who knows the complexity of what you’re dealing 
with. So that’s a very good strategy to deal with, you know, kind of get 
them involved with you. 
Scott: Well, yeah, it turns out that with our product group, they can be as 
opinionated as anybody. It’s usually about somebody else’s product, though. 
They usually think that their product is great and everybody else’s has got a 
problem— but again, the same strategy: put them to work. We actually 
have a significant number of people who are not technology-literate. They’re 
in traditional business functions like finance or HR or whatever it happens 
to be. And they just want something that works for them. They’re not as 
enamored by the new feature or the new capability, maybe as somebody 
with a more technical background, so part of our challenge as we’re 
developing applications or creating user experiences is to satisfy both the 
technical and the nontechnical in terms of what we do and how we do it 
and the services that we offer. That’s part of the fun at Microsoft. 

CIOs at Work 
43  
Yourdon: Now, there’s an aspect to this that I had expected to hear more
about and that is the situation where these peers and their respective
business units are able to get their hands on technology by themselves
because it’s so cheap and so pervasive. The PC version of that 25 years ago
was just going down to Radio Shack to buy something. And these days, they
can just download an app for their Android or iPhone or whatever, and
start using technology that you’re not even aware is in the office, until it
gets big enough to be noticed. Is that kind of a problem area that you run
into a lot? 
Scott: No, we don’t think of it as a problem, really. What we have is a
model that we use to figure out how we think about any given application
and it basically is a matrix that results from on one side, the threat or the
risk associated with that application, if any, and on the other part of the
matrix, the business benefit from that application. And the result is four
quadrants that either allows you to say, “We have to contain this. We have
to embrace it or we should embrace it. We should allow it and not mess
with it at all—it just exists. Or we should ban it, and effectively block it.”  
And so there are some things where’s there no business value and a high
business risk either in the form of viruses or some sort of threat, IT threat
or whatever, that we just block. But there are many others, like a lot of the
social network capabilities, the better ones, where we say, “Not only are
we going to embrace it, but we are going to fully utilize it for the business
benefits that it can bring.” So everything falls in the matrix somewhere and
every company can make its own judgment on any given thing about which
part of the matrix it falls in. But we use that framework really to evaluate
things and then put in place either the appropriate measures or not, as the
case may be. 
Yourdon: Well, that certainly makes sense. The aspect of this that I’ve
heard from most of the other CIOs that makes eminently good sense is that
somebody might bring a new toy, a new gadget, a new smartphone into the
office without your knowing it, but sooner or later—and it’s usually sooner
these days—they want to access your data, and they want to connect to
your infrastructure. And that’s something you’ve got control over and
you’re very concerned in terms of risk—obviously security and privacy, and
so forth—so they can’t get very far, so to speak, without running up against
your protection or evaluation matrix that you’ve put in place. So I guess
maybe I was over-worried about that one.  
But why don’t I move on then to the next obvious question: what are the
main problems and concerns and issues that you worry about that keep you 
3

Chapter 2 | Tony Scott:  
CIO, Microsoft 
 
44  
awake at night? I assume security is at the top of the list, but are there any 
others as well? 
Scott: It is. I mean, Microsoft is one of the most attacked companies on the 
planet in terms of every hacker trying to earn his merit badge seeing if he 
can get in, so out of necessity we had to try to be at least very good at the 
security thing. So, while you always worry about that every single day, on a 
daily basis we don’t end up having much issue in that particular space.  
I suppose one of the things I think about a lot is what I’ll call “macro-
architectural threats,” and let me explain what that is. Over the years, the 
quality of the components that we build things out of has just gone up and 
up and up. And you see it across the landscape. Cars are better. The 
quality of everything we buy and use has just gotten better and better and 
better over the years as the broader quality movement has taken hold. And 
so, it’s not very common anymore that you see product failure in the same 
way that we used to see it, maybe a few years ago. Or defects show up in a 
particular product, because most manufacturers—whether it’s Microsoft or 
hardware people or whatever—have gotten pretty sophisticated at building 
a quality product or component. Where the new opportunity is in the 
architecture that is built up from all of the pieces. So it’s still possible, for 
example, to build something, a solution for an end user that, while the 
components are all of high quality, the way they’re put together may be 
vulnerable or may have some architectural flaw in the way it’s created. And 
because of the complexity of many of these things today, it’s hard to 
actually see these architectural flaws. We’ve seen examples of this in the 
nation’s electric grid. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Scott: Where in some cases accidents happen because of some 
unanticipated event that exploits an architectural flaw that was latent in the 
system. The Internet is a Petri dish, I think, in some respects for some of 
these architectural failures to not only happen, but also the magnitude of 
them could be enormous at some point as we build up solutions and 
capabilities out of all the components that exist. And I don’t say that in a 
way that should be interpreted as we shouldn’t use the Internet or it’s 
dangerous, but I think we have to be prepared for some of these bigger 
failures to occur, and we will recover from them relatively quickly, but they 
will occur, like the stock market crash. 
Yourdon: Oh, the “flash crash” last year?  
Scott: We keep having these long, deep depressions that once were the 
case, but we’re still having these events, and I think of threats that we may 

CIOs at Work 
 
45  
face in the technology space in much the same way. They will happen, we 
will recover reasonably quickly, but they might be rather prolific in terms of 
their impact. 
Yourdon: I can certainly tell you that the Defense Department and various 
other government agencies spend a lot of time worrying about that, simply 
because there are people who are trying to deliberately exploit these things 
as opposed to accidental architectural defects. 
Interestingly, one of the ways that I earn a living is working as an expert 
witness for lawyers, trying to figure out whose fault it is when some huge 
system doesn’t work. And it often has to do with these architectural 
problems between vendors. So, the Microsoft product is fine, and the XYZ 
product is fine, but there’s something about the architectural interface that 
can either be exploited or has some limitation that nobody ever thought 
about. I don’t think that problem is going to go away in the short term, and, 
indeed, if anything, it may get worse. So that’s a good one to bring up, 
because I think that’s probably something that every CIO is either already 
worrying about or really ought to be. 
Scott: I totally agree. 
Yourdon: Because if nothing else, all these CIOs are usually the final stage 
of approval and endorsing some of these huge architectural complexes 
involving vendor software. So they’re the ones who are going to get the 
blame if it does all come crashing down on their heads. Okay, let me just ask 
a couple final questions. These were prompted by some of the things you 
said in our first conversation. You had told me about how your IT 
department works with several of the product groups when a new product 
is being developed. And I’m curious to know whether your IT group takes a 
proactive role in terms of interactions with other departments, or do you 
wait for them to come to you to start talking about new stuff that they’ve 
started doing? 
Scott: No, we’re very proactive, actually, so as each product cycle begins, 
we’re in the early stages of the design—putting our two cents in in terms of 
what features it needs, what capabilities it needs, how it should work, all 
those kinds of things, and we follow that all the way through the whole life 
cycle, including upgrades and subsequent patches that may occur. So we live 
with the product groups through the entire life cycle, and we have a very 
active program that measures the health of that product relationship. 
Yourdon: And, and I would assume that might even start with the kind of 
early exploratory prototyping? 

Chapter 2 | Tony Scott:  
CIO, Microsoft 
 
46  
Scott: Oh yeah, absolutely. 
Yourdon: Well, I think that’s a good thing for people to know about, that 
these products don’t just sort of spring out of the Microsoft firewall without 
a lot of internal stuff going on with you guys. 
Okay. Well, I could go on all afternoon, but I’m sure you’ve got a long list of 
things to do, people waiting outside your door at this point, so I should 
wrap things up.  
Scott: All right. Thank you. 
Yourdon: Well, thank you. I really appreciate it again, and good luck with 
everything else. 
 

C H A P T E R 
3 
Monte Ford 
Senior Vice President and CIO,  
American Airlines, Inc./AMR Corporation 
Monte Ford is Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer at 
American Airlines and its parent company, AMR Corp. He oversees all as-
pects of the company’s information technology strategy and operations. 
Widely regarded as a leader in the field of information technology, Ford 
joined American Airlines at a time when the airline needed to regain its 
technological prowess. Ford’s leadership has been critical in restoring Ameri-
can to the forefront of technological innovation—one key element to the 
long-term success of one of the world’s largest airlines. 
Prior to joining American Airlines, Ford held senior management positions at 
The Associates First Capital Corporation and the Bank of Boston. Mr. Ford 
has served on the boards of two public corporations and is currently on the 
board of directors at Oncor, one of the United States’ leading energy 
transmission and distribution companies. He is also a member of The Re-
search Board, an international think tank restricted to CIOs of the world’s 
largest corporations, and the CIO Strategy Exchange (CIOSE), a selective 
multi-sponsor program for chief information officers from “forward-looking” 
companies. He is active in community programs, church leadership, the 
Baylor-Grapevine Board of Trustees, and the Dallas Children’s Medical  

Chapter 3 | Monte Ford:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, American Airlines, Inc./AMR Corp. 
 
48  
Center Development Board. Ford has a long history of community involve-
ment in both Dallas and Boston. 
 
Ed Yourdon: One of the questions that I’ve asked everybody at the 
very beginning, particularly because I know there are lots of young IT 
professionals who dream and hope that someday they’re going to end 
up in your position, … is basically [about] how you got to where you 
are now. Is this your first CIO position? Or have you kind of come up 
through the ranks of technology to end up where you are now? 
Monte Ford: I started on the vendor side or the supplier side of 
the business, working for supplier companies, like Digital Equipment 
and IBM. 
Yourdon: Oh? That’s unique amongst the people I’ve spoken to so 
far. I started with DEC1 also, by the way. 
Ford: I thought that was a fantastic company, but I ended up being 
hired by my customer in Boston at DEC, and took an executive posi-
tion with the customer organization. I was about to take a different 
job at Digital, a more senior job at Digital, and I went to tell my cus-
tomer, and he asked me to come work for them. 
Yourdon: Oh. 
Ford: Which I did. I went to work for them and became a customer 
of Digital Equipment and IBM and other companies at the time and 
then continued on along the technology track from there. So I came 
into this side of the industry reporting to a COO that also was a CIO 
and moved from there to take a job in Texas …with the intent of be-
ing the CIO at that company, which I did [become]. And then I 
moved from there to being CIO at American. By the way, I did have 
marketing and technical jobs when I was at DEC as well. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. By contrast, I was always in the techie depart-
ment. I worked at the old [Maynard, Massachusetts] mill, originally on 
                                                
1 Digital Equipment Corporation, a vendor of computer systems, software, and peripherals 
that merged with Hewlett Packard in 2002. 

CIOs at Work 
 
49  
the PDP-52 and then on the PDP-63, in the early days. But it was quite 
a place to work. [laughter] That’s for sure. 
Ford: Sure was. 
Yourdon: Anyway, the question that I was about to ask was whether 
you had any important mentors or role models along the way. 
Ford: I have had mentors and role models along the way. In both 
sales and marketing and in technology, I have had mentors and role 
models and people—I continue to have mentors and role models and 
people that provide me the opportunity to grow and develop in what 
is always a mutual relationship. At least I try to make sure that every 
relationship I have is mutually beneficial, but I have had them along 
the way, inside the professional range and out.  
And I know this book is about technology, but as an African-American 
in this industry, this business, I’ve had the opportunity to have role 
models that counsel me on how to function within the technology 
world, as well as people that counsel me on what to do about tech-
nology. Technology is really the culmination of a set of common-sense 
functionality, if you will, to me, that is applied to solving business prob-
lems and business needs based on circumstance. The technology busi-
ness, though, is as much about people as it is about technology, maybe 
more about people than it is about technology. So my focus, and the 
role models that I’ve had, and my focus over the years has always been 
on the people, and a lot less so on the technology.  
I think if you get the people part of it right, the technology part will 
come. Technologies come and go. They change—I’ve been through 
several technologies that are supposed to save the planet. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
                                                
2 The PDP-5 was DEC’s first popular minicomputer, introduced in 1964; it was the predecessor 
of the far more popular (and more miniaturized) PDP-8 minicomputer. 
3 The PDP-6 was DEC’s first large-scale computer, introduced in 1965 and aimed at the scien-
tific/engineering marketplace. Its design was based on a 36-bit word of memory, and it thus 
competed fairly directly with IBM’s 7090/7094 computers. It was the predecessor of the PDP-
10 and DECsystem 10 computers. 

Chapter 3 | Monte Ford:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, American Airlines, Inc./AMR Corp. 
 
50  
Ford: And make programming incredible and make the world in-
credibly easy, which I know that you have both lived through and 
written about over the years. And you know, every so often, you 
hear another technology’s going to change everything, and often 
technologies do change things, but there’s always another one com-
ing. The thing that allows you to make it through all those changes 
and iterations and capability and lack thereof around technology has 
to be the people you work with and grow and cultivate and manage 
and develop. So my focus around technology is really on people. 
Yourdon: Yeah. You know, that’s something they certainly don’t 
teach you in college, at least not when I was in college. I didn’t have a 
chance to learn it for several years after college either. But I think 
that’s a comment I’ve heard fairly consistently from everybody in 
terms of their mentors and role models. And one of the reasons, by 
the way, I had to put that question on the list is that I knew, for ex-
ample, I was going to be interviewing the CIO of Microsoft, and I had 
to ask him whether Bill Gates was a major role model for him and so 
on, and I’ve gotten a variety of interesting answers.  
One last question in this “getting started” area: once you started 
moving along this career path, did you find the need for any additional 
education? Did you go back to get an MBA or anything of that sort? 
Ford: You know, I’ve had several opportunities to get an MBA and 
including sponsorship to get a full MBA and multiple opportunities for 
executive MBA. And I did not. I chose not to.  
I think the most important role model for me … from a technology 
standpoint—and I think this will stand the test of time—is a guy 
named Jim Cash. 
Yourdon: Now where have I heard that name before?  
Ford: Well, he was dean of the business school at Harvard. He ran 
the Harvard Business Review. He was a professor at Harvard in the 
business school. He ran their executive MBA program. He’s a tech-
nologist, he’s written books, he’s on the board—well, I think he just 
got off the board of Microsoft, he’s on the board at GE, Walmart, 

CIOs at Work 
 
51  
he’s been on the board of Knight Ridder, he’s on the board of Chubb, 
he’s on the board of Tandy, which is originally Radio Shack. He’s done 
a number of very strong, highly qualified things. Early indicator of 
what outsourcing would be to India. 
Yourdon: Ahh. 
Ford: Early indicator of real-time and just-in-time inventory manage-
ment and did consulting around those things. Early indicator of just a 
number of things—social networking. Early indicator of a lot of things 
that technology would evolve to. He’s just an incredibly bright, well 
organized, very well socialized person. 
Yourdon: Very interesting. Really, it’s the heart of your day-to-day 
life in a sense—and that is, how you see technology and IT contrib-
uting to the success of an organization like American? I think every-
body knows the story from the early days of just what an enormous 
impact [American Airline’s reservation system] Sabre has had busi-
ness-wise and technology-wise, but what’s the story today, in 2011? 
Ford: I think that the business that we’re in is a technology business. 
We’re in the information business, I should say. We do transport 
things on airplanes. We make the world smaller, certainly. We trans-
port things on airplanes, but the thing that people need most, 
whether it’s transporting cargo or themselves or somebody else or 
something else, they want information. You know, our routine day is 
transporting 33,000 people someplace on an airplane that they 
weren’t at earlier in the day before getting on our plane. And it hap-
pens on time the vast majority of the time, around … 84 to 87 per-
cent of the time, which is a pretty incredible number actually across 
the industry. … And that’s great. If you look at all the things logistical 
and otherwise that need to go in to get a plane off the ground, it’s a 
minor miracle. Never mind luggage and all the rest of those things. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Ford: So we transport 110 million bags or so a year, and we lose, 
literally lose, less than a couple thousand out of 110 million. And the 

Chapter 3 | Monte Ford:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, American Airlines, Inc./AMR Corp. 
 
52  
tiny minority of those bags, less than three tenths of 1 percent, arrive 
late, and 80 percent of those come in on the next flight. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ford: So when you think about that, 110 million times—now, if it’s 
your bag, it’s late. That’s another issue. It feels different. But less than 
three tenths of 1 percent is a big number. So on a routine day when 
everything is fine, at the airport and routine flight, everything is fine, 
everything is great. We’re measured by what happens when things 
are not routine. When there’s a dust storm that shuts down Dallas, 
like it did a couple of weeks ago. 
Yourdon: That’s right. 
Ford: When there’s the most incredible weather in recent record-
able history in the Northeast and in Chicago. What happens when 
you’ve got thousands of planes and hundreds of thousands of people 
who are impacted? And when it happens over a two- or three-day 
period? How do you recover? People want information about their 
flight. They want to know what’s going to happen, what do I do, what 
are my options? All of these are built around and driven by technol-
ogy. Technology is at the center of everything we do, and information 
technology, information specifically, is at the heart of that sensor. It’s 
the core of that sensor. So we play a pretty significant role, and 
probably even more so than we did back in the Sabre days, because 
even with Sabre, a lot was still manual and otherwise, and with to-
day’s volume and today’s technology, you just cannot do that. 
Yourdon: You know, I heard a variation on this in a speech by 
Theresa Wise, the CIO of Delta, who said one of the things they now 
try to do is stay in touch with their customers almost 24 hours a day, 
along the lines of what you were saying. And what I see as a traveler, 
I’m getting things on my iPhone saying, “You can now check in on this 
flight,” or “Your flight’s been delayed”—I got that on the way to the 
airport a couple of weeks ago—“and here are your options.” So I 
certainly agree with you that generically, maybe one of the things that 
has changed over the last 30 or 40 years is the opportunity that you 

CIOs at Work 
53  
have with technology to provide this information everywhere and
anywhere, anytime to a degree that just wasn’t possible back then. 
Ford: You know, Ed, our philosophy, our goal, is not only for cus-
tomers and employees, but we want to meet the customers and em-
ployees where they want to be met, which we don’t get to dictate.
And—do you have American’s iPhone app? 
Yourdon: I do, yeah. 
Ford: So what we’re trying to do, with all of the things we’re doing
with iPhone and Android and other platforms that we’re working on,
we want to be able to meet people wherever they want to be met.
And you’ll see some other examples of this coming up. And we don’t
get to dictate that. I mean, in a world of social networking, in a world
of social media, social technology—we don’t get to control everything.
The world has gone from being very vertical to very horizontal. 
Yourdon: That certainly is true. Absolutely. 
Ford: And in a horizontal world, you don’t want the hierarchy. In
your business, I used to sit around every morning and wait for the
newspaper kid to come, and I would hope that he wouldn’t throw it—
when I was living in Boston—hope he wouldn’t throw it in the snow. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Ford: And hope that he doesn’t break a window or bang the front
door with it, and I would sit there and wait patiently for the newspa-
per to tell me what my world was and what was going on in it. Now I
get the newspaper on Sunday, the New York Times, just because I like
laying down on the couch and opening up the newspaper and having
paper everywhere and reading it. But the world has been voting to
get information instantaneously. My kids won’t read a newspaper. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ford: They read it online. But they won’t physically read—you know,
it’s kind of sad to me actually, because I’m a newspaper guy. But they
want the information when they want it and where they want it, and
they’re not going to wait for the paper guy, paper boy or the paper 

Chapter 3 | Monte Ford:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, American Airlines, Inc./AMR Corp. 
 
54  
girl. And the information flows horizontally at a rate that we can’t 
control and manage. So, three years ago or so, I don’t remember the 
time, a plane set down in the Hudson, and the way the news media 
found out about it was on Twitter. 
Yourdon: Yeah, it was on Twitter. It was about a mile away from 
where I’m sitting right now. Out on the Hudson River, that US [Air-
ways] flight. That was an amazing thing to watch—on Twitter. 
Ford: On Twitter! You know, and the first pictures came from some 
guy with a smartphone. So nobody knows their names. Who was 
tweeting about it first. I mean, none of that is really important. It 
wasn’t breaking news from CNN. It was breaking news from Twitter 
reported on CNN. And so, in a horizontal world, people go to each 
other really very quickly to get information. So the hierarchy of wait-
ing for the newspaper or the hierarchy of waiting for American to tell 
me what’s going on in my world isn’t going to happen. So we supply 
all kinds of information through the Internet. Our customers aggre-
gate that data faster, as fast as we can supply it, so they know and can 
understand what’s going on.  
Before we had the capability that we have now, we started sending 
information out over the Internet about flights and this and that to 
other service providers and other information providers and the like. 
And before we started doing this ourselves, I was standing at a gate 
and the flight was delayed. And I knew what was going on with the 
flight because I called the Operations Center to find out. I was at the 
airport walking around, seeing what was going on. The Operations 
Center told me, “Okay, we’re just making a decision. Hold on a sec-
ond. Okay, we’re going to change gates. We got a new plane coming 
in. That one’s broken. So we’re going to move down three gates or 
two gates, or wherever the new one is. And we’ll be getting that in-
formation out shortly.” Well, as soon as they put that information 
out, it’s broadcast across the Internet. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ford: So I’m sitting there. I see a bunch of people looking at smart-
phones and handheld devices. All of a sudden, about 20 percent of 

CIOs at Work 
 
55  
them, 25 percent, pick up their bag and walk down two gates, just as 
the gate agent is announcing, “We’ll have more information for you 
shortly. Just hold on.” Those people already had the information. The 
irony was we sent it. And at that moment, I said, “You know, I know 
we have all these things coming, but I am not going to put our em-
ployees in this position.” And we emphasized getting real-time infor-
mation out to people as quickly as physically possible, at least at the 
same time that we get it out to customers. 
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Ford: And now, we’re the best aggregator of data of anybody. We 
see the smartphone implementations and other things. And the re-
sponses to it—in our app, we’ve embedded technology and informa-
tion into the functional features of the device. So it’s not a website 
experience. It is a functional experience that takes advantage of the 
device. And you’ll see this continue through GPS, the concept of 
presence, the phone. So at DFW [airport] here in Dallas, one of the 
most difficult things for people is parking someplace and coming into 
another terminal [thinking] “Where did I park my car?” 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ford: Now you can take a picture of the place where you parked, of 
the location number where you parked, and it’s embedded into the 
app. And you pull up your flight and the information comes up on the 
phone with a picture of where you parked. It’s embedded in the app, 
taking advantage of the features of the phone. 
Yourdon: That’s fantastic. 
Ford: It pushes—for an Android, for instance, it pushes flight-status 
notification. And you can imagine that it’s not too far-fetched to 
think that, well, since we know where you are—I mean, customers 
are willing to share information. They know nobody has any privacy 
anymore—about when they’re on, what their location is, and what 
their GPS position is—so if I know that you left Dallas a couple of 
days ago, and the application knows that you’re coming back, and the 
application then realizes you’re in Dallas, it ought to just pop up the 
z

Chapter 3 | Monte Ford:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, American Airlines, Inc./AMR Corp. 
 
56  
picture of your car and say, “Remember. You parked at B23” or 
whatever it is. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Ford: And those are things that the public is just not going to stand 
to wait for. And those are the type of things where I think we have 
the right mindset. I’m biased, but I’m willing to test this. We have a 
superior mindset than most companies like ours about what the func-
tion of technology is and the capability is and how to embed that into 
the thinking of the people that implement it. And not just customers, 
right, but the people that implement it, so customers and employees. 
So we have—CRM. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ford: And CRM is customer-relationship management, as you know. 
Well, we have something called ERM, which is employee-relationship 
management, which focuses on the same concepts, right? 
Yourdon: Aha. 
Ford: Employee-relationship management—our employees live the 
same way our customers do. So our employees work the same 
way—our employees work the same way our customers do. And it’s 
unrealistic to think that our employees, who live in a very horizontal 
world themselves when they’re outside of work, will get to work 
one day and all of a sudden have to be vertical. Have to be in this 
hierarchical structure, with this technology that doesn’t allow them 
to work horizontally the way they work everywhere else. It doesn’t 
make sense. So we have to be as focused on the employee, à la my 
airport day experience I just told you about, as we do for the cus-
tomer, or we’ve only got half the equation. And most people don’t 
think of things that way. We focus on the information our employees 
get, and the social networking aspects, social media, social technol-
ogy aspects of what they do. They will by definition be of more use 
to the customer.  
And if it makes it sound like I’m doing a little bit of bragging, I guess 
that I am, but that’s not the point. The point is, technology in our 

CIOs at Work 
 
57  
environment is the leading-edge indicator of what the capabilities of 
the environment and the workplace are. People will almost let them 
pay us to do the work. So here’s the deal. You can fly on a flight that 
costs $10, and you go to the airport, stand in line, get your ticket, 
whatever. You can fly on the [same] flight, it will cost you $12, but 
you do the work yourself and go through a self-service machine. 
You’ll pay the $12. 
Yourdon: Just because you feel you’re in more control. 
Ford: More control. You’ve got all the information. You’ve got all the 
things you need yourself. In a horizontal world, nobody’s going to 
stand around and wait for the hierarchy to wait their turn in line. Tell 
them, “Here, okay, I’m going to give you information.” “No, I want it 
all. I can do it myself.” Nobody’s going to wait for the newspaper boy. 
Yourdon: Very interesting. Now, a lot of this involves giving cus-
tomers and employees the opportunity to do things that they basically 
could not do before. Is IT in your organization expected to be the 
originator or creator or the source of new ideas? Or does it come 
from all over the place? 
Ford: Yes, we call it the “art of the possible.” But it’s a three-
pronged approach. Part of what we do at American is we take some 
of the best businesspeople … throughout the organization—they’re 
in revenue management, they’re in capacity planning, the person that 
is the president of the Advantage program, our frequent-flier pro-
gram… You take the best employees in the company—some of 
them, anyway—and we run them through the IT organization when 
we can, as part of sort of corporate property, if you will. I take them 
here, give them a total frontal lobotomy, and then retrain them from 
scratch about everything from how to start a project, how to man-
age a project, how to run a project, the IT aspect—because their job 
is information. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ford: They’re only as good as their ability to implement the next-
best technology solution within their business unit. And so we take 

Chapter 3 | Monte Ford:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, American Airlines, Inc./AMR Corp. 
 
58  
them here, we don’t park them. We take them here, they go through 
regular jobs in the IT organization like a career IT person, and then 
we push them back out into the business.  
That philosophy works beautifully if you really believe that the world 
revolves around IT. Because your people can be great managers, 
great thinkers and this and that, but if they walk into the room and 
say, “Okay, we’re going to talk about everything about the business 
and every aspect in the business, except that IT stuff—I’m going to 
throw that over the wall to the programmers. I don’t understand that 
IT stuff.” It’s perfectly acceptable in some places to walk into a room 
and say that, but unacceptable to say, “Uhh, numbers, financials, 
budget—I don’t understand that budget stuff. I’ll leave that up to the 
financial guys.” Nobody’s accepting of that. But in some places it is 
still acceptable for somebody not to have a thorough background and 
training and understanding of technology. 
Yourdon: How much of that is a function of the generation? You 
know, you still see older managers who won’t read their own e-mail, 
but it’s much less common, isn’t it, with the younger generation? 
Ford: It is with the younger generation. That makes it more challeng-
ing though. It doesn’t solve it, because IT is still evolving. The younger 
generation is pushing IT in a very horizontal way. It’s pushing IT to 
places it’s never been pushed before. So social networking, social me-
dia, horizontal stuff, is part of the continuum, not the end state. So, 
the, the people driving—I’m talking about young people—are driving 
things to another place, to another level. So, for instance—what’s the 
best way to articulate this? The places where we have to be are ahead 
of where we are today. So when we bring people into the organiza-
tion, bring young people into the organization, they expect instant 
messaging and social media and socialized technology and this hori-
zontal world. That drives a set of requirements and a set of things 
that set the future of the next generation of things that we have to 
provide that is head and shoulders above where we are today.  
And so our job is to figure out how things like mobility, what things 
like mobility and the concept of mobility mean. So we can’t develop 

CIOs at Work 
 
59  
applications anymore that are “stateful” applications. Even mainframe-
like applications or client-server-type applications, certainly not cloud-
based applications, you certainly can’t develop them in a way that 
doesn’t contemplate mobility. You can’t develop them in a way that 
isn’t agile in nature, or an agile development methodology, because 
they’re not going to sit still for six months of requirements that they’ll 
see a year and a half later when the project’s done. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ford: It’s not how they work. So while they are driving some of the 
things we do on an implementation basis today that we live with, 
what’s not happening is, they’re not contemplating and thinking 
about, “Okay, what is the future going to be? What kind of cellular 
or wireless network am I going to have to have when everything is 
on, when everything, everything is an Internet-based function, an 
Internet-based protocol?” 
Yourdon: Interesting. Now you’ve actually touched on a couple of 
things in the next area that I wanted to discuss, in terms of the new 
trends in … IT that are likely to influence … your organization over 
the next few years. You mentioned cloud and mobile are the two ob-
vious ones. Are there any other new paradigms or new trends that 
you see coming along in the next few years? 
Ford: The real implementation is agile computing. Not just the talk of 
it and not just—but the real implementation of agile computing. 
Yourdon: Interesting. Okay. I have not heard other CIOs emphasize 
that quite that much.  
Ford: I’d be interested in any comments you might want to add here, 
such as: what kind of development projects are you now doing in an 
“agile” fashion, and how much of what you use is older legacy apps? 
How are you dealing with the legacy apps—are you refactoring any of 
it? What issues have come up, and how do you deal with them? 
Yourdon: Okay, well, that’s a good one to add to the list. Let me 
turn it around 180 degrees then and ask about the dark force. You 

Chapter 3 | Monte Ford:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, American Airlines, Inc./AMR Corp. 
 
60  
know, what are the problems that keep you up at night and the things 
that you really worry about in terms of IT over the next few years? 
Ford: This is part of what I was saying is challenging IT. And I don’t 
think I articulated it well, but the days, the hierarchical days, of big 
American Airlines or even some of the technology providers deciding 
what the future of technology is—that’s gone. Consumer-based tech-
nology, in a horizontal world, consumer-based technologies will dic-
tate what big corporations do and how they provide it and what they 
provide and when and to whom. It will dictate what your employers 
demand. It will dictate what your customers demand. I don’t care 
what project we have going on, if it’s not based on what consumer-
based technologies are driving people to have the capabilities to do—
and when I say “consumer-based,” individual technologies that people 
can have and use—then it’s useless.  
So one of the challenges we have is we don’t get to determine all the 
rules anymore. We don’t get to go to the mainframe gods and tell 
everybody what they can network to and what they can do and what 
they can’t do. I mean, DEC made a living off of helping to open this up. 
Yourdon: Yes. It’s true. 
Ford: So we don’t get to do that anymore. We have to look at and 
be predictors of the trends and technology and media and stay 
much more ahead of where things are and … where we think things 
might be going in order to provide the capability for people to do 
that. So to do what they demand to do, because if you can’t connect 
to people on their BlackBerry, they’re just not going to talk to you, 
irrespective of how good you think your application is. So you bet-
ter build it in a way—in an agile way, I think—you better build it in a 
way that works mobilely and you better be able to make sure it 
works up and down quickly, in the cloud, and you better be able to 
do it nimbly, agile.  
Those three things go together, significantly go together in my opin-
ion, and are a troika, like a three-legged stool that cannot be broken 
apart functionally, for the future. The difficulty in all this is how do I 
predict what my budget is? How do I predict what the next things 

CIOs at Work 
 
61  
are? I can’t do five- and ten-year programs very often anyway, at least 
not the way that I used to. They’ve got to be smaller component-part 
things. I’ve got to be able to turn left and turn right quickly. I’ve got to 
be able to do a lot of things that I didn’t have to necessarily do be-
fore, and I have to be a pretty good predictor of where we spend 
money. And then how do you, how do you budget an agile-developed 
project? You have standup meetings every day, you have the scrums 
every day, ten-minute standup meetings in the mornings. You’re hav-
ing these agile work sessions where what you started with, where 
every two weeks you’re coming back, or three weeks or four weeks 
you’re coming back with a prototype, and what you started with six 
months ago is not where you are now. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ford: But it’s a better place, but you thought your scope was gonna 
be XYZ. Now scope is ABC and XYZ, or you thought it was going to 
be XYZ, now it’s just Z. So how do you manage technology in a pre-
dictable way in that environment? And we’re cutting our teeth on 
that, and I don’t think the whole world has figured that out, but I ab-
solutely believe that’s where it’s going and that’s what we’re doing. I 
don’t think that most CIOs … that are not technology providers—I 
can’t speak for them—but I don’t think that most CIOs in businesses 
are thinking about things that way. And that’s absolutely how we have 
to think about things. 
Yourdon: So you see that as one of the big challenges. Well, I cer-
tainly would agree with you. I think everything you’ve said makes 
eminently good sense, but it’s interesting that you focused on that 
as the first and foremost item as opposed to what I’ve been hearing 
from almost every other CIO, whose first and topmost concern 
that gives them nightmares every night, is security. Not that I’m 
suggesting you’re ignoring it at all, but that wasn’t the first thing 
that you mentioned. 
Ford: But that’s a given. You can’t stop the train unless it’s just egre-
gious, but you can’t stop the train because the horizontal world pro-
vides different security concerns. Of course, it does. I mean, in the 

Chapter 3 | Monte Ford:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, American Airlines, Inc./AMR Corp. 
 
62  
news business, authentication of stories is much more difficult, and 
there have been a bunch of people saying, “Stop this horizontal stuff, 
because you can’t trust the stories.” Well, that’s not stopping. Secu-
rity has to catch up with—it has to be not the tail wagging the dog, 
but the other way around. Security has to function in a way that we 
need it to function to be effective. And people like me have to think 
about security differently. When we first started this cloud computing 
thing, we had 150 reasons why we couldn’t do it, ’cause it didn’t look 
and feel like the mainframe, it didn’t look and feel like the client 
server, it didn’t look and feel like the data center. It’s not going to 
look and feel like that, so what things can we do and how can we 
change the security paradigms, and we can by the way, to adapt to 
what the needs of the people are, because, remember, the consumers 
are dictating this stuff, not us. And people are always going to provide 
things that they can sell, and that’s what people are buying, this hori-
zontal technology, not the vertical stuff. And security better figure 
out how to catch up … security to me is a given.  
And by the way, when I talk about this three-legged stool, you know, 
this … agile development methodology, mobile computing, and cloud 
technology, we’re dragging the vendors along with us, we’re dragging 
the suppliers along with us and demanding that they do things in the 
way that we need them to do. So it’s not just us following technology 
trends. It’s suppliers to companies like mine. And … CIOs don’t have 
this nailed, they don’t have this licked, they don’t have this figured out 
as well, and we’re having to do this together, at the same time. 
Yourdon: Interesting. And I think that’s kind of different from the 
popular story that you see in the press, where the impression is that 
the vendors are leading the way, and you’re saying it’s really not that 
way at all. 
Ford: Not that way at all. No, you may hear that from the supplier 
guys, but, of course, they’re supplier guys, so they think they’ve got all 
the technology. It’s not that way at all. 
Yourdon: Hmm, okay. Well, that is interesting. So you’re saying se-
curity is just a given. One of the things that I’ve been interested in, 
though, is the level of concern that I’ve heard from some CIOs.  

CIOs at Work 
63  
Ford: Oh. I don’t want to, Ed, I don’t want by any means to minimize
the importance of security. We are all over security. We’re all em-
bedded with the government, TSA. You know, we’re 20 percent of
the air commerce in the United States. If something were to happen
and our systems were to shut down, that’s pretty significant. I mean,
we have a lot of personal information. 
Yourdon: There’s all the privacy stuff, too, yeah. 
Ford: I mean, we’ve got to PCI-a-go-go everything we do. So we are
security-, security-, security-focused. Absolutely. Incredibly so. My
only point was, you have to just be that way. It has to be part of your
existence. Not to focus on the future of technology is shutting things
down. Or the focus on the future of technology is security. If you can
focus on security, you can focus on shutting down things that happen
as opposed to what you can allow to happen in a secure manner. It’s
a different mentality. 
Yourdon: Okay. That does make an awful lot of sense. 
Ford: And things that we can’t do securely, by the way, we just don’t
do. But so far, there have been very few things that we’ve not been
able to do. That’s one of the places where we’re dragging the vendors
along kicking and screaming. 
Yourdon: Aha. Interesting. Two more areas that I want to ask you
about before we run out of time. We’ve already touched on this
whole topic of the younger generation or the digital natives or what-
ever else you might want to call them. And, of course, they’re not
only coming into your IT department; they’re coming through every-
where, in all business organizations. Do you have any concerns about
the younger generation in terms of how they use technology or what
their expectations are? 
Ford: No. My only concern is if we can get enough meaningful infor-
mation from them. If we can sit them down long enough to get enough
meaningful information from them to be able to chart the course of
our future. They’re a tremendous resource all over the company, and 

Chapter 3 | Monte Ford:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, American Airlines, Inc./AMR Corp. 
 
64  
if we have our way, we’re not trying to limit the technology or the 
people who understand the technology in the organization.  
If I have a company full of technologists that work in business and do 
the job in business every day, I’m happy. That’s why we transplant 
people from the business unit into the technology organization and 
then send them back out. Even if they’re technology-savvy, it’s a re-
quirement to work here, to have technology background, if you’re 
coming into the management training program or whatever. I don’t 
view that as a limitation or an issue or—I’m not afraid of it at all. One 
of my first jobs, when I got hired by my customer, the first thing they 
said [was], “The first thing you’ve got to do is this e-mail stuff, [it] is 
getting out of hand.” 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Ford: “Now we’ve got to shut this down. People are using it during 
the day, you know, they’re hacking off. People could be using it—my 
God, they could be sending e-mails out all day instead of doing their 
jobs! You’ve got to shut this e-mail thing down and figure out how to 
get it under control. And the other thing is, these PCs are out of con-
trol. Personal computers are just causing people to do their own 
work and, you know, just people have them at home now. They’re 
starting to be in their homes. This is crazy. Shut it down.” 
So the first thing I did was look into this. And I thought, “You know, 
these guys are crazy. We’re not going to shut this down.” So I came 
back with this report that said, “The way you really get control over it 
is you let people do what they want to do.” And they said, “No, no, 
no.” And I convinced people that we should do that. And we opened 
it up, with some measures and some security and some control and all 
that, and the response was incredible. I mean, we got more value and 
understanding about what we need to do as a company by doing that 
than by everyone else running around and trying to shut things down.  
I think the same thing is true with people coming in. Unless you 
think they’re all stupid, you really ought to take advantage of them. 
They’re the ones that made this stuff really popular and really work 
and caused the companies that are supplying the technologies to 

CIOs at Work 
 
65  
them to focus on what their needs are and what they want to do 
and how they want to do it. The best ideas from YouTube come 
from … people using it and saying what ought to be the next thing. 
Not, you know, the genius of some big corporation. 
Yourdon: That certainly is true. Absolutely.  
Ford: If you really believe that the world is horizontal and becoming 
more so, you have to embrace it in how you live your life every day, 
including the people you employ and how you manage them. And by 
the way, it’s not just technology. How do you manage these guys? 
How do you manage these people? They’re not going to sit around 
and listen to you dictate all of the—you know, we’ve got to be sensi-
tive here, because we’re in airlines, so we need structure, right?  
We need a bunch of things because safety is first and foremost in eve-
rything we do, so you’ve got to have structure. But how do you man-
age a bunch of horizontal employees coming in to a historically vertical 
organization? You’d better manage them differently, or you won’t get 
as much out of them, or they’ll leave. So it’s a set of problems that 
are, that are interesting and different—but a tremendous opportunity. 
Yourdon: That reminds me of a question I wanted to ask you about, 
because it came up in an earlier interview this morning. Have you 
seen many instances of younger people being hired into your organi-
zation as a team and insisting on remaining together as a team? 
Ford: No. 
Yourdon: As opposed to just individually? 
Ford: No, and I don’t know how tolerant we are of that in our work 
environment. 
Yourdon: Well, as I’m sure you know, it’s always been common in 
the IT industry that if a project team works together and bonds, they 
want to stay together on the next project, which runs afoul of a lot of 
HR policies. But this idea of being hired right out of college as a team. 
I heard this about a month ago from the CIO of Marriott, and I got it 

Chapter 3 | Monte Ford:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, American Airlines, Inc./AMR Corp. 
 
66  
confirmed this morning by the CIO of Arizona Public Services, and I 
had not heard it before a month ago, so I was just curious. 
Ford: That they hire people as a team right out of college? 
Yourdon: Well, the kids insisted on being hired. They said, “You ei-
ther take all four of us or none of us.”  
Ford: I would take a pass, and I’m not sure how long those kids 
would be around anyway. And I would take a pass because, we view 
people as individuals, and if you think about it—though, if you’re do-
ing agile development, you have to focus on teams more, you have to 
pay people differently, you have to have a better, greater emphasis 
on teams and the value of teams, because that’s how you get the 
work done. But I don’t subscribe to that philosophy at all, and when 
teams of people come in and start to dictate to you what you can 
and can’t do and what they will—’cause the next thing they’re going 
to say is what they will and won’t work on. I’ll take a pass. I have a 
very different philosophy. We break up teams routinely—high-
performing teams. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Ford: And it’s the best way to get more high-performing teams. 
Once a team hits a stride, and they’re cruising and they’re just loving 
life, “and this is great, and we’re really high-balance, high-
performance,” you know, invariably there are other places that are 
not working as well. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ford: So you take the leaders from that team and either create new 
teams or put them where they will be more effective in taking those 
traits and characteristics and learnings and things from the team that 
they were on, and propagate that across the organization, proliferate 
that across and throughout the organization, and invariably you get 
better people and better teams, with better people that are cross-
pollinated, number one, and that culturally and functionally put the 
kinds of attitudes and culture and philosophy out there, spread out 

CIOs at Work 
 
67  
throughout the organization, that you would not have had as much of 
had you not done that.  
The other thing that it does is … it proliferates the concept of team, 
because what happens with really high-performing teams that demand 
to stay together and that kind of thing, after a while, it’s not necessar-
ily them as a team, but it’s the overall team. How much of a team do 
you have if you have people that pride themselves on how well they 
do versus other people at the expense of everybody else as opposed 
to how they make the entire organization better? 
Yourdon: Ahh, interesting. 
Ford: How do they make the entire world better? ’Cause what you 
have then is “us against the world,” or haves and have-nots, or 
thems and those, and, you develop these little cocky—especially if 
they’re working on new stuff, right? You develop these cocky, inter-
nally focused, “my way or the highway,” “just us,” “I’m only focused 
on me,” “I do good work, but, you know, the rest of the organiza-
tion—never mind them.” When you routinely break those up, you 
get a team effect that’s greater than the sum of the parts. You get a 
synergy that exists that otherwise you wouldn’t by sending them 
across the organization. 
Yourdon: Okay. Very interesting. Okay, I’m going to ask just one last 
question, and I think it’s kind of an appropriate question, and that is: 
where do you see yourself going from here? Do you expect to be a 
CIO for the rest of your life, or is this just one of many opportunities 
along the way? 
Ford: I was thinking about starting a career writing technology 
books. What do you think? 
Yourdon: [laughter] It doesn’t pay very well these days! 
Ford: But as ex-DEC guys, maybe you and I can team up and go to 
some publisher and demand that we stay together as a team. 
Yourdon: There you go. [laughter] 

Chapter 3 | Monte Ford:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, American Airlines, Inc./AMR Corp. 
 
68  
Ford: But I really don’t know. I’ve never really managed my career. 
There will always be a need for technology people. So I’m on the 
board now for—I’ve been on two public boards and one board that’s 
sort of a utility—and boards are going to continue to need good, 
strong, qualified technology people that have experiences like I have in 
a significant way. And I can only do one board at a time while I’m here. 
So I would do more than that, but for the time being, the world needs 
leadership that is open-minded and open-thinking and not shutting 
things down. The world needs to understand how to implement hori-
zontal technology in, in a large enterprise environment. And that’s 
something that I think I am extraordinarily good at and may be narcis-
sistic or conceited about it, but I think that part I get.  
And so I’m not really focused on it, but I know that if things keep 
going the way that they are, that there will be people like me that 
need to help get it there. And I’m not the only one, obviously. 
There are a whole bunch of people that understand this stuff. But 
I’m just one person. But I think I can help get people to where they 
need to be. 
Yourdon: It’s a future path that I’ve not heard other CIOs mention. 
And as it turns out, I’ve been on a couple of public boards also, so I 
completely agree with you that obviously in places like Silicon Valley, 
maybe everybody on the board is a technology person. But not in the 
typical Fortune 500 companies. You’ve got strong marketing people 
and financial people and so on, but, you know, having a real strong 
voice for technology—what a great career. 
Ford: And I’m a very strong believer in all kinds of diversity, and I 
think some of those Silicon Valley companies would be a lot better off 
if they didn’t have just technologists on the board. 
Yourdon: Oh, absolutely. Yeah. 
Ford: Think about it. Not a lot of them have CIOs on the board. 
Yourdon: You know, I’ve been surprised how infrequently the CIO 
has been on the board of all the companies I’ve been trying to track 
down. You’re right, absolutely. 

CIOs at Work 
 
69  
Ford: You know, they absolutely should. People understand the or-
ganizations and the structure and the things they’re trying to do, 
they’re trying to sell to. No matter the size of the company, they 
want to sell to a big company. It legitimates them, it will standardize 
them, it will get them big contracts, all of that. And as much as even 
the companies that say, “We are so anti-big company,” the first thing 
they want to do is sell a contract to a big company. 
Yourdon: [laughter] Right. 
Ford: And it makes sense. It makes sense to have that same exper-
tise. I also am a firm believer that just as right now, because of not 
only security, but also all these other things that we talked about, be-
cause today on public boards, as you know, you have to have a finan-
cial expert. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ford: It makes all the sense in the world to me for any significant 
board to have a technology expert. I don’t, I don’t know if it will be a 
sort of requirement, Sarbanes-Oxley, like that you’re got to have one 
certified and all that, but if you’re a forward-thinking CEO and you 
don’t have a technology person on your board—I don’t care what 
business you’re in—how real forward-thinking are you? You abso-
lutely have to have technologists on your board, or at least one, if 
you’re going to live in the free world today, irrespective of the prod-
uct or service. 
Yourdon: Well, I completely agree with you, and I think that is a 
wonderful general suggestion as a career path for CIOs at some 
stage, maybe later on in their career. Wonderful. Okay, well, I’m go-
ing to wrap this up so that I don’t interfere with the rest of your day 
of meetings. 
Ford: Thank you. 
 

C H A P T E R 
4 
Mittu Sridhara  
CIO, Ladbrokes plc  
Mittu Sridhara is Group CIO at Ladbrokes PLC. A leader in the global betting 
and gaming market, Ladbrokes transacts more than £16 billion each year—
making it a pure, cross-channel digital business on a global scale. Customer ex-
perience at Ladbrokes is delivered by a combination of trading, banking, stream-
ing-content, and gaming platforms personalized by channel. Ladbrokes’ innovative 
KickOff app won the Future Mobile Award for Mobile Gambling 2011.  
An international visionary, Mr. Sridhara has an outstanding track record of building 
high-performance teams, products, and industry-leading customer experiences. He 
is recognized for his customer-centric approach and passion. Mr. Sridhara’s career 
has encompassed Senior Leadership Technology and Product Marketing at Sabre; 
CIO at Versapoint NV, a broadband telecommunications company; and Group CIO 
at Avis Rent A Car System, LLC. 
 
Ed Yourdon: I usually start off the same way. I don’t need to ask where 
you grew up or where you went to university, but people were not born 
into the position of CIO, so I’m curious to know how you got to where you 
are now. Were you a CIO somewhere before? 
Mittu Sridhara: Yes, I was. I actually tell people about who I am, because 
how you do your job, especially on a global scale in a global organization 
does, I think, add flavor to it. 
Yourdon: It does, and it’s something I had not anticipated. And I hope for 
your sake that it’s very different for you, but some of the organizations I’ve 

Chapter 4 | Mittu Sridhara:  
CIO, Ladbrokes plc 
 
72  
spoken with have said, whenever there’s a crisis anywhere in the world—of 
which there are many today—“We get a phone call at three in the morning 
because our organization is global.” Now I hope you don’t have global cri-
ses, but I can imagine you have a global scale, so that it makes things differ-
ent than a lot of people would expect. 
Sridhara: I think probably most CIOs at scale have operations to run 
24/7. I mean globally. So, something can go wrong at any point in time along 
the way. But also how you implement and influence, culturally and across 
geography, is also relevant to the context. Because, who you are and how 
you perceive and how you message are quite fundamental in how successful 
you are in getting things done. And you get things done through people, 
not through technology. You also get to customers through solutions that 
have elements of technology that is derived through an understanding of 
what the customer wants. I believe the global aspect has been a significant 
part of the job and I’ve operated globally for pretty much most of my ca-
reer. I’ve been in business now for 22-odd years. So I consider myself a 
“young body with high miles.” 
I started with American Airlines in what was the decisions group, which 
then became Sabre Technology. 
Yourdon: Separate business. Yes, I remember that story. That was one of 
the, I think, the first big case studies of information being more valuable than 
the parent company that spawned it. 
Sridhara: We built an ERP system for what was the travel business as a 
whole, and earned my stripes going from being one of the ‘coders’ to lead-
ing the project because the lead got stuck in a previous project at South-
west. And by default, I assumed leadership and delivered an ERP for travel 
agencies. I’m going back a decent period of time, but that product is still 
there on the marketplace. It was built in a very agile manner, with custom-
ers in the same room. Locked into helping drive deliverables, literally cutting 
a version of the product every day. In about nine months, we built a prod-
uct that was the ERP for the travel agencies business process, the ability to 
take your reservation, process it on the GDS in the back end. And then 
provide you with all the services you required. 
I came into the business process side at American and very quickly was no-
ticed as somebody who understood technology but also understood busi-
ness process. 
I was starting to manage teams as a whole, but more importantly, I under-
stood what the customer wanted. And we were able to translate that into 
the requirements, or the user stories, as you call them today, in agile 

CIOs at Work 
 
73  
terms, for what needed to be built. So, yes, there was not a traditional 
technology part then, but I ended up then using technology to enable solu-
tions for business. 
Yourdon: One of the questions I’ve asked in this early stage of just about 
everyone is whether they received any formal education along the way. Did 
you go to CIO school or get an MBA, once you got on this track that was 
about to lead you where you are now? 
Sridhara: From an educational point of view, I’ve been a CIO for, at a 
group level, for about ten years now, so it’s been a school in and of itself. 
But in terms of building up to it, it was a progression of different roles and 
responsibilities—jobs and different career spans and spans of control, I 
should say, that gave me the experience to help execute as a CIO. 
Yourdon: Well, it’s interesting how few people have said, “Well, yes, at a 
certain point I had to go get my MBA” or “They sent me off to learn about 
finance and accounting and so forth.” There has been a lot of emphasis on 
broad education at an early stage, but after that, it seems to be very much 
on-the-job training, as you rise up through the ranks. 
Sridhara: Mark Zuckerberg didn’t go to school to learn how to build 
Facebook. So the answer to this is, I think for all of us, especially for me, 
learning is big every day. I come in to work every day to keep learning. So 
it’s a daily and a career aspiration. To learn literally every day and every 
year, to take on responsibilities that help you learn, grow, refine. And you 
also learn through building other people and building businesses. So you’re 
constantly learning. 
Learning is such an important thing to me, I went and signed up with 
London Business School and got some of the finance and marketing sides. 
I was kind of completing my portfolio of tools that I use every day. But I 
do believe in applying them practically. 
The magic sauce to me is not just in the theory of what you need to do, 
but it’s also in understanding how you do it. And how you refine it as you 
do it to get the job done, and these are three very separate things. 
You can be a consultant up front, and a very good consultant at seeing what 
it is that needs to get done, but understanding true context, and then start-
ing to deliver it, and then refining the plan as you deliver it to be the right 
result—you could think of it as agile, it’s strategic agile, but in organizational 
delivery terms. 

Chapter 4 | Mittu Sridhara:  
CIO, Ladbrokes plc 
74  
Not just the technology, because often CIOs, I think, are enabling busi-
nesses to do more, or they differentiate at a lower cost overall. I should
probably talk to you about strategy. 
Any simple strategy boils down to three things: differentiate and grow top-
line revenue and differentiate and drive more value; drop costs and do more
for less, while you currently run the business that is in play. 
Yourdon: Very quickly. One last question in this sort of “getting started”
area. And that is the question of whether you had any significant mentors or
role models that helped shape who you are today? 
Sridhara: I’ve been very fortunate, very, very fortunate, because in many of
my jobs, I’ve had people that I’ve worked with where several people stand
out. What’s interesting to me when I reflect on your question is not only
were they mentors back then; they continue to be friends/mentors/role
models to this day. 
Because I look back at them when they were young managers, and I still
look at some of them today and look at how they’ve chosen the basic life
decisions they’ve made, and not just career decisions. And you learn from
them, and continue to learn because these relationships last a lifetime.
There are several people that come to mind. 
I’ve always looked at mentoring not just in a business context but mentors
as role models. 
Yourdon: Now you mentioned a moment ago, the next major area I want
to get into, which is how you see IT here at Ladbrokes. For example,
achieving the objectives you mentioned of competitive differentiation and
driving value and just keeping the lights on. And everybody has had a slightly
different story to tell me there. Why don’t we start with the first part,
about differentiation? How do you see IT achieving that, or how are you
using IT to achieve that? 
Sridhara: Fundamentally, I think, differentiation. It’s probably worth taking a
moment to describe the business, so that you understand the context. Lad-
brokes has more retail outlets than Tescos in the UK. The market capitaliza-
tion is £1bn ($2,000m). It’s not our true turnover. If I reported like Tesco’s, I
would be reporting 15 to 16 billion in stakes yearly. So when it comes to the
solutions in IT, we service every single penny of our £16 billion. 
My can of beans is electronic, my shelves are electronic, my prices are also
going to go electronic. And I was out at Gartner now ten-odd years ago,
probably nine years, talking about real-time systems. Nowhere else in my
entire career have I been somewhere where real time is truly, truly real 

CIOs at Work 
 
75  
time. In this business, if there’s an example on the betting side of our busi-
ness, if a horse leaves the gate, and you place a bet two seconds later, we 
might have a problem. So two seconds can make a huge difference. 
You could be viewing it on-screen on what is effectively streaming media 
on the wall in a shop, and you could place a bet on a handwritten slip. If 
we capture that bet incorrectly at the wrong price, we could be out mil-
lions of pounds. 
So that ability to digitize what is manual, in subseconds, but to get the right 
price, to match up with the video feed, with the right product is critical. 
Across channels we are a customer experience and entertainment company 
and delivering a rich entertainment experience to you, the customer, if 
you’d like to bet or game. And we’ve got to bring all those together in real 
time, and the technology underpinnings is what does it for this business. 
By real time we’re talking about 20 milliseconds of latency making a big dif-
ference. So it’s about ensuring the price to be right, but also ensuring the 
pinning enablement is all correct. It’s also about operational processes being 
automated because you’re doing this for fun, the sooner we actually give 
you something back, the sooner you have a choice. You have a choice to 
put it back in or take it and walk away. 
The whole industry is in the process of understanding the customer, and 
what the customer wants is key. I know you come to this question a little 
later in your series of questions around what are the big differences and 
emerging trends. 
The smart mobile device for us, not just the mobile device, but the smart 
mobile device, is an interesting opportunity, because suddenly it’s immer-
sive. Before it wasn’t, you know, your flat text message. Yes, you can en-
gage, because we’re in the space of providing a rich piece of entertainment 
to you, which includes content, it includes price, it requires streaming video 
or stats around a game, a price, around you. A smart device now suddenly 
starts to make that possible. 
So that’s where you have really rapid convergence coming our way. And we 
are at the forefront of most industries, because others have to deal with it 
as well. Convergence is coming to us much quicker than it is to anybody 
else because the only physical thing in our business is cash, and even that is 
going digital. 
Because the iPhone 5 is expected to have a digital wallet, thus new battle-
ground for the Googles and everybody else around payments. The reason it 
is a new battleground is because of convergence.  

Chapter 4 | Mittu Sridhara:  
CIO, Ladbrokes plc 
 
76  
How do I then ensure that everything is consistent and engages around 
regulation as well, which is another key element for us. We are strictly 
regulated, more so than the FSA1 on what you can and cannot do and 
what we’re required to do as well. We cannot always do what another 
retailer can do. 
So it’s just a fascinating space, because we are in the Web 3.0 business in 
that our customers are already watching media, socially interacting in-store, 
and buying product. It’s now about how do you make the technology—the 
technology’s come alive for the segment—how do you then apply it effec-
tively to the business processes you already have? 
Yourdon: One of the things that you just said intrigued me, in terms of 
being aware of a customer profile. Obviously, there’s a real-time aspect to 
that too—but how fast would my profile change and to what extent can you 
anticipate my future profile and perhaps offer me opportunities or games or 
transactions that I might not have thought about on my own? 
Sridhara: That’s what I call “more ‘e’ than Amazon,” as a tagline. Why 
more ‘e’ than Amazon? It’s more than just product. It’s a product where the 
price is varying by the second. A large range of products, where the product 
has to be delivered through a web channel but also has to be delivered in-
store, also has to be delivered on the smartphone, and all of those things 
have to be cohesive and coherent, rather. To deliver a seamless customer 
experience while you’re performing trading. 
As a bank, because we are, we have traders. We have people aggregating 
and disseminating content around understanding you, the customer. We’ve 
always looked at our platforms, and we’ve grown up in the silos of retail and 
a web-emerging web channel, but we’ve never really looked at our business 
and said, “Oh, look, this is just one business really.” 
It’s a betting business and a gaming business in its core constituent parts. 
They’re all technology enabled, and you don’t need to do them separately 
and differently. Yes, you need to deliver them differently around who, you, 
the customer is and what you want, but in the past we’ve done it very dif-
ferently, and we’ve grown up very differently. 
What we’re in the process of doing is automating the underpinning business 
processes, but also, building the platforms around you the customer, to 
where, as we understand you better, we deliver the personalization. 
                                                
1 The Financial Services Authority (FSA) is the regulator of the financial services industry in 
the UK. 

CIOs at Work 
 
77  
The average customer is looking for an experience. It’s our ability to give you 
what you need and when you need it, the way you need it. And that’s what 
we’re in the process of building right now. And building it in a cross-channel 
manner, so wherever it touches, it looks and feels consistent to you. 
On the other hand, if you do not wish to be known, then we will not only 
respect that, but we will ensure that this is the case, and we will interact 
with you as such across channels. So we’re going from this ‘push it all out 
and some of you will take’ to this ‘push-pull engaged,’ but again, it’s engaging 
in real time. 
Yourdon: That’s really fascinating. The third basic part of the overall objec-
tive that you mentioned a moment ago is something that I characterize as 
keeping the lights on, just running stuff. And from everything you’ve just 
said, you obviously have to do so in a very high-performance fashion, where 
every nanosecond counts. And I assume also reliability and availability and all 
those sorts of traditional parameters are almost as important as they would 
be for a nuclear reactor or an air traffic control system. Umm, is there any-
thing special you all do in that area, other than just redundancy and huge 
numbers of servers all over the place? 
Sridhara: We can’t afford huge numbers of servers. This is a bank without 
the cash to do it all. 
[both laughing] 
Sridhara: We have the same challenges without the same budgets or in-
vestments. We’re not capable of making the same investments in these ar-
eas. So we have to be very innovative in how we underpin all this technol-
ogy and how we build. We’re in the process of building a trading platform, 
which is actually a banking platform effectively, but some of the systems in-
tegrators refuse to bid at the prices I was asking for. 
However, we are delivering those platforms on industry-standard technolo-
gies at a fraction of the prices that most banks would pay. To deliver exactly 
the same thing. 
I’ve got the economies of scale, and as a result I’m able to build a good level 
of redundancy into how we deliver it. And that’s the good thing about tech-
nology; it’s getting cheaper as well. 
There are other, new technologies that are coming down the road. Com-
puting power, as a whole. The buzzword is always cloud, but, you know, be-
ing able to do it securely is key. 

Chapter 4 | Mittu Sridhara:  
CIO, Ladbrokes plc 
 
78  
We are very “spiky”—we’ll go from 600 bets a minute to 6,000 bets a min-
ute just before an event. Now, a bet in our business is about the same as 
Visa or MasterCard transactions. It’s not only the payment, it’s not only 
taking the cash out of your wallet and putting it back in; it’s also about get-
ting the right prices, getting combinations, managing liability behind it. So 
it’s not just a sale, it’s a sale which then has to be transacted, monitored, 
and re-computed for how much you may win to manage liability. 
So one transaction typically means six different things that have to happen. 
So we are pretty “peaky” in how we have to transact. And so how afford-
able computing is, and the high end of computing, is key and also the 
virtualization of that capacity. 
Computing power will get cheaper, faster, and smaller and for Ladbrokes, in 
simple terms, it’s about coming back to strategy, differentiation, and value. 
Yourdon: Okay. But there seem to be quantum jumps, where a 10 percent 
decrease in price or a 10 percent increase in CPU cycles isn’t going to make 
a whole lot of difference. But there’s some point where things that were 
simply not possible before suddenly become possible. And I assume that’s 
going to happen in your case, although I’m not sure what form it will take. 
Sridhara: But it’s about you as a customer and your experience. So with a 
smart device, you’re starting to expect that you have live streaming, as an 
example, and you have come to expect that it is as good as, if not better 
than, what you may be receiving sitting and watching television. But you’re 
also expecting to transact on it and look up other things in additional win-
dows while you’re watching the video. Now, that requires a certain amount 
of computing power on the front end. 
It’s compressed, it’s streaming, and it needs to compute. But on the back 
end, you’ve got to then be able to deliver all of that at scale, so you will 
never know how many people are going to be engaging with you on mobile 
devices, and that will continue to increase pretty dramatically. 
Which is why the back-end ability to process all of it is key. So in our busi-
ness in particular, our ability to continue to deliver the experience that the 
customers are looking for in an affordable way is absolutely key. 
Yourdon: There is one aspect of what you’ve just said, this whole idea of 
mobile computing becoming more widely dispersed. In many areas it’s got-
ten to the point where computing activity is essentially free. It may be sup-
ported by advertising or something like that, but whether it’s free or almost 
free, it has suddenly opened up entirely new markets. Whole continents 
[that] could not afford computing at all before now can—and therefore, I 

CIOs at Work 
 
79  
assume, have become potential customers for you. That might not have 
been the case before. I don’t know how much more there is to go on in 
that direction, although I suppose it will go on for another five or ten years. 
Not everybody in Africa has a cell phone yet, by any means at all. Let alone 
China or India. Do you see that multiplying by another factor of 10 or a fac-
tor of 100? 
Sridhara: Well, it’s certainly a factor of 10x. But also in our market, it’s 
about regulated markets, so not every market is available. When the mar-
kets do become available, you will have phenomenal steps in growth. 
Yourdon: Interesting. One of the points that has been mentioned to me by 
some of the other CIOs is that as the overall cost of computing has 
dropped and, we now have a phenomenon that one of the American 
authors refers to as a “cognitive surplus,” an example of which is Wikipedia. 
We now have the computing power available, and people have enough 
spare time and good thoughts in their hearts that they’re willing to contrib-
ute some of their surplus cognitive power to, to do things like open-source 
computing or Wikipedia or any number of other examples. Is there any as-
pect of that that’s relevant in your world? 
Sridhara: It’s relevant, once we can open up what we do, to saying, “Hey, 
look, if you’re a games developer,” as an example. “And you like building 
games, I’ll provide you a development toolkit to build games. Yes, you can 
go ahead and build it. You don’t need to have the horsepower to run it.” 
“We will run it for you, and then you can become part of an app store.” 
Games are an example, and we do run different versions of games, different 
versions of games take in marketplaces, customers like different games, they 
like variety. It will happen at a much bigger scale as time goes by. 
Yourdon: What about the whole area of data visualization? I would imagine 
that some, if not all, of the things that you’re dealing with involve the possi-
bility of presenting enormous quantities of data to a trader or a player. 
Where it would be wonderful if there were some way of boiling it down to, 
a more understandable digest, so to speak. 
Sridhara: Very much so. We’re in the process of automating our entire 
trading floor. And they’re actually in test runs going live right now for some 
markets and then we’ll continue gradually adding all markets. But there’s a 
lot of visualization and can have 20,000 different things possibly coming into 
setting up an event. 
So that gets visualized for the trader. They can make decisions based on 
that, but also, if you go to our current website, you will see stats for how a 

Chapter 4 | Mittu Sridhara:  
CIO, Ladbrokes plc 
 
80  
horse performed or how a footballer performed at a previous match or 
what their history was. That’s already there and making it more visual is 
clearly going to be a turning point. 
On the gaming machines, we are in the process of testing a game in China. 
And the Asians more so than us and some of our customers here and other 
geographies, like to see and understand the patterns, understand what’s 
happening. So visualization is a key element of the experience—for certain 
customer types. 
Again, being able to provide that and then in some of the platforms, we’re 
looking to roll out. I won’t say more than saying they’re going to engage 
you visually. 
Yourdon: And, of course, a lot of those areas are, just by their very nature, 
going to require vast amounts of additional computing power to be able to 
do the back-end computation and presentation to the user. That is going to 
be interesting. 
Sridhara: But it’s also about the tolerance as you talked about earlier. I got 
a mobile device, not just a server, which is a foot next to the other. So it has 
to have a price update at the same time. And all able to fit on a small screen, 
too. So it’s about getting it right for who you are and what you want. 
Yourdon: Well, let me change from all the wonderful futures and opportu-
nities to the dark side of the force—the problems and the risks. What is it 
that keeps you awake at night, if anything? 
Sridhara: You never have a problem, you always have an opportunity. It’s 
a question of how you address the problems. So when something is an 
opportunity, you go about it differently because you go about it and say, 
“Okay, is this an opportunity to address something now in a different way, 
so that it does not become an ongoing problem?” 
Sridhara: So it’s often an opportunity to go in and fix, but the way you fix 
it is as important as what you fix. You’ve got to look at what the customer 
wants, what broke, and how do you ensure that it doesn’t break again? Or if 
it does break, is it okay for it to break, because it may not be that the cus-
tomer sees that as the most relevant thing to your experience. You may do 
it in such a way that it’s safe-fail as opposed to fail-safe. 
Yourdon: Usually when I ask that question, the answer I get almost imme-
diately revolves around security. And I would imagine in your case, the 
mismatch between dealing with the technology of security threats while also 
being constrained by all of the regulatory things that you have to live under, 

CIOs at Work 
 
81  
which usually moves a lot more slowly than the technology. How do you 
balance those two things? 
Sridhara: Frankly, I’m coming from regulation, which is something you’ve 
got to comply with. It’s not optional. And everything is designed to be se-
cure and compliant, PCI-compliant or the gambling acts and everything else, 
so it’s always designed with compliance right from the start. 
That’s one. Second, security is always a threat to anybody right now in op-
erating in any electronic form. We’ve got things like DDoS2 protection, 
we’ve got 24/7 monitoring alerts that go out should patterns change, auto-
matic blocking that goes in place. 
But DDoS attacks and security, or the way people come at you can con-
tinue to change and become more sophisticated, so it’s something you’re 
constantly looking for, constantly reviewing where you are, how you’re 
doing it. 
It’s certainly something that I constantly re-evaluate, saying, “That’s how we 
were choosing to address the problem yesterday. What has changed? Can 
we address it differently today?” 
Yourdon: The way you just raised this a moment ago took me back to a 
comment made by the CIO of one of our universities, who said that, in 
terms of re-evaluation, he looks to his students because he said, “I don’t 
know everything, my peers don’t know everything, and we’re not always 
able to keep up with everything. But we have this constant influx of new 
students who are smarter than us and more inquisitive than us, and we look 
to them in a way, as people on the edge of the frontier.” Is there anything 
equivalent in your case? I can imagine it could be some of your customers, 
for example. 
Sridhara: Our customers, absolutely. Our customers are looking for dif-
ferent types of services. It’s industry peers. It’s some of our partners as well. 
Because of our geographic spread, often an idea in one geography for regu-
lation purposes cannot be applied in the other, but you have lessons learned 
that can be applied. So we have innovation or ideas coming out at us in so 
many different ways, and we also foster innovation and an open culture here 
to where every idea is a good idea. It’s a simple thing: fail, fail fast, but suc-
ceed faster. 
Yourdon: And get data about it, yes. I agree. One last thing that has always 
struck me, because I’ve been in the field for 45 years. Forty-five years ago, 
                                                
2 Distributed denial of service. 
x

Chapter 4 | Mittu Sridhara:  
CIO, Ladbrokes plc 
 
82  
much of what we dealt with in technology was very expensive and very 
scarce and therefore controlled very diligently. But now, of course, so much 
technology has become cheap to the point of almost being free, and perva-
sive to the point where our employees—not just in the IT department, but 
employees everywhere, or customers in your case—may well have better 
technology at home than what they’re going to find in the office. And yet 
the control structure that I’ve seen in a lot of IT organizations, led by the 
CIO, still seems to be this top-down hierarchal kind of mechanism that’s 
just completely out of place. 
And I’m just curious as to your thoughts about, you know, how to deal 
with that. 
Sridhara: And that has to do with what worried me earlier. You’ve got 
to look at everything as a service, starting with the customer. Bringing 
them services that matter. And then, as you progress, so if you’re a trader, 
those trader apps and perhaps you’re trading as a trader where you do it, 
is completely secure today and will always [be] in the future. So you draw 
rings, concentric rings, if you will. You’ve got to hammer security and ap-
ply it in layers. 
So the average user is just coming in and doing Word documents and e-mail. 
As long as they’re not extracting customer data, we’ll have a different 
amount of security and it will be a different boundary than deep down here, 
where there’s lots of customer data. And trading information, as an example. 
If you’re a trader, yes, I will choose to provide you with a laptop and anything 
else you need and have it completely encrypted and wipeable remotely. 
It’s also about business process—which is why solutioning is an important 
thing, x role in y, the organization is now looking for something greater than 
what they should be looking for. They need levels of authorization for cus-
tomer data. So if you look at it again from the “what data matters?” [stand-
point], you can address some of these opportunities differently. 
Yourdon: That’s a very good point. What I have found with all of the CIOs 
I’ve spoken to is that they’re focusing on all these technology issues that 
we’ve been talking about—but, of course, they’re also interacting with their 
business peers, heads of business departments or product departments, 
who are very smart people and very competent people and often have very 
strong opinions that have helped them succeed. 
And they not only think they know how to run their business better than 
you do; sometimes they think they know how to run your business better 
than you do. How do you go about achieving the kind of influence you need 

CIOs at Work 
 
83  
to avoid risks and to take advantage of opportunities that hopefully you do 
know more about because of your expertise? 
Sridhara: Excellent question. I think you probably know the answer and 
where I was going to come at it from. In every business I’ve been in, I’ve 
been very, very lucky. I seldom had many challenges in working with my col-
leagues to get the job done. And I think part of it is, if you look at it from a 
customer view, fundamentally, and you understand the end customer, then 
they’re all partners, they’re all partnered together. I’m incentivized as much 
as they are to deliver business results and shareholder value by driving cus-
tomer growth. So if I’m addressing the same problem they’re trying to ad-
dress, we’re on the same side. Now, we may have different views of how 
we think we may address it, but we’re fundamentally trying to solve the 
same issue, and it often is the ground of convergence, as a result, because 
you’re comparing notes on how best to solve it and often find, “Yes, they’ve 
got great ideas. Let me combine these with the ideas my team can bring,” 
and together you come up with solutions that no one person would have 
come up with. So that bringing the sum of the parts together—you know, 
what I used to call “2 + 2 = 5,” but I increasingly think “2 + 2 = 22.” 
And that’s very, very important. In a fast-moving world, no one area can see 
it all. So it’s about people combining and collaborating now even more so 
than before. 
Yourdon: I certainly agree with that. Now I think one of the reasons it’s 
been a problem in some of the other situations I’ve seen is that the CIO has 
sometimes only been in his or her position for a short period of time, so 
there’s this element of trust that has to be built up—because even though 
your business peers may think you’re all trying to achieve the same objec-
tives, they might not necessarily agree with your particular perspective or 
your solution or your priorities.  
Sridhara: I’m not sure there is a quick way to win trust. I think you can 
get going quickly, but trust is something that is earned both ways. Over 
time, by doing what you say and saying what you do. About being trust-
worthy, about having integrity, competence—clearly, if you’re incompe-
tent, they may trust you, but they may not trust you’ll get the job done. 
So it goes without saying that competence underpins all of that, and all 
those only can be established with some time. Now the key thing is to 
ensure results—because this is where agile comes in, because if you fo-
cus around the customer in agile, you can deliver to your end customer, 
to your mutual customer, and do so quickly and you build trust, because 
you’re doing that in dialogue. 

Chapter 4 | Mittu Sridhara:  
CIO, Ladbrokes plc 
84  
Yourdon: Exactly. And that’s the common answer I end up with. You
know, when I first got started in the field, you often didn’t have anything to
deliver for seven years. And you can only rely on trust during that period
because you had no intermediate results or prototypes or daily builds. 
Well, let me switch gears to the two last areas. I’m very curious about eve-
ryone’s opinion about the “new generation,” whether you call them digital
natives or whatever. And, of course, they’re arriving everywhere in the or-
ganization, not just in the IT department, but everywhere. Armed with their
smart mobiles and their different attitudes. They’ve grown up in a world of
Google and multimedia. Is that something that you see a lot of around here?
Is this something that you think it’s good or bad or irrelevant? 
Sridhara: I think it’s good. We increasingly see a lot more of it coming into
our workplace. Overall it’s good in that it always challenges how you keep
your own employees engaged, but with them they bring, because of the
space we’re in, our customers are in the same space. It’s a good representa-
tion of what I’ve got to solve anyway and solve for externally, and having
that on the inside just brings good ideas—right inside our building. 
So they’re a part of the team and this is part of encouraging innovation right
through the workforce, but also improving how we drive what we do. And
it’s an exciting place given the challenges we have. It tends to really lend it-
self to new ideas, looking at things differently, and driving solutions that
work, by default, work for the person who’s come in but also result in driv-
ing the right customer experience. 
Yourdon: Well, that is a very good point. I’ve been even hearing about that
in banks, where their traditional IT people simply don’t know how to reach
a generation of college students that the bank wants to get as bank custom-
ers, but they’ve got young programmers who are on Facebook who can
reach out and effectively communicate. That is a very good point. Any nega-
tives? Any concerns about the new generation of digital natives or digital
whatever you want to call them? 
Sridhara: No, not really. I think they’re all different. Again, they come in
different flavors. Yes, you can do a pattern and say, “This is what they all
want.” They are looking for places that have values and core ethics. That’s
important to the new generation as it is to everybody else, I suggest. They
place different emphasis. They want to understand more about what they
are doing and how they do it. The question of work-life balance is a bigger
question for them than it was for some other generations. 
Yourdon: One of the people I interviewed was the former CIO of the
American Defense Department. He’s very concerned with what he regards 

CIOs at Work 
 
85  
as the superficiality of the younger generation, their inability to spend a lot 
of time really focusing and concentrating on, on some intellectual question 
for long periods of time because they’ve grown up in a world where they 
can find something on Wikipedia right away, they can Google something 
right away, and they don’t ever have to spend more than ten minutes think-
ing about anything. Is that something you see at all? 
Sridhara: I think they adapt to the workplace with time—if you provide 
them with good mentoring and structure. Yes, that’s a good thing. They can 
find an answer to at least 80 percent of the questions you ask them very, 
very quickly, which is great. All of them aren’t going to fit into a mold. Some 
of them will take to program management; some of them will take to 
customer experience. 
They will take to different roles as you start understanding their strengths. 
And I think they bring a valuable perspective, you know, contribution and 
energy and also make every manager and the world think differently as well. 
Yourdon: One last question, and then I‘ll let you go. It’s the obvious final 
question: where do you see yourself going from here? After life as a CIO, is 
there a future life? 
Sridhara: Is there a future life? I think there is. Well, first of all, let’s answer 
the latter one. There is a future life, and I think it will continue to evolve be-
cause I think increasingly technology enables the business and the running of 
the business are fusing even closer. When we’re in roles like the ones I’ve 
held and I’ve had the luxury of holding, they’re always closely associated with 
the front end, customer end, and the solutioning of the services. 
So every role I’ve had has been technology-intense with the customer at the 
core. Delivering product platform and solutions to enable enterprise value, 
shareholder value and customer experience. Effectively, I’ve been on both 
sides of the fence as being a pure “CIO” and running technology and prod-
uct marketing for a B2B and B2C. So, increasingly, I think, roles will fuse and 
will evolve. I think the people who want to grow and evolve will continue to 
have fascinating roles, especially when you come at it from a solution view 
and you get technology, and you get the customer. I certainly expect to 
have a lot of fun over the next 15 or 20 years. 
Yourdon: Okay. Well, can’t do better than that. All right. And with that, I 
think I will turn this off. I very much appreciate your time. 

C H A P T E R 
5 
Steve Rubinow 
Executive Vice President and CIO,  
NYSE Euronext 
Steve Rubinow is Executive Vice President and Chief Information Officer of 
NYSE Euronext, parent company of the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), where 
he is responsible for all aspects of technology as well as global innovation for the 
leading stock exchange in the world. Previously he was the Chief Technology Offi-
cer for Archipelago Holdings Inc. in Chicago, where he was responsible for soft-
ware development, quality assurance, operations, customer connectivity, and tech-
nical support for the Archipelago Exchange (one of the original electronic commu-
nications networks to officially serve as an institutional stock exchange). The com-
pany merged with the New York Stock Exchange in 2006, which then merged 
with Euronext in 2007 to form NYSE Euronext. 
Previously, Dr. Rubinow was Chief Information/Technology Officer for NextCard 
Inc.; Vice President and Chief Information Officer at AdKnowledge, Inc.; and Vice 
President of Corporate Management Information Systems at Fidelity Invest-
ments in Boston. He began his career as a systems analyst at the Continental 
Bank in Chicago. 
Dr. Rubinow has a BS and an MS in Chemistry, an MS in Computer Science, an 
MBA in Marketing and Finance (where he ranked first in his graduating class), and 
a PhD in Chemistry. 
 

Chapter 5 | Steve Rubinow:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, NYSE Euronext 
 
88  
Ed Yourdon: The questions I thought I would start off with are the more 
strategic ones. I can certainly imagine IT is “strategic,” though I don’t want 
to say “weapon” here. But what element of your IT is strategic? And how? 
Steve Rubinow: It is interesting that you said that because a lot of times 
in the past, people will talk about our industry as an arbitrary battle 
ground. So yes, war terms are quite common here though we don’t want 
to use “bull’s eye.” 
But if you talk to certain people on any given day, they will tell you that this 
is a technology firm that happens to run exchanges, as opposed to an ex-
change firm that has something to do with technology. That is for a couple 
of reasons. One is that without technology there is no firm. Certainly, the 
open outcry system with people exchanging slips of paper, that’s from an-
other era, everything is electronic. The vast majority of trading takes place 
with servers talking to servers. Humans are the trading model builders but 
they are not there in the middle for the most part where it takes place, ex-
cept for on the floor downstairs. That is an important, but smaller, part of 
what we do. 
The other thing is if you were to define our business as we do, we put it 
into three segments. One is the cash trading business. That is what people 
first think the New York Stock Exchange is for. It is important. Second is 
the derivatives trading business—we have a healthy global business in both 
cash and derivatives. The third one, which is the newest one and the most 
interesting, is the technology business. Every product and service that we 
build or create for ourselves we are certainly willing to sell to others. 
Finally I would think it’s one of the most promising businesses we have. We 
said to the world last year that within five years we would be a billion dollar 
business. So the technology feature of the company’s services is a big part of 
the business in terms of becoming a technology vendor, which I try to point 
out to our vendors. I remind them that we love that they are our vendors. 
We love what they do with us. But also in some small way—and maybe big 
ways in the future—they are our competitors. So it is an interesting focus.  
Yourdon: And I was just thinking about the kind of things they show peo-
ple on television, with human traders waving sheets of paper, even though 
that sort of thing has been out of date for five or ten years. 
Rubinow: A relatively small percentage of our volume goes to the floor and 
sometimes people ask me what’s the floor for, or why do you still have a 

CIOs at Work 
 
89  
floor? So many exchanges throughout the world no longer have a floor. 
They have largely disappeared. I say what sounds like a company line, but 
makes perfect sense: The floor will be there as long as there are customers 
who vote with their dollars and support it. I think the floor is a small but 
significant portion of the trading that goes through here. The customers 
support it. It makes money for us. It is a service that offers yet another op-
tion for the customer.  
As long as that model still is viable, we keep it. If it ever changes, we may 
reevaluate, but it doesn’t look like it is going to change. And it makes a 
great platform for CNBC, Fox News, and all our in-house media outlets 
broadcasting from here, rather than broadcasting from a lifeless place like 
some of our competitors. 
Yourdon: At the other extreme is a whole phenomenon that I was unaware 
of is the high volume of the high-frequency trading business. I was staggered 
to see what a large fortune we are all seeing. Will that continue growing?  
Rubinow: Yes, it has definitely, the trend has happened for a number of 
years in the United States, and it is becoming more pronounced in Europe. 
In my mind it is really just a matter of time before it becomes the norm in 
Asia and the other continents, too. That is something I wanted to point out 
to people, from the technology perspective, it is one of the most interesting 
things we do. Designing something in an industry that is concerned with mi-
cro-second response times. In order to develop that, we have to not only 
understand how to write good functional software, but we also have to 
know how to write efficient software and you have to understand the oper-
ating system, the network, the hardware and all the resources in a com-
puter environment. 
When you finally develop the software, you have to realize all these things 
make it an interesting job. But it is the only way you can do it with micro-
seconds here and there. And then, of course, you have to do it in high vol-
umes. Some of our systems, like our market data systems, run at millions of 
messages per second. And you have to do it with very little jitter. Our cus-
tomers do not like oscillations in response time. They want them to be 
perfectly flat so you get low variance and low response rate with high 
transaction volume—it has to be very secure, very reliable, and, of course, 
cost-effective. You put all these things together and it makes for an inter-
esting technical platform. 

Chapter 5 | Steve Rubinow:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, NYSE Euronext 
 
90  
Yourdon: So performance is part of the problem. It reminds me of the 
’60s and ’70s when their hardware was less technical and more limited 
than ours, and we were starting to be so much more relaxed about that 
long list of criteria. And now it is back again. I hadn’t thought of that. That 
is very interesting.  
Rubinow: We have two new data centers that we completed last year. 
One in New Jersey and one outside of London. Most of the space in the 
data centers is not for us; it is for our customers. Mostly because they want 
to reduce the limis of the speed of light in the problem. You’ll appreciate 
this when you walk a customer into the data center, and they see where 
our trading engines are. They see where their equipment is placed and 
they’ll see some other equipment and sometimes they’ll say, “Well, what is 
that over there?”  
“It’s for another customer and that is all you need to know.” 
OK. And that is a few feet closer from where I am. And I’ll say, “OK, let’s 
review this. Rule of thumb, the speed of light is about a one foot a nanosec-
ond (in a vacuum). So let’s see what a few feet means… that is a couple of 
nanoseconds. Yes that’s a difference but I don’t know that you can take ad-
vantage of a couple of nanoseconds today. Maybe next year, maybe ten 
years. I don’t know…but it is not something I would make a big deal about 
because I really don’t think it should be important to you. If that changes, 
we will take a look at it.” 
But in thinking about this, we thought about how does one mitigate that? 
Well, one is, if we go back to something many people would remember—
depends how old they are—go back to the design of the computer like the 
Cray, which was built in a circular architecture to make all the processors 
equidistant from the core. So the trading engines are the core and all the 
customers could be in the perimeter of the circle. So that is one way; we 
are not doing that, but that is one way. The other way some people have 
done is that they modify the length of the cable. The further away you are, 
the shorter the cable; the closer you are, the more slack in the cable. You 
would think it is crazy, but this is what some people have done to  create 
the schematic to make everyone exactly the same to the smallest conceiv-
able increment of time, as everybody else and that a nanosecond differ-
ence is unacceptable. That’s a bit extreme—but these are the sensitivities 
of the industry. 

CIOs at Work 
 
91  
Yourdon: I was completely unaware of these issues until I got involved as 
an expert witness in a lawsuit related to high-frequency trading. There are 
some staggering numbers, and I’m now paying closer attention to things I 
have been unaware of. Last question I have in the section is to ask your per-
spective of what IT is doing to retire old legacy systems and prepare for 
what we cannot do today. 
Rubinow: The thing is, we keep pushing the technology envelope in the 
trading business. We constantly strive to improve. I have calculated, and I 
am sure my peers in other companies have calculated, what is the fastest 
speed you can possibly achieve by integrating the most advanced technology 
and at what point is it a limitation of processors that are not fast enough or 
memory that isn’t fast enough, etc. 
And we do have other considerations we can’t get around. And so we are 
trying to be on the edge of technology and do whatever is possible. Having 
said that in the technology business, we address the needs of what we refer 
to as the capital markets community. We are constantly white boarding new 
products and services that we think the industry would want and may know 
to come to us or may not even know they need yet, but it makes perfect 
sense. And so we are trying to come up with all kinds of things like that. 
Yourdon: So you have the “aha” opportunity to introduce something down 
the road?  
Rubinow: Yes, it’s one of these things where that’s so true in so many 
other industries. If you ask a customer what they would want—for example, 
the iPod—if you went to people and said, “Describe to me what kind of 
iPod-like device you would like,” before it existed, they wouldn’t know what 
to say. But then Apple built one, and people said, “Oh yeah, I always wanted 
one of those, I just didn’t know it until now.”  
Yourdon: It is funny you should mention it. There was an article in the New 
York Times today that said just exactly that. It is not the customer’s job to 
figure out what he or she wants. It’s the job of the company, perhaps with 
focus groups for customers.  
Rubinow: I probably have done that so many times. You see someone and 
say, “Technology would enable the following things.” They would say, “Gee, 
I never knew that was possible. I never thought of that, but now that you’ve 
described it to me, it sounds like a fantastic idea.” But it just wasn’t in their 

Chapter 5 | Steve Rubinow:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, NYSE Euronext 
 
92  
gestalt to think about such things and they use it like a little blast from left 
field to remind them. 
Yourdon: I don’t want to go too far off on a tangent, but there is another 
aspect to this as I am sure you heard of. When you first introduce a new 
technology to some people, their immediate instinct is to continue doing 
old, familiar things—maybe a little faster or cheaper—instead of looking to 
complete new applications. And this is true of all kinds of things that go 
back to hundreds of years.  When Alexander Graham Bell invented the 
telephone, he himself told people what they could do was stay home in the 
comfort of their own living room and listen to a live performance of an 
artist playing in a concert hall. Is that something you run into in your busi-
ness as well?  
Rubinow: We do run into it because the financial services industry is full 
of really smart people, but in many cases they are smart people who are in 
a particular valley or rut mentally, and sometimes when you help break 
them out of it, they are smart enough to know it, but they never spent the 
time to do it, because they didn’t have the stimulus or catalyst to make 
them see things in a different light or from a new perspective. 
That is why I am a big promoter of people that have worked in different 
industries coming together. Only half of my group has spent their whole 
career in financial services while the other half are newer to financial serv-
ices, and bring a different perspective than people who have worked their 
whole life in financial services. We just recently hired a head of global de-
velopment. When we were doing the search, I wanted to look in other in-
dustries, so I brought this fellow in who came from Silicon Valley. He was an 
accomplished software guy and when he interviewed here, several people 
said he had never worked in our industry. 
But I said, “Well, OK, he’ll learn. He is not stupid, he’ll learn. It is not 
rocket science.” Second thing, he had never worked in a regulated industry. 
“No problem. He’ll learn that too. He’ll understand the rules.” The third 
thing is the most telling. They said because he had never worked in our 
industry, he has never worked with difficult people.” I said, “Oh man, take 
your blinders off. We haven’t cornered the market for difficult people.” So 
it is nice to get other people with different perspectives. 
Yourdon: I am wondering if I will see that there is a pattern. I have al-
ready interviewed the CIO of Microsoft who ultimately got into the Silicon 
Valley kind of world, but who started off in a totally different career. I am 

CIOs at Work 
 
93  
wondering how to differentiate between the ones who are really interest-
ing and the ones that are not interesting. 
Rubinow: Well you know, with my biochemist background, hybridization 
often yields a stronger product, and I believe that is true even with a CIO  
as well.  
Yourdon: There is another aspect of this that I thought you would be able 
to comment about: the generational phenomenon. The fact that we have 
the younger kids without all the preconceptions. 
Rubinow: We will take advantage of it, and I will say, in my limited expe-
rience I read and hear all about that. You know, for years and years 
prominent scientists said that their most creative discoveries were in 
their twenties, but they didn’t think the big discoveries were as likely as 
they got older.  
I can tell you that I think all the time about the younger generation, mean-
ing people in their twenties working here. They grew up with video games. 
They are used to very visual interfaces. They are certainly not strangers to 
technology. They have certain expectations for what their workplace 
should be like. 
In my immediate work environment, I find that someone in their forties may 
frequent and be as adept at Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn as someone in 
their twenties. Maybe a 20-year-old is better at video games. I don’t know if 
such distinctions help us that much in what we do, but maybe the examples 
haven’t jumped out at me. Maybe there are subtle differences around, but I 
just haven’t noticed them. I don’t see a profound difference. I have found 
smart people in every generation. I find different people in every generation. 
Yourdon: Well, it’s a profound change to go from a world where we have 
limited resources that are very expensive that are controlled and regulated 
and doled out very carefully to a place where many of these are pervasive 
and free and therefore ought not to be controlled, yet they are. 
Rubinow: Yes, and that is one of the positive aspects of technology we 
have today, and if I heard it once, I have heard it a thousand times. When I 
was a developer I used to ignore performance in software—because the 
assumption was, oh well, buy a bigger server. We don’t have that luxury 
here because, first of all, we are very cost-conscious, but second of all, the 
idea is not to rely solely on hardware because the software has to be hyper 

Chapter 5 | Steve Rubinow:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, NYSE Euronext 
 
94  
efficient too, otherwise you are not competitive.  And you can be sure that 
the competitor down the street is thinking the same way.  
So anybody who comes in and says, “I’m a software guy. I don’t have to 
worry; just buy more memory, or buy more processors.” It is not as simple 
as that. You actually have to think about a lot of things, but we have a niche 
that not everybody plays in. So we do think about those things.  
Someone observed the other day that they were looking for a typewriter 
ribbon and they used the Internet to find a typewriter ribbon. So it is kind 
of ironic that you would do that. It is a cultural thing. One guy here, in his 
thirties, made a comment about using a Rolodex to look something up. I 
said, “Let me stop you for a second. Do you think someone ten years 
younger than you would understand what a Rolodex is?” And he said, “You 
know, they probably wouldn’t.” Well that’s a term that we take for granted 
but it doesn’t make any sense anymore  
Yourdon: The other aspect of this generational thing that I heard a lot 
about from financial services industry is that the difficulty of reaching out to 
the consumer marketplace. They’re asking themselves, “How do we make 
our stuff more relevant to kids in college, who would only find things out 
through Facebook or Twitter?” It’s a pretty big culture shock. This is 
probably not so relevant in your realm, because you are not marketing to 
college kids. 
Rubinow: You’re right. Our direct customers are traders and they’re not 
so focused on it. In fact, in most of what is built, they help guide the devel-
opment of the interface. We are just the technology supplier, and so they 
can leverage whatever pleases them. But we do have a website and we do 
sell our data on the website and a few other things. And we want to make it 
appear contemporary and create an innovative impression. Regardless of the 
industry we look at, we want to let people know that we are the leaders of 
the twenty-first century. And that helps to create that impression. 
We haven’t gotten into general mobile applications in a big way because 
few traders would do anything mobile (other than in the special instance of 
using wireless devices on the floor of the exchange) because of response 
times and security, among other reasons. And we want to create an im-
pression that we are out there. We look around the country and see a lot 
of iPads around. Our use of them is symbolic of us trying to show that we 
are where the innovative people go. You bring the iPads to me and maybe 

CIOs at Work 
95  
there are applications that would be informational, so we are exploring all
of these things. 
Yourdon: I would think iPads would be interesting to trade from. 
Rubinow: Well, it takes us down another avenue of discussion in terms of
collaborative technology. Our technology group is spread out to many cities 
in the world. Four throughout the U.S. and three in Europe, and we are try-
ing to find ways to make it feel like, whether it be with an iPad, video, or
collaboration tools and knowledge sharing, we are exploring all those things
to try and bring the community closer together. This also includes custom-
ers, vendors, and academics, so that anyone who wants to be part of our 
network is properly segregated, working confidentially, but they all partici-
pate in helping us to become smarter and do things better. 
Yourdon: That’s interesting because that has become one aspect of a
whole collection of issues, when you want to do things behind the firewall,
but also cross the firewall, and communicate with outsiders like former em-
ployees and customers and so on.  
Ironically the best examples I have found so far are in the pharmaceutical
industry. They have an enormously long product development cycle—
from ten to fifteen years to bring a newly discovered drug to market. Eli
Lilly and Pfizer are examples of companies with collaboration involving
people outside their firm, and these are very conservative companies. So
it’s very exciting to hear you talk about this, all the more so in a regulated
industry like yours. 
Rubinow: As a matter of fact, just this morning there was an Internet radio
show called CIO Talk Radio. I was on that program talking about what they 
were terming “collective intelligence” and we touched upon this very subject.  
Yourdon: This generational phenomenon is one that people seem to react
to very differently, especially when it comes to tools, and I would imagine
that must be relevant to developers. For example, I ran into someone who
said the average college kid today has never seen Microsoft Outlook, and 
would be horrified if he did see it—not just because of the user interface,
but because of the overall perspective on how he spends his day.  
In my case, I get up in the morning and think: what do I have to do today? I
look at my e-mail to see which clients are complaining, which clients have
new tasks and deadlines, and so on. But a college-age kid is likely to get up
in the morning and ask, “Where are my friends? What are they doing? How 

Chapter 5 | Steve Rubinow:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, NYSE Euronext 
 
96  
far away are they?” I see that kind of thing on Facebook with my nieces and 
nephews. In fact the whole world revolves around that. 
Rubinow: Well, I understand that perspective, but I am sure there are 
other reasons Microsoft thought of that interface when they developed 
Outlook. A better solution to that is being put into Windows 8 on the 
desktop. With the limited number of people I have talked to that have a 
Windows 7 phone, they like that aspect—that they have a Facebook tile and 
whatever else they use often that they run continuously and they are liter-
ally one click away. 
I just want to bring up one other generational issue. People sometimes say 
to me, “We have to offer our new younger employee a computer device, 
and nine times out of ten, they will choose a Mac. If we don’t offer them a 
Mac, they will not work here.”  
My response is: the Mac is primarily a tool. Whether they get to use a par-
ticular tool or they don’t, is that the most important thing to them? Maybe—
I am not really sure if that should be their primary motive, or maybe they 
view it as symbolic of the rest of the work environment. I am not sure, but I 
don’t know anyone who comes to us and turns down the job because we 
said, “No, you can’t have an Apple, you have to use a PC.” You often hear 
that, you have to … “X” or otherwise they will not work for you. 
Yourdon: Well, I think it is more symbolic with Mac users. I think it is rep-
resentative of a larger phenomenon. It may be Mac vs. PC, but it is usually 
smaller, newer devices versus old, and where I see the battle particularly 
being played out is in the mobile device. I think it is 3M or one of the For-
tune 500 companies that has made a big splash in the enterprise when their 
hire new university graduates and tell them, “Bring whatever device you 
want. We are not going to force you to have a BlackBerry. We will figure 
out your iPhone or whatever you’ve got.”  
Rubinow: We have talked about that here as well; in one sense it would be 
a great relief to say, “Here is a list of devices that are in the realm of possi-
bilities. Pick your favorite one—go buy it and we, in combination with the 
vendor, will support it.” There is a certain appeal to that, but on the other 
hand, we are a little different from a lot of companies, from a regulatory and 
security standpoint. We would not be as freewheeling as, say, a non-
regulated company that is not under potential attack by a lot of people from 
around the world trying to break in. But we have talked about it, what it 
would take to do that, though we have not come to the point where we 

CIOs at Work 
 
97  
say, “Go ahead.” The iPad is one that runs through the conversation often. 
People go and buy one, and it is cheap enough—and now that they have it, 
they want to be able to use it in the corporate environment. And we make 
it work, and so we have a taste of what it is like for people to bring in a de-
vice to the party and make it work. 
Yourdon: It’s interesting that the iPad app environment is somewhat con-
trolled by Apple, as opposed to the Android world that’s open, and that 
may turn out to be very scary. Well we have touched on “futures” here, 
and I started off by asking what are some of the new trends influencing in-
dustry? Mobile, obviously, and generational issues. Are there any other key 
technology trends that you see? 
Rubinow: Well, I am very quick to say that “cloud computing” as a concept 
is not something new, but something that other people remember from the 
sixties as time sharing. One of the main enabling cloud technologies, virtual 
machines, dates from that era as well. 
Having said that, we would like to provide cloud computing, or whatever 
technology would comprise it to our customers. A private cloud where our 
customers would include almost any software and infrastructure—whatever 
service they are looking for, we would provide it for them. It would be the 
most efficient, and that resonates for our customers, they are all looking for 
a better solution.  
Everyone needs similar infrastructure, so why have your own “server de-
partment”? They all do the same thing and instead of them all doing it sepa-
rately, where there is no real competitive advantage, why don’t they have a 
firm like us do it for them in a cloud, where we are set up and they get all 
the advantages of the scale that we operate and maybe some of the analyti-
cal services that we do for them today as well? So that is a big opportunity 
for us in our position. 
The other thing that we talked about is social networks and multimedia. We 
talked about how we collaborate with the larger world—we get ideas when 
we communicate with people. From the technical standpoint, I don’t know if 
there is anything unique, we are particularly pushing the envelope—faster 
processors, bigger networks, more efficient storage—and in some cases we 
are impressed and in other areas we are disappointed in the speed of the 
technology. I don’t know if there is anything here that I would say is the 
“next generation” yet. 
Yourdon: Virtualization is right in there with cloud. 

Chapter 5 | Steve Rubinow:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, NYSE Euronext 
 
98  
Rubinow: There are two categories of applications in our world. One that 
lends itself to virtualization quite nicely, but it is just an extra millisecond 
here or there of acceptable overhead. We virtualize a lot of our environ-
ment in that respect. But the trading world operates in microseconds now, 
so it’s important to eliminate unnecessary overhead. And so we virtualize 
what we can and don’t virtualize what we can’t. 
Yourdon: The next thing I had on my list is interesting because with all this 
thinking about the future, we can all look back there on a bit of history—
even if it is only 50 years for the whole industry, it is a lifetime for some of 
us. What do you think are the most significant IT discoveries in your ca-
reer—the “defining moments”?  
Rubinow: Well, things like the advent of the Internet and the Web, more 
powerful interfaces. I think that has changed a lot of things. In terms of 
knowledge versus what people ever had before, I think, there are a lot of 
things that we are still relatively primitive on. In terms of software devel-
opment, I don’t think we’ve moved light years ahead. We have different 
languages, different methodologies, but I don’t know that we are all that 
better off for them. They are different flavors and people might have more 
bulletproof software as opposed to “pretty good,” and I don’t know that a 
lot has happened in that regard, too. 
I will tell you in terms of history, there was one of our developers in Europe 
who wanted to throw out one of our software tools and replace it with a 
newer one. And I said “What was your primary reason?”  
The response was, “Well, the one we use was developed in the ’90s so it is 
old technology.”  
And I said with my typical sense of sarcasm, “Okay, now let me follow this 
thread. You would like to replace the technology because it was old.”  
I said, “Do you know many of the languages and tools we use to write most 
of our software were developed a long time before the ’90s, so those sys-
tems are also based on ‘old’ technology? So I guess you should throw those 
away too. Clearly, they could not possibly be any good.”  
So I think we are always looking at the new stuff and then the old stuff, some 
of it is robust enough that we sometime don’t appreciate the technology that 
has been around for a long time and has advanced over time. But in terms of 
dramatic changes, I think that it is really the Internet along with more power-
ful interfaces, but I can’t think of anything else that is dramatic. 

CIOs at Work 
 
99  
Yourdon: You brought up a good point. You are probably familiar with 
Howard Rubin. He often makes a point that in terms of development, some 
of the organizations are a hell of a lot better than they were 20 or 30 years 
ago, but the average productivity level hasn’t changed all that much. It’s a 
little depressing that conference organizations calling people like me to give 
talks to the current generation, about software development—and they 
just want updated versions of the talk about things I used to talk about in 
the ’70s. 
Rubinow: There is something else that is kind of a “back to the future per-
spective.” As you know, processor speeds are not growing at the same rate 
they were, and to make up for that, one of the things we talk about all the 
time is in order to keep the ball moving at a reasonable rate in terms of per-
formance and speed, we should have better parallel programming models.  
We don’t have a lot of these models. We ask where has this occurred be-
fore, and then we can use the language that was designed to attack a similar 
problem 20 years ago (as in the telecom industry) and it wouldn’t be neces-
sary to start all over again. 
But if we focus on that kind of thinking and teach programmers how to do 
things in parallel, as opposed to primarily letting the operating system do its 
best, we could take advantage of all the multi-processing options that are 
available to us. That is something that a lot of people in our industry talk 
about and I don’t know how soon we will be able to accomplish that. 
Yourdon: You have actually touched on something important there. My 
colleagues have written a lot of books suggesting that we look for the spe-
cific solutions rather than general solutions. 
Rubinow: Yes, you have touched on something that I think about a lot 
lately—the way we are thinking, and I can tell you now that I think I am an 
example of that. Because of rapid changes in information presentation 
technology, I jump around from one hyperlink to another. We see less and 
less of the desire to sit and think deeply about a problem and research it 
to a high degree. Once upon a time I used to think like that, but I think 
like that less now than before because of the information environment in 
which we work.  
Some people will argue that it helps you to think more quickly versus the 
argument that is there are times you need to think deeply about a problem 
and spend a long time on it. When I was in high school, I was a chess nut. I 

Chapter 5 | Steve Rubinow:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, NYSE Euronext 
 
100  
was very competitive and I could sit at a chess board for hours. I would lose 
all track of time. I cannot do that anymore. My mind won’t readily support 
the same single activity for hours, and I regret that.  
Yourdon: Some of that, of course, is age.  
Rubinow: Ha, you have to remind me. 
Yourdon: It is definitely because I used to watch my sons play competitive 
chess and the younger boy placed second in a national championship. But I 
don’t think it is typically an advantage, especially when we have so many 
other urgent problems to solve. 
Rubinow: You may have heard about the software that you put on your 
desktop that shuts off your e-mail. It forces you not to have e-mail, so you 
cannot be distracted. Wow—I would have never thought of that, but I un-
derstand the value in someone telling OK you have enough e-mail, I’m going 
to shut it off for a while so you can focus.  
Yourdon: Yeah, that is intriguing. Let’s see, what next on my list? What 
about problems and issues that you worry about? 
Rubinow: We are always trying to be more cost-effective. It is always a big 
issue for us, especially because of the nature of our business—there is a lot 
of focus on efficiency here. And then the other thing is that because we are 
an icon of capitalism around the world, we are particularly attractive to 
people that have bad intentions. So security is a big issue for us.  
Another concern: how do we find the best and the brightest, and how do 
we keep them? How do we motivate them? How do we get peak productiv-
ity? From an economic standpoint, our business is correlated to volatility in 
the world because that’s when people trade more.  
Yourdon: Actually you have just reminded me of a question. When I was 
looking through your file, I saw that you guys are out there in public forums 
quite a lot, whether it is CIO Radio or keynoting in any number of confer-
ences, and so on. And clearly you are not talking to your immediate subor-
dinates or peers. It is not like here in the office, but people outside. Do you 
see a growing role for CIOs in general, as a public spokesman for some as-
pect of your business? 
Rubinow: Yes, I certainly do in this company. Certain people in the world 
know that there is this place on Wall Street and they see the big American 

CIOs at Work 
 
101  
flag, they see activity on the floor there, and they don’t realize how signifi-
cant we really are.  
When I tell people what we do, with sophisticated people and sophisticated 
technology, they say, “That is really amazing, we never knew that.”  
So part of my job is to remind people of that—our customers, our employ-
ees, and our potential employees, those people who would say, “Why 
would I ever work here?” Many of the things we are doing are cool, so I am 
a PR person for the company. I do that a lot. 
Also, another customer base that we haven’t talked about: the customers 
that are listed here, we get revenue from that. I don’t talk to every company 
but I do talk to a lot of technology firms, and I explain to them why their 
technology might be used here, what their affiliation with us means to them, 
and the interesting things we can talk about together and that we can work 
on together. And in some cases they weren’t aware of it and, it might be an 
obvious partnership for us and then again it might not be. So for all these 
reasons, I find myself talking about these things. 
Also, in some regard, we try and help push the industry forward. Here is an 
example: when IEEE was talking about networking standards, the next one 
they wanted to go to was the 40Gb standard. We said, it is going out of 
style—we’ll surpass 40Gb in no time, why don’t you guys think about 
100Gb? We tried to advocate our need for technology, so people would do 
things for us that we need them to do. 
Yourdon: I was thinking simultaneously that where you have historically 
assumed that the spokesman for the company would be the founder or 
the CEO, you would not tend to think of the CIO as the technology 
spokesman—but, of course, those were the more classic companies and 
now there is a much larger set of “classic companies” that rely entirely 
on information. 
Rubinow: You are absolutely right though; let’s use Apple as an example: I 
don’t know Steve Jobs, I’m sure he is a very capable guy, but he is not solely 
responsible for the iPhone or the iPod. Apple has all sorts of products, and he 
does a really good job of promoting Apple but it takes others as well. From 
my perspective, many of the things we do are the products and services that 
all of our customers will become familiar with one day—and so I can probably 
talk to them better than many other people in the company, so I have a very 
useful prospective that someone on the business side may not have.  

Chapter 5 | Steve Rubinow:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, NYSE Euronext 
 
102  
Yourdon: Well, the CIO of Microsoft said something interesting to me—
he said, “A lot of our customers come to us and say ‘You’re a big company 
and presumably you know stuff about IT. How do you discover it and how 
do you do this or that?’” And so his role, from that perspective, is to be a 
spokesman or the champion of technology. 
Rubinow: The CIO is becoming more prominent in the highest levels of 
the corporation. So many industries have an information technology em-
phasis and some CIOs are so prominent that he or she is going to be the 
spokesperson for one of the most important growing parts of the busi-
ness. They focus more on communicating then they ever did before. And 
that sort of resonated with me, too. 
Yourdon: My wife suggested an interesting example to me: So many of the 
problems and recalls we’ve been hearing about lately in the auto industry 
seem to involve software. And so you often wonder, how would that be 
handled in different IT organizations, with different CIOs?  
First of all, how would that problem have been created in the first place? 
And second of all, who found the problem? And thirdly, how was the whole 
thing handled by the CIO? Whatever that story is, it’s probably different at 
Toyota than it would be at Ford or Honda. So it points out that the CIO 
not only has to explain to the media the good things that are done, and why 
your company is so successful, but also how you screwed up with its use of 
IT in its products or services. 
Rubinow: This is my philosophy. We talk about two things that I like to get 
people focused on. One is communication skills, and I always point this out 
to people. People ask who had the greatest influence on my career. I say the 
first thing that pops into my head is my father, primarily because he told me, 
no matter what your job is, you are always a salesman. You are always try-
ing to sell something to someone.  
It is not enough to sit back and say “I am brilliant” and everyone will rec-
ognize you’re brilliant. You’ve got to make it happen. So I thought about 
communication skills since a really young age, and I encourage people to 
do that too and to take advantage of as many communication opportuni-
ties as they can. 
The other thing is that you never get too far away from your technology, it 
is critical for me to keep on top of it. But many CIOs, too often, were a 
developer at one time and now they’re an administrator.  

CIOs at Work 
 
103  
I know one CIO from another firm and when I talked to him, I asked him 
his opinion about technology. And he said, without hesitation, “I don’t have 
to think about it anymore, I have people who think about those things for 
me.” And I said, “Wow, we all know that technology can be very challenging 
and you have to have a seat at the table. Otherwise, what they are going to 
end up doing is that everyone around you will be smart and give you con-
flicting recommendations and ideas and all types of things.” 
I often find myself with two smart people; one says we should go right and 
one says we should go left, and if I don’t have an appreciation for what they 
are trying to decide and help them come to some conclusion, then I just 
have to say, well you know, he is usually right, so I will go with him.  
So I try not to get too far from technology either. I try to stay close to the 
work going on. I am a voracious reader and I think in order to be an effec-
tive CIO you really have to comprehend a lot of technology. It doesn’t 
mean that you can always tell what qualifies one project as a success and the 
other as a false start, although I can do that with some things. That is the 
culture of things we are talking about.  
Yourdon: Would you emphasize the whole multi-disciplinary approach? 
That seems to be consistent with your career and what you have seen 
elsewhere. 
Rubinow: Yes, I would do that too. I think that there are many computer 
specialties, and there are many different aspects of a business. Technology is 
always important. And I would go further: I don’t want to say that someone 
that has been at the same company for decades is limited, but in the earlier 
part of my career, I got my degree in chemistry, but I always used comput-
ers as an essential tool.  
I wanted to develop more and understand things better, so I started taking 
classes in computer science. Because I knew the direction I was headed, I 
would probably never write an operating system, or write a network pro-
tocol on the job. But I wanted to make sure I was more well-rounded and 
on top of that, an even better technologist—but I also wanted to under-
stand what business was all about. I tried to get myself exposed to as many 
situations as possible.  
It worked for me and I think I would encourage people to have as many dif-
ferent perspectives as you can have because it also helps to bring fresh ideas 
to things that need freshening up. I always liked the idea, and like people 

Chapter 5 | Steve Rubinow:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, NYSE Euronext 
 
104  
who have done a bunch of different things as an augmented background, 
because they make contributions to people that are more useful as well. 
Yourdon: On the other hand, you said something fascinating that will be 
true for every student today, but that was not true in generations before: in 
every university, a significant part of your arsenal of intellectual pursuits 
from high school onward involves computers. And obviously that was not 
true for me when I was in high school in the 1950s. There is a period of 
time that you can either get involved with computers or not. 
Rubinow: Today, you can take it for granted. I remember my very first 
programming class was when I was in eighth grade, and I had to go across 
the city to a university computer room to use the technology—which was 
the mainframe—and I had a terminal. And it was nice to have a personal 
computer at home where I would program ever since then. I was an outlier 
then, as to what was expected. 
Yourdon: Well, actually, you don’t have to worry about being an outlier. 
My youngest son originally intended to study physics in college, but ended 
up with a degree in philosophy from the University of Chicago. And then, 
about five years later, he went back to Columbia to earn a bachelor’s de-
gree in physics and then on to Toronto to get a master’s as well. I envy the 
broad background he got along the way. 
Rubinow: And I respect that as well. People come up and say to me, clearly 
you don’t use this chemistry you studied. On the contrary, I developed dis-
ciplined problem solving based on the scientific method. It applies to the 
sciences, but is also applies to so many different things in my job and so, no, 
it is useful every day. 
Yourdon: Yes, scientific method problems solving. 
Rubinow: And you know the processes—the logic, philosophies, analyt-
ics—are valuable. 
Yourdon: Let me turn that around and ask you, is there one common 
piece of advice for people who want a career path to the CIO? 
Rubinow: People that come to me and say, “I want to do what you do,” 
focus too much on technology. If they’re really technically smart, then it is a 
logical progression, and then I tell them there is this whole other thing 
called management and leadership. You can’t find it in a book, it is really 
hard to take a course and say now you are an effective leader.  

CIOs at Work 
105  
I don’t often know the prescribed path that people take to become good at
those skills. It’s acquired through experience, coaching, and mentoring, or
being mentored, and all those sorts of things. I impress upon people, those
“soft skills” differentiate CIOs from wannabe CIOs. They need those skills 
to work effectively in a company. 
I’m often asked, well what class do I need to take to become certified, say,
in Microsoft skills? And I say it goes well beyond certifications. And by the
way, I don’t always have the answer to that. You may not have the oratory
skills of President Obama no matter how hard you try. Similarly, not every-
one can be a really good leader.  
Yourdon: To go off in a different area, how do you have conversations with
your peers in the business units about the crazy ideas they bring to you? 
Rubinow: You know, I think that there is an assessment you can do with
numbers and that’s the easiest tool. Then there are the people who become
“believers,” or intuitively they feel something is right. And you sometimes
have to dissuade them from it if the facts don’t support it.  
My decision ability is good, so when they recommend something to you,
you may know it doesn’t make any sense. It is not just a difference of opin-
ion; it just doesn’t make any sense. You go to them and say, for the follow-
ing reasons, “I don’t think this will work.” 
And they say to you, “But why?” 
I’m pretty good at making decisions and if my intuition is telling me it is a
pretty bad idea, you have to work extra hard to find ways to tell people
that I don’t think that is going to work. And then again you can be wrong 
too, but… 
We have had some examples of that in the last few days. People come up
with ideas here, and I immediately get ten examples or changes in priority to
accommodate them, and somehow they feel it has more value than it really
does. And that is the way it is and you have to find ways to persuade people
with leadership and management because these are other people over whom 
you have no authority and you can’t order them to do what you want. 
I learned this more than any other place when I worked at Fidelity Invest-
ments. A new job was created, and I interviewed for it, and they hired me
for it, and my job was to integrate things—to develop an information
architecture integrating all the relevant information of 40 divisions.  

Chapter 5 | Steve Rubinow:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, NYSE Euronext 
 
106  
And I said “I am not naive about these things, not everyone is going to re-
port to me. How do I get them to do go along with it? How am I going to 
do this?” 
And they said, “Oh don’t worry about it: the chairman wants it done.”  
I said OK. So I go to Boston, and I go to the first meeting and present a re-
port on another technology.  
And they said, “Why would we do that?  
And I said, “Well, apparently the chairman wants it.”  
They replied, “Well, can we give you a list of all the things the chairman 
asked for? Join the club.” 
So I said to myself, that is not going to work—so how do I get all these guys 
to do what I want them to do when I can’t order them to do it? And I found 
many different ways. I found persuasion, escalation, politics, barter, forceful-
ness. I found there were many different ways, and I got cooperation from 
people, not always on my schedule, but I got people to do what I wanted 
them to do. The practice of influence management was a very valuable les-
son from this. Good communications skills, good listening skills—that is a 
very important skill and I notice that among people who work for me.  
When they get frustrated and complain to me, when they want that guy to 
do something and he just won’t do it. I tell them, you just try it a different 
way. Here are some of the ways you might approach that. And that’s a good 
educational lesson, too. 
Yourdon: There is an aspect of that I would like to explore a little further. 
In a way it has to do with this global issue of the CIO getting an equal seat 
at the table with other C-level officers. You mentioned earlier that in many 
businesses, there are people who are now up at that level who have been 
very successful on their way up at doing something, which is usually instru-
mental to the success of the company. Now they may have been the best 
automobile engineer and as a result, they often feel that that defines the 
company’s success. How in general do you think the CIO is going to be able 
to get the kind of influence and respect that they need to be able to operate 
as an equal?  
Rubinow: Well, sometimes I think that every technology department in 
almost every company should have their own PR function or internally rely 

CIOs at Work 
 
107  
on skilled people to make contributions in the best possible marketing way, 
as if they were selling toothpaste or another consumer product.  
We do remind people. And just a couple of weeks ago for our management 
committee, we did a report of what we’ve done over the last three years. It 
is mind boggling, the things we have accomplished. In terms of cost reduc-
tion, in terms of output, in terms of innovations, and we put it together be-
cause we are conscious of it every single day. But our management team has 
other things to worry about, and they’re not focused on, how great has IT 
been in the last year? 
But when we brought them the report, it reminded them and they were 
unanimous. They said, “Yes, we were aware of this, but when you put it all 
together, it is a great record.” But we have to keep reminding people of our 
contributions, and our impact—and relying on other people to take an ac-
tive role is not a good strategy. 
Yourdon: Well, in fact, it seems more often that you don’t even have the 
option—you are more or less thrown out. Howard Rubin used to make 
that point a lot, there is an enormous amount of money being spent on stuff 
the senior executives couldn’t touch or feel, it is very intangible. And yet if 
you package the story properly, you often could say, “By the way, this is 
really what we have done.” 
Rubinow: I remember one of the managers I worked for at Fidelity on the 
business side, said to me, “Show me what you’ve accomplished every month.”  
And I said, “Like what? A total redesign of our network?”  
“No,” he said, “that activity is invisible to me. You might think about the 
amount of money you saved the company.”  
And I said, “How about quarterly?” 
“No,” he said. “Every month …do something.”  
We found things to do. We know that certain managers are skeptical, and 
we’ve got to find away through our activities to remind them of the value 
we provide. 
Yourdon: That is a big part of the future as well. First, recognizing the need 
that can be addressed with IT— and then being able to pull it off. 

Chapter 5 | Steve Rubinow:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, NYSE Euronext 
 
108  
Rubinow: Well, everyone wants to see progress. When people have the 
confidence that you are doing good stuff, the outcome becomes more pre-
dictable as a result. So you have to think long term.  
Yourdon: Here’s a different question: what attributes do you look for in 
the direct reports who are going to be part of your “CIO team”? 
Rubinow: I remember reading something a long time ago about a study on 
football teams. You can have a really great football team where none of the 
players like each other, but technically they are very competent. But if you 
can, a football team that is technically good and where they also really like 
each other, you’re going to have much better results. And I think that is 
what we have here. We tend to enjoy working with each other and under-
stand each other; we know what the expectations are.  
People know what to expect from them. They know when to ask questions 
and they are on the same wave length. That is an extremely important thing. 
And by the way, when working long hours, you want to do it with people 
that you like. You don’t want to spend 12+ hours a day trying to solve a 
problem with people you can hardly stand, or need to get away from. There 
are some people here that I have gone on hiking trips in the mountains with, 
because we really get along well. And so that is an important characteristic.  
Then again, technical competence and all those kinds of things have a big 
role in making good decisions and making the right calls. Also risk taking, 
perspective—otherwise, you will not be able to advance as you want. 
There are several things I ask of people when they work for me. One is that 
you can see a lot more than your immediate job—see the bigger picture. 
Second, if you make a decision and it turns out poorly, I ask myself and oth-
ers if another skilled practitioner would have made the same decision at the 
same time given the same information. If the answer is yes, then even if 
we’re not happy with the outcome, it’s hard to fault the decision maker by 
using hindsight. On the other hand, if you made a decision to go left when 
other people in your position would have said go right, then I think there is 
a bit of a problem. Thirdly, let’s not make the same mistake over and over 
again. Let us learn from our experience. And I think people understand that. 
So I think there is a sense of loyalty here. And equal commitment to each 
other. I know that they have my back and they know that I have their back. 
When times are tough, I am not going to distance myself and say, hey, 
there’s a problem, I didn’t know what was going on. We know we can 

CIOs at Work 
 
109  
count on each other. And that, combined with the other points makes a 
really great team.  
Yourdon: You mentioned in that effort, you would be working 12 hours a 
day. Do you see this job as a 12-hour-per-day job?  
Rubinow: I am a self-admitted workaholic. However, I don’t try to impose 
that on others. But having said that, there are things here, especially during 
the day, the trading day, where you know that something is pending, involv-
ing a lot of money.  
We’re global and so we need to talk to each other all hours of the night. 
People know that I read my e-mail at two o’clock in the morning. I don’t tell 
everyone, but they know I am going to be that way. Most of the people here 
work a standard work week on the job, but they are really available seven 
days a week. And it is rare for someone to say, you know it is a weekend, 
I’m on holiday or I’m on vacation, don’t contact me.  
I don’t want to ruin anyone’s family life but if you don’t mind it, because 
you’re part of the team, you have professional pride. And that is just the na-
ture of what we do here. You will find people that work here, even off site, 
who work really long days. Work is part of what we do. And they enjoy the 
personal satisfaction of accomplishment and being part of the team. 
Yourdon: Do you think that’s true of CIOs across the board?  
Rubinow: I think people are not hiring, so people are working longer 
hours, doing more jobs. I do see that, until times get better. People do want 
to have some time at home, and the hiring will start to peak again. And I’ll 
tell you—in 1998 when I went to work at a start-up in Silicon Valley, I had 
this image that I was going to work day and night, that I was going to sleep 
in the office at night, and that I would survive on a diet of Diet Coke and 
Oreos. These are all the visions I had. And when I got there, I did find a lot 
of hard-working people, but I found I was one of the hardest-working, so I 
asked some of my younger colleagues about this. They said they didn’t work 
late nights just because someone thinks they’re supposed to work 12 hours 
a day. It’s also generational—they also realize that there is a life outside of 
work. Dedicating yourself to the company is not a life that they need to or 
want to emulate. I understand that and I respect that. It is not a choice that 
I make, but I understand. 
Yourdon: I remember after I first visited some of the companies out in 
Silicon Valley, a lot of them had the motto, “Live hard and play hard.” 

Chapter 5 | Steve Rubinow:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, NYSE Euronext 
 
110  
Rubinow: I think younger people are even more so that way, than maybe 
people who have grown up in a different generation—for whom work really 
dominated their lives. I was thinking, though, that some people understand 
how important work is and are far too passionate about their jobs. In some 
countries, labor laws have prevented people from working too much and 
they are realizing the benefits of that. 
Yourdon: I remember hearing that in Germany, they would literally lock 
the office doors at five o’clock—and if the server crashed, you could not get 
into the building. I was stunned.  
Rubinow: And that is the lifestyle they want. It’s very successful. 
Yourdon: That leads into my last question, not about that technical but 
about the social aspect. One of the philosophies of the “agile” approach to 
development is that of a “sustainable” work schedule. You’re not running a 
sprint, you are running a marathon. And you got to be a little more careful 
to pace yourself. If you go at top speed all the time, you are going to burn 
out. I’m curious from your prospective what do you think about this whole 
movement in general.  
Rubinow: Agile development—I like it. I like the outcome, like the fact that 
I know what we are going to do in the timeframe of a single sprint. Every-
one knows what they are supposed to do and I like the productivity. For the 
right application, it really has a good impact on programming, too.  
Yourdon: On programming? 
Rubinow: Yeah, wherever it makes sense to use it. Sometimes we use it 
for entire projects. Sometimes we use it for individual tasks. So I am an ad-
vocate for all these things.  
Yourdon: I’ve been amazed by the growth of agile—I went to the last big 
Agile conference last year, and there was somewhere near 1,200 people in 
attendance. They are coming up on the tenth anniversary of the Agile Mani-
festo. And there are some very interesting surveys and statistics about mak-
ing it work with multi-national projects, making it work in regulated indus-
tries. It definitely works in certain environments—especially when it’s al-
ready in place and the project is all inside one organization. If you have 
arms-length, contractual relationships between vendors and customers, and 
you have developers all over the world and it is more than 100 people, then 
it can be more problematic. 

CIOs at Work 
 
111  
Rubinow: We are a little more careful with that but then again we use it 
where it makes sense.  
Yourdon: Okay, I think this is probably a good point for us to wrap things 
up, and bring the discussion for a close. I’d really like to thank you for taking 
the time to talk with me today. 
Rubinow: Thanks. 

C H A P T E R 
6 
Lewis Temares 
CIO Emeritus, University of Miami 
Dr. M. Lewis Temares is VP/CIO Emeritus for Information Technology and 
Dean Emeritus of the College of Engineering at the University of Miami. For the 
majority of his career, he led a staff of 300 employees and was responsible for all 
aspects of computing and telecommunications, operating with a $40 million 
budget. Dr. Temares joined the University of Miami in 1980 and later became the 
first officially designated Chief Information Officer in higher education in the 
United States, while simultaneously serving as Dean of the College of Engineering 
from 1994–2007. Selected as one of the “Premiere 100 IT Leaders in the 
World,” he led the University of Miami IT Department to place in the top ten of 
Computerworld’s “Best Places to Work” for eight consecutive years, a distinction 
only the University of Miami can claim.  
A frequent keynote speaker, author, and presenter at academic, business and 
information technology conferences, Dr. Temares has consulted with governmental 
agencies, private companies, and multinational organizations alike. He is often 
cited in national publications and is a senior member of IEEE, a Fellow in the 
American Marketing Society, and a member of multiple executive councils and 
advisory boards, including the Dell Platinum Council and Microsoft Higher 
Education Advisory Group. 
 
Dr. Temares: Let me make this comment first so that we get everything 
straight and straightforward. I am no longer the CIO for the University of 
Miami, because I retired in August. 

Chapter 6 | Lewis Temares:  
CIO Emeritus, University of Miami 
 
114  
Ed Yourdon: Right, yes, I do know that. 
Temares: So I’ll put everything with the caveat, “as of August,” because 
the new person coming in should have a new perspective and obviously 
have different goals. 
Yourdon: Yeah. Let’s start with something specific: one of the things I’m 
obviously seeing—as I’ve kind of expected—is that all of the CIOs have 
some fairly universal tasks of keeping the lights on, worrying about security, 
and so on. But I’m curious from your perspective: what is different about 
the CIO role in the university or academic institution than you would 
expect to see somewhere out there in the Fortune 500 commercial land? 
Temares: Well, there are a couple of things that make you unique. First of 
all, my customer is the student. A student coming in has this unique role of 
being my customer and probably the gentleman or the woman who is most 
likely to raise a breach of security. You know, when I was dean and a 
student came in with a 1600 on his SAT, we said, “Yes, he could have gone 
on to Carnegie-Mellon, could have gone on to MIT, he’s at the University of 
Miami.” And the VP side of me, the VP/CIO side of me says, very succinctly 
to himself, “Oh, damn, I think I have somebody coming in that’s going to be 
way ahead of my own people and he’s going to break into my system.” So, 
you know, my customer is also one of my most dangerous security risks, 
just being an 18-year-old student. 
The sad thing which happens, which is very unique, is that we recruit faculty 
members who are all very smart and doctors who are all very smart—and 
they have individual entrepreneurial characteristics. They have tenure, they 
can do anything they want with regards to setting up a network; they have 
funding, they have research, they have everything, and they can make the 
same decisions as the person who does research in the field of medicine. 
We have a bunch of people who are actually very independent 
entrepreneurs, and yet I’ve got to bring them all together to share in the 
network and share in the mission so hopefully everything that they all do 
will meet standards. So that is a very unique characteristic that we have in 
education, especially in higher education.  
Yourdon: Interesting. Now, when you were doing this role, did you have 
to act as a champion, so to speak, for using more computers and technology 
in the classroom itself—which I can imagine some faculty would resist? 
Temares: Well some people are, because of the generation gap, the older 
faculty, are resistors. I thought of bringing computers into the classroom for 
a long time and I can give an instance of something that happened. I looked 
in [a classroom] door and [noticed a faculty member] writing on the 

CIOs at Work 
 
115  
whiteboard from yellow notepaper. … I said to him afterwards, “I’ve got a 
couple of questions here. One, did you notice those devices that were with 
the students? Those are called computers. You could have sent them notes 
in the mail. And they could have had them available and learning for the first 
time in front of you. And, secondly, is that paper yellow from age or is that 
new paper?” And I didn’t score many points, but I made my point. I think it 
really didn’t help because, as a senior faculty member, you cannot tell them 
how to teach. If they want to use technology, fine. 
And yet I have a young faculty member who was teaching English and 
teaching how to do research and immediately went to the computer and 
showed them how to use the Web and showed the students that they can’t 
trust the Web. It has to be totally accurate ’cause the stuff on there is not 
reviewed and not verified. So you can verify something or not verify 
something—just between an encyclopedia and Wikipedia, that kind of thing. 
So, it depends on the faculty member. Some grasp it immediately. Some 
don’t. The same thing happened with the doctors putting in an electronic 
hospital record right now. There’s one third of your doctors who are really 
excited, one third of your doctors who are indifferent, and one third of 
your doctors who are opposed. And the big thing is keeping the one third 
“indifferent” away from the one third “opposed” so you can get it in. 
Yourdon: Interesting, interesting. Now you raised an issue that was my 
second question for you, and it is kind of an obvious one. Obviously, a 
university like yours is likely to see, and is going to be forced to deal with, a 
much denser population of these New-Age, technology-savvy kids—so my 
question is, what advice do you have for the CIOs of various other 
companies that are likely to be hiring them as soon as they get out of your 
university? 
Temares: Well, one of the things that’s good about these kinds of students 
is that they teach you what’s the next step in technology. I mean, I knew 
enough about mobile technology and the need to have wireless for my 
campus long before people knew about having to have wireless computers 
for their workplace—mainly because I’m dealing with students there on the 
leading edge. See, you’re dealing with a bunch of people that truly grew up 
with computers that are attached to them, and now you’re learning from 
them—and social media is another example. 
Using social media, which they do, they think that we have to communicate 
differently with homework. You see, we’re not a corporation that has to 
communicate something it wants to get out to its customers. So the new 
recruit that comes in has to work towards it and is expecting things that are 
not necessarily available at the firm that they’re coming into. They’re 

Chapter 6 | Lewis Temares:  
CIO Emeritus, University of Miami 
116  
expecting to be able to use the social media. You know, this whole
generation, it’s a non-secretive generation. We’ve always told people,
“You’ve got to be transparent if you want to be trusted.” You’ve got to tell
people to communicate. Well, this generation, this is TMI [too much
information]. There is too much information about this generation. They
feel nothing about exposing themselves on Facebook, on Twitter—I say
“exposing themselves,” because they communicate what we (the previous
generation) used to consider private information. This generation just talks
and talks about people freely, and that’s a whole different environment for
us in the computer field, and in the security of computers. This generation
will expose things to the school and forward it and not think twice about it.
It’s a totally different culture. 
Yourdon: Very interesting. Yeah, I certainly agree with you, having watched
some of this myself. Well, that kind of leads me into the next area: what are
some of the key technology trends that you see shaping the next few years?
I mean, obviously, social media is now in front of us, but do you see other
things coming along that we should be watching? 
Temares: Mobility. Mobility is a big one. Everybody’s going to want video
mobile, I mean, you know, your RIM [Blackberry] device, your Apple device.
I used to say the students coming in had a six-second attention span.
They’re down to three seconds. And one thing that occupies them is the
picture. So they want more and more video entertainment. And so if you
want to get to your customer, or you want to get information out, you’ve
got to use a mobile video device. 
Yourdon: Yeah, I was just reading some details about a speech the CIO of
Delta gave at some computer conference, and she was saying similar things,
saying that, you know, “One of the things we want to do at Delta is to be
with the customer 24 hours a day. You know, whatever they’re doing with
our mobile phone apps, and so on,” and so I think that’s how business has
got to look at it. Aside from mobile, what else? 
Temares: It’s very simple. The life of a CIO, getting into the corporate
world, getting into the executive suite, it’s a different kind of lifestyle. More
and more it’s going to be a checklist of how you’re going to use the
technology. More and more, it’s going to be a marketing effort of trying to
explain to people in your corporation how information technology can
better sell the product or can better reduce the less cost of a product. 
Yourdon: You know, it’s interesting: earlier this week, I was interviewing
the CIO of the New York Stock Exchange, who was saying that maybe the 

CIOs at Work 
 
117  
CIO of the future has got to be the Chief Media Officer also—explaining all 
of this stuff. 
Temares: There’s no question about it. I agree completely. I think if 
anyone does not understand or become fluent in media, the whole 
relationship between voice/data integration, they can forget about it. I agree 
completely; and don’t forget about the advantages of voice. It’s been 
overlooked, and people forget that the phone conversation is a valuable tool 
as well. And it’s a lot quicker in a lot of ways than detail work. 
Yourdon: Absolutely. Well, all of this had to do with looking forward. 
What about looking back? You’ve been in the field probably almost as long 
as I have. Throughout your career, what would you say have been the most 
significant changes or developments that you’ve seen in the field? 
Temares: Oh, there’s no question that life changed with the personal 
computer. The second time life changed was with the Internet. Even being in 
the educational field, I was on e-mail in the early seventies, because we had 
ARPANET and the Internet and things of that nature for the research 
networks. But the fact that the personal computer became so commercial, 
was a major, major change. The second thing is the Internet, and the third 
thing is mobility. 
Yourdon: Yeah, I think I would agree with all of those—although 
something I’m coming to appreciate just in terms of the pervasiveness, 
particularly with students, is the Google phenomenon. The fact that any 
question that occurs to you about anything at all—which you would often 
have shrugged and ignored in the past—you now Google it. 
Temares: Absolutely. And I’ll add to that, not only can you answer any 
question, but you can also do it anywhere, at any time, because of the 
mobility of a wireless device. You don’t have to go to a library to look it up. 
In the old days, even when you had computers, when you first had 
computers, you had to get to computers and then do it on your own. 
Yourdon: Yeah, that’s a good point. Wherever you are, even if you’re out 
on the street. 
Temares: Absolutely, wherever you are, and you add to that the GPS 
technology that’s everywhere you are. There’s no getting lost anymore if 
you have an intelligent phone. 
Yourdon: There’s a related issue that has occurred to me a lot: one of the 
things that old timers like you and I would have seen is that back in the ’60s, 
there were a lot of technologies that were very expensive and very scarce, 
and, therefore, very restricted and very controlled. For example, think 

Chapter 6 | Lewis Temares:  
CIO Emeritus, University of Miami 
 
118  
about mainframe computers. And now we’ve got a lot of stuff that is 
essentially free and ubiquitous and pervasive, everywhere, and yet we still 
live in social institutions that are trying desperately to control these things. 
Mobile phones are a good example of this phenomenon. Do you see any 
more things of that nature coming along, things that are going to become 
universal and free? 
Temares: Well, I’ll tell you, one of the things that I’ve been involved in is 
telemedicine. And the most difficult part of telemedicine is the cost of 
telecommunications for processing data from Latin America—because it’s all 
government-controlled and their prices are absolutely ludicrous compared 
to what it is in various other parts of the world. So, eventually, I think the 
economy is going to break that down, the same way it has broken down 
barriers in terms of dealing with China, trading with China. It’s going to 
break down the telecommunication barriers also because we’re going to 
have to communicate to be in business, and if that’s the case, if it’s too 
expensive, it won’t get done. And Skype is in business; you’re doing this on 
Skype. Skype is in business because they found a way to get business done 
and in a cheaper way. 
Yourdon: Good point, good point. 
Temares: And economics kills everything. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Temares: And it changes things. 
Yourdon: Let me move on to another category. You hear a lot of talk 
these days about IT being a strategic weapon to enhance the business. 
Would you say that’s true for universities, too? 
Temares: Oh yeah, there’s no question that the only reason for IT’s 
existence is to support the business unit. For example, IT supported the 
admissions applications: you need to have a great Web presence, for a quick 
response and getting information out to people who are inquiring. We now 
do a lot of things, for example, in terms of inquiries. It used to be we lost 
the inquiries. You know, they’d inquire but we’d be so busy about applicants 
that we didn’t have time for inquiries. 
Now, with technology, anybody that inquires, we start to send things to 
them—because they’re a tentative, they’re a possible, they’re a future 
maybe. So now we can go after different people; whereas we were only 
dealing with the admissions applications, we’re now dealing with anybody 
who asks about the university, sending them promotional information, 
because we can do that over the Web. We’ve got their e-mail address, 

CIOs at Work 
 
119  
they’re coming through the Web, we give them back the information 
through the Web. 
The other thing is the cost. Obviously it reduces the cost to support the 
information technology, to have the infrastructure to reduce the cost of 
delivering the classroom information. But most important of all is the way 
it’s changed our whole medical side. Being an academic medical center, you 
need the high-performance computing to do your genomic research, you 
need your high-performance computing to do other kinds of research, 
engineering research, architectural stuff, so the whole of information 
technology is networking. We have to keep the network up 24 x 7, 365, no 
question about it—so in addition to the network that supports the faculty 
members doing their individual intelligence and research and work, we also 
have to have the support in terms of the applications systems that will allow 
them to keep performing their administrative duties as well. 
Yourdon: I would imagine also, as a recruiting tool, you’ve got to have up-
to-date and leading-edge technology to attract the best researchers and the 
best professors.  
Temares: There was no question when it first came to my attention. I 
think we were the fifth school that had all our campuses wireless. We have 
five campuses, but three major ones that are ten miles apart; each is like ten 
miles away from the other one, almost like an equilateral triangle. The 
medical school, the marine school and oceanographic sciences, and the main 
campus, which is basically the undergraduate and graduate school. And all 
three campuses had to be interconnected, all three campuses had to have 
wireless, because no matter where you go, from campus to campus, you 
had to have the connectivity that you needed to do your job. So a faculty 
member may be teaching on the marine campus when in fact, he’s a biology 
instructor, so he has to have that ability to be in both places at the same 
time. And that’s what’s happening. I like it. You know, you used to say, “You 
can’t be in two places at one time,” but now we can, now, because of the 
mobility. We can be in two places at one time. 
Yourdon: That’s a good point. Well, as I’m sure you know, this has been a 
very frustrating area for CIOs in normal companies because they have kids 
coming in applying for a job who will say to them, “I’ve got better computing 
equipment at home than the crap you want me to use in the office.” 
Temares: [laughter] That’s true. That’s very true. We find that all the time. 
All of a sudden they’re saying, “What do you mean you don’t have split 
screens? You only have one screen for me to do my applications on? You 
know, I’m used to working with two or three screens at one time so that I 

Chapter 6 | Lewis Temares:  
CIO Emeritus, University of Miami 
 
120  
can have multiple applications open at one time. And I move one from the 
other.” I mean, the things they come up with … you know, instead of 
criticizing them, you’ve got to listen to them. That’s one of the most 
important things, I think, that has changed in the CIO role. The CIO role is 
more of a listener now and asking the problem of what’s going on and 
listening to what’s going on than the guy who’s promoting what he thinks is 
the future rather than watching the future appear in front of his eyes. 
Yourdon: Interesting. I certainly would agree with you. I had one other 
question in that category, and that is whether IT is expected to enable 
entirely new things which the university simply cannot do today? 
Well, let me give you somewhat of an off-the-wall example: both MIT and 
Berkeley are the two examples that come to mind. They have essentially put 
all of their lectures online. Well, Berkeley has put everything onto YouTube, 
which in a sense changes the essence of a university as being a place where 
you have to go there for the most part to get your degree. Now, aside from 
laboratories and the experience of interacting with other students, you can 
get a lot of your education through YouTube. I mean, that kind of changes 
the nature of the business, doesn’t it? 
Temares: Well, that goes along with the whole idea of having online, to 
the resident having the experience of being in the classroom. There are a 
couple of things that go wrong as far as I can tell. First of all, part of the 
differentiation is the faculty member. The reason that private schools charge 
a different amount of money is not only the support they get from the 
government but often there’s the quality of the researcher or the instructor 
that they’re talking to. You want to deal with the guy who writes the book 
rather than the guy who reads the book. The guy who writes the book is 
someone you can deal with, and he’s a decent faculty member, too—you 
get a huge interaction that you can’t get if you were doing it online. And the 
interaction of students, in terms of the student’s interactions with another 
student, is immeasurable. So there’s something to be said about the 
environment that’s worth working on. 
We’ve almost gotten to the question of: can you have all telecommuting 
workers? When you want to do a project, you want to get together for 
something that requires bigger than individual effort, how difficult it is to get 
there through telecommunications? It’s not the same when you can’t watch 
the body language, you can’t watch the facial motions, you can’t watch the 
whole combination of what is the human interaction.  
For a big psychology class, which normally has 350 students in a lecture hall, 
what does it matter? Fine. If you’re talking about a graduate course, or 

CIOs at Work 
 
121  
where you’re doing something with the sciences, I think it does matter. 
Stanford turned their lecture-hall engineering degree all online, and they 
found a very, very difficult time, because they were paying a bunch of 
graduate students to be available if a student had a question, because you 
couldn’t move forward unless you had an answer to the question. 
They ran into some very big difficulties, because they were charging the 
same for the online degree, the same as the in-person degree. 
Yourdon: Well, it will be an interesting area to watch, I think, as time  
goes on. 
Temares: Oh yes. And, again, one of the nice things about IT is that you 
can predict a little bit of the future, but it’s virtually days that you predict. 
You can’t predict more of the future, because the things that come out are 
just overwhelmingly incredible, even when they’re advancements over 
existing things. Who would have thought everybody would want all this 
information out there on Facebook? Or some idiot walks around and has, 
you know, five million followers on Twitter? I mean, this is nuts!  
Yourdon: [laughing] That’s right. Let me switch to a different topic area, of 
problems and concerns and issues. What would you say are the main 
problems or threats that concern your kind of IT industry and the academic 
environment over the next couple of years? 
Temares: If my number-one concern wasn’t cyber security, I think I’d be 
asleep in the closet. The answer is security, security, security—and 
especially with the new generation, who doesn’t view security in the same 
way until they get burned. Until their identity is stolen or something else 
happens to them, because they really are just too open and they don’t 
appreciate the level of security that’s necessary to survive in our domain. So 
I really think it’s a combination of you need security because more and 
more of the information will be available. If you’re going to have your wallet 
somewhere on your RIM [Blackberry] device, you’ll have a real problem if 
somebody breaks in because it’s like stealing your wallet and stealing your 
life away. So I think the biggest, my biggest, concern is always the security 
protection of the individual and the individual’s data. 
Yourdon: Okay. Well, a related question is how do you communicate that 
kind of concern to the university people around you, your peers and 
superiors, as well as the customers right outside—which would be your 
students—and then the people outside the university firewall? 
Temares: It’s really like a losing campaign, it’s part of the marketing. You 
know, faculty members are the same way. Don’t forget individual faculty 

Chapter 6 | Lewis Temares:  
CIO Emeritus, University of Miami 
 
122  
members are used to publishing their research and sharing everything they 
do. You know, we live in a crazy world in higher education. Think about 
this: we send people to conferences to deliver papers on all these unique 
things they learned, they’ve accomplished. After somebody outside sees 
these unique things they’ve accomplished, they offer more salary and hire 
them away from us. So we literally pay for our faculty members to leave us. 
Think about it. It’s a crazy environment. But we do! So we want to publish, 
because it’s a great reputation builder. You know, your Stanfords, your 
MITs, they get their reputation because of the good research everybody 
knows they do and the exciting things that come out of them. But guess 
what? A guy who’s got exciting things at MIT will get a job offer from 
Carnegie-Mellon that will probably give a 30 percent pay raise or a 40 
percent pay raise because of the uniqueness … they wanted to bring him. 
And offer him graduate assistants or whatever. And by the way, once you 
have tenure in an institution of any prestige, the next institution you go to 
automatically gives you tenure. It’s virtually a given. 
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Temares: You give the person the opportunity to advance himself, show 
his knowledge, make the world know you, and then he can go out and get 
another job somewhere else for more. 
Yourdon: [laughter] That certainly is true. Well, given that state of affairs, 
then, how do you go about communicating the need for more security and 
maybe a little more privacy? 
Temares: You try to educate them by publicizing leaks, publicizing when 
you have meetings—it goes along with all my other desires to publicize 
what IT can do and can’t do. So I meet with academic deans and counselors, 
or I’ll meet with the various people of the faculty senate, I’ll meet with the 
people in terms of the research council. The idea is that the CIO has to get 
out of his ivory tower and [get] on the road. And “on the road” means 
selling IT and selling the points he wants to accomplish with IT. A lot of 
times people don’t even know what IT can provide them. They’ll give you an 
awesome look like, “Really? We can do that?” I have to say to them, “If you 
have a problem with your systems or your mobility or anything of this sort, 
just give it to us. That’s what we’re here for, we’re the pros. We’ll deal with 
them.” And people don’t even realize that this thing exists. 
Yourdon: Well, I think you’re right. So a lot of it is marketing and, as you 
say, getting out on the road. Certainly, one of the things I’ve noticed now 
that I’ve been looking more closely at CIOs is how often they are out on 

CIOs at Work 
 
123  
the road, speaking at conferences and public gatherings and so forth—much 
more than I would have guessed. 
Temares: And, by the way, there are two things that I have to do. You 
have to be aware of what other CIOs are running into, which means going 
to the conferences and talking privately with other CIOs and what problems 
they’re confronting, even if they’re in another industry. It doesn’t matter 
because the things in their industry will move to your industry one day, so, 
if they have problems in the financial industry or the higher education 
industry, they will have the problems eventually in the retail industry and in 
other industries. There are twin towers, you know; it happens.  
The second thing that you’ve got to do is market yourself and your 
department and your abilities internally to your organization. You can’t just 
say, “Okay, I’m there when they need me.” No, no, no, no. You create the 
need, you let them know what’s going on, you let them know what’s 
available so they can make use of it. And ask them, go out and ask, “Would 
it be helpful if? Can I do this? Can I help with that?” and so on, and that’s the 
way you learn things. 
Yourdon: And that’s how you stay on the radar screen also, if you’re seen 
as a contributor rather than just a pain-in-the-ass cost center, which I think 
is important. 
Temares: [laughter] Exactly. Oh no, you said it better than me. You’re 
absolutely right. What makes you a revenue producer rather than a cost 
center? If somebody says, “Hey, Lew Temares of the IT team was just over 
here and they really gave me something of benefit,” and you know, your 
boss and the rest of the guys will be looking at you in a different way. 
Rather than just saying, you know, “I need more hardware, I need more 
software, or I need, I need, I need, I need.” 
Yourdon: Yeah, I agree. 
Temares: And there’s nothing the matter with saying, “I need,” because, 
generally speaking, you do need. At such-and-such a cost-per-item. I mean, 
you can’t live with five-year-old technology, whether it’s servers or whether 
it’s hardware or software. Everything has an age. You know, one of these 
days they’re going to come up with something that will replace ERP. You 
know, we always are adding new systems, we’re always adding 
philanthropism, we always had COBOL. Then came ERP in the ’90s. That’s 
20 years ago—the ’90s—or 15 years ago since the ’90s. How come we 
don’t have anything better than ERP now? It’s going to be there, but then in 
five years we’re going to have something that’s no longer going to be called 
ERP. It’s going to be called something else and it’s going to be better.  

Chapter 6 | Lewis Temares:  
CIO Emeritus, University of Miami 
 
124  
Now, a good example of that is cloud computing. I have this mania about 
cloud computing, because really, what it is, it’s host computing. We’ve had 
host computing since the ’70s. IBM used to have data centers, if you 
remember, and you’re going to have your data and get your result on your 
console in your office. These existed way back then. 
Yourdon: Fundamentally, you’re right. Well, that raises an interesting 
question that kind of gets us back to this generational issue. How do you 
communicate to the younger generation that there are a lot of things that 
were done before, that there are a lot of lessons that can be learned 
without having to repeat the same mistakes and failure all over again? 
Temares: Are you a parent? [laughter] How do you convey adages to a 
younger generation? 
Yourdon: [laughter] Oh, okay. 
Temares: It’s no different than being a parent. You hope that when you 
say what you say you’re not spitting into the wind, but really some of it … 
actually, you throw it and it actually sticks to the person. Don’t know how 
much sticks and how much not, even including the new worker that comes 
in. The hope is that they are bright enough to be as open as you are open to 
them, that they will be open to you rather than just saying, “Oh, you’re just 
old-fashioned, you’re an idiot.” 
Yourdon: Well, of course, it’s a lot easier for them to have that attitude in 
our field because the technology is a million times faster than it was when 
you and I were young kids. 
Temares: Well, they sort of understand that. They really do. You know, 
you tell them: what’s the difference between a “client” and the end of the 
terminal? I mean, there’s no difference between a client and a terminal 
basically, and we’re going more and more towards a terminal concept if you 
think about it. I mean, the, the new RIM device that’s going to be coming 
out is as close to a terminal as a tablet, basically. It’s going to be as close to 
a terminal as you’ll find, but yet at the same time we’ll have the ability 
because of the RIM device to do everything through the Internet. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Temares: It’s going to have very little storage. You’re going to have to buy 
storage from a vendor so I try to tell that to the younger generation, I tell 
them funny things. One of the things you can use as an example is a camera. 
When you want to take and keep and store pictures, you used to be able to 
do 12 pictures, 15 pictures, and then they went to 27 pictures on an entire 
roll of film and you thought it was incredible, then 36 pictures. Now all of a 

CIOs at Work 
 
125  
sudden, you’ve got this little thing in it and it’s got 2 gigabytes, 4 gigabytes, 8 
gigabytes, 16 gigabytes, and you can hold hundreds of thousands of pictures. 
But the principle is the same: it’s a camera and it’s got a modem, you’ve got 
this little digital device. 
It’s the same principle. You just got better technology. But the same thing is 
happening to computers. It’s the same principle, better technology, which 
makes things happen more conveniently, faster, and sometimes, and a lot of 
times, just nicer. I mean, the quality is better. 
Yourdon: That certainly is true.  
Temares: And they always relate to the camera. It’s crazy, when you relate 
to the simple thing, you relate to the throw away camera compared to what 
you do when you buy a camera and you put your memory in it and they can 
see, “Oh yeah, I guess that’s similar.” 
Yourdon: And you can give one to every single guest at a wedding 
reception. That’s where I’ve seen it a lot. Tell everybody to take pictures, 
hundreds of pictures, and maybe one or two of them will be good, and then 
we can throw everything away at the end and that encourages behavior that 
simply was not allowed, let alone encouraged, a generation ago. 
Temares: Listen, every firm, every business has old computers that they 
get rid of on a regular basis. I mean, everybody has a cycle now, their 
economic budgeting. It’s what your cycle of your computers, what’s your 
cycle of your servers, what’s your cycle of your everything, every piece of 
equipment. What’s the cycle? You’ve got to put in your budget plan for the 
next five years what the cycle is for that replacement. 
Yourdon: Absolutely. I’ve got one more generational question, and that is 
related to, say, the young graduating student who sees a possible career that 
will lead up to your role. He says, “Some day I want to be just like Dr. 
Temares. I want to be a CIO.” What advice would you give such a person 
to prepare? 
Temares: I always, I always tell that person to try and get as much 
education as they can when they’re young, because it’s so tough to go back 
when they want to go back. 
Yourdon: Ahh. 
Temares: So perhaps you can get a master’s afterwards. I also promote, if 
they possibly can, to get a combination of degrees. For example, if you’re 
going to get a bachelor’s in business administration, get a law degree or get 
something else other than a master’s in business afterwards. If you’ve got an 

Chapter 6 | Lewis Temares:  
CIO Emeritus, University of Miami 
126  
engineering degree, go get an MBA unless you’re going to go into pure
engineering. If you want to come into the technical field, into the business
world, you have to have business background. You have to have some
business courses. You can’t just fit in there unless you have the MBA, unless
you have the BBA, or you have to have some criteria that gets you in there
so you can understand accounting, economics, because it’s not just
technical. There’s a cost factor and one gets weighed against the other, and
you have to know, you have to know the difference between an income and
a balance sheet. 
You have to understand the business. Otherwise, you can’t talk to the people
in the business, and you’re going to be viewed as just a techie and you’re
going to go nowhere. Now, you can become chief technical officer, that’s
what some of them want to be—but even the chief technical officer has to
talk to the boardroom sometimes, has to talk to the senior management
sometimes, and has to market their ideas. I tell students, engineering students,
that they have to know how to market themselves and market their ideas.
Think of the greatest invention in the world, and unless they know how to
market it, it’s a waste. 
Yourdon: I certainly agree with you. 
Temares: Whoever’s going to make the money is the guy who knows how
to market it. 
Yourdon: One of the things that has impressed me with the interviews I’ve
done so far is just the enormous breadth of backgrounds that these people
have. The guy I interviewed earlier this week had a PhD in chemistry. The
woman who’s the CIO at Delta is a concert violinist. The CIO at Microsoft
started off in the Parks and Recreation Department. It’s just, it’s amazing. So
this idea of the breadth of the education and exposure to things is great. 
Temares: Somewhere in the background are communicating skills and
business skills, somewhere, because they can’t get where they are and they
can’t stay where they are unless they have communication and business
skills. And that’s the other thing I tried to explain to them—that you have
to learn how to communicate. You know, Twitter is one form of
communication. It’s not the all, the end-all. You have to learn to talk and
present and deliver. And, you know, that’s why we have a speech class at
the university. My new pitch is in project management. People nowadays,
when they do project management tend to underestimate the cost and the
time. They are really bad estimators, and, of course, if you estimate low and
you come in high, you’re looking for your next job. If you estimate
correctly, you look like a hero. But, you know, the idea is not to hit it on 

CIOs at Work 
 
127  
the exact date and budget, the idea is to always come in lower than you 
estimate. So you don’t do yourself or your company a favor by saying, “Oh, 
I’ll have this up in three months for $2 million,” and you actually get it up in 
five months and it cost you two and a half million dollars. One day late 
means you missed the timeframe. One dollar more means you missed your 
budget. One dollar fewer means you came in under budget. And that’s the 
way you can deliver it. So it’s all in the marketing.  
Yourdon: Interesting. Well, I certainly would agree with you. Let me move 
on to another category. One of the things I’ve been trying to figure out is 
the typical responsibilities and duties that a CIO has, and, I get the 
impression that a lot of it is pretty basic in the universal—keeping the 
machines on, keeping the lights on. 
Temares: Sure, sure. 
Yourdon: So from your perspective in the university, what are the key 
responsibilities of a CIO? Or maybe you’ve already covered it in a sense. 
Temares: Well, I’ll say it again. I have a diverse population, having faculty 
members and researchers, grad students, and doctors. So having them being 
able to perform their tasks, some of it life and death, it’s truly —you know, I 
often use the phrase on the administrative side, to the provost: this is not 
rocket science, this is not life and death, and the shuttle will go up, whether 
I make this happen or not. It’s not like something that would be disastrous if 
we are one day late or some disorder just happens. However, when you are 
dealing with doctors, it is life and death. When you are dealing with faculty 
members who are only here a given amount of time, they are only in that 
classroom for that hour. It’s a little different in terms of the operations in an 
academic medical center than it is in a normal business. I hate to say it’s only 
money, because, of course, money is important, but it really is on the 
administrative side, only money. This is a lot more significant. 
Yourdon: Interesting. One of the other things I’ve found in the interviews 
I’ve had so far is that CIOs do not act alone; they’re not solitary actors. 
They all have a team. And so my question is: if you are assessing various 
candidates that might be a part of your team, what kind of qualities and 
strengths do you look for in a candidate? 
Temares: Ahh, well, one of the strengths that is very, very important is 
that I try to interview to see if they fit. Let me give you an example. Two 
years ago I was looking for an assistant associate vice president for 
applications of equipment. But really what I was looking for was that person 
had to have the characteristics that possibly could assume my role, ’cause I 
knew I was going to retire. So when I was looking at the person, I was 

Chapter 6 | Lewis Temares:  
CIO Emeritus, University of Miami 
 
128  
assessing them in terms of their communication skills, their presentation 
skills, but also to whether they could handle the day-to-day administration 
of the applications systems and how they communicate and deal with 
people. So the attributes of the person basically have to do with [whether] 
they fit in with the team.  
You know, I would say that an all-star team of the best player in every 
position will lose to a team that plays together regularly because as a team 
they play better rather than an individual effort. So while I need a superstar 
maybe in terms of a tech-math, in terms of the network, I need somebody 
that’s really good at security. Overall, if I’m looking at the meld of where 
they can go and what they do, above all else, I want people that know their 
specialty but also display keen knowledge of their specialty by explaining 
their specialty and being part of the team. 
Yourdon: It’s interesting that you should mention that because I’ve now 
heard that theme a couple of times, particularly in the private sector—
where a lot of these CIOs are saying that they themselves are putting in  
12-hour days, as is everybody on their team. And you don’t want to work 
12 hours a day with people you fundamentally dislike, so it’s very important. 
Temares: I’ll say. That’s very true, very true.  
Yourdon: That’s amazing. One last question for this area. Are there 
priorities for a CIO that you consider essential that other key executives, 
like the provost or some of the other people in the academic environment, 
might misunderstand and feel differently about? 
Temares: Yeah, you have to have a passion. Our business is education and 
your passion in IT really becomes a passion of providing a service as best 
you can. It runs into conflict because to provide the best services very often 
is beyond the economic means of the institution, so the adaptability is that 
you have to provide “good enough” for the person and yet to have the trust 
of the provost and have the trust of the chief financial officer, who may feel 
that it isn’t good enough because of economic reasons, not because you 
think it’s acceptable to be good enough. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Temares: It’s a very difficult line to walk, you know what I mean? 
Yourdon: Yeah, sure. I’ve been hearing from some of the other CIOs that 
they find themselves surrounded by other key business leaders in their 
company who rose to their position because they had not only good talents, 
but very strong opinions about the right way to do things for their business 

CIOs at Work 
 
129  
—and they often don’t like to hear the CIO telling them their ideas or 
requests are unreasonable or impractical. 
Temares: I’ve got 3,000 of those. Every faculty member and doctor thinks 
that they know the business better. You know the only difference between 
a doctor and God is that God knows he’s not a doctor? 
Yourdon: [laughter] I think I’ve heard variations on that one before. 
Temares: Yeah, right. So they all think they know the business better. I 
can’t tell you how difficult it is with all these paper records the docs have, 
to tell them, “We can scan this stuff in and then when you have a file of this 
stuff. See, you still have it but you don’t need your file cabinet. It’s called 
document management. It’s been used for years and years. You’re not the 
first to do it.” 
“Oh no. I want to see that paper; I want to be able to read it.”  
“You can still read it. You can read it online instead of reading it on a piece 
of paper.” 
I’m telling you, I swear to you, this is a conversation I’ve had innumerable 
times, including with faculty members. Oh no, I mean, that’s way back to the 
TRS-80s. Remember the TRS-80s? 
Yourdon: Oh, yeah. 
Temares: The TRS-80 was very big with faculty members because they 
could buy it at a local store and do their own thing, and I was telling them 
that they’ve got to do stuff because that’s the digital policy, they had to buy 
IBM, or they had to buy from a real company that was in the business of this 
type of computer. And, you know, they wanted to do their TRS-80s. It’s 
been there forever, it stays. Whatever they used in graduate school they 
think they can use when they come into your environment, and I’ve got to 
make sure it works on my network. And all sorts of diverse things are on 
my network. It’s anything—a university is different than a real corporation 
in that they’re allowed to buy and do whatever they want because they get 
free money. They have government research money. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Temares: Government research money doesn’t tell you, “You have to use 
a Hewlett-Packard piece.” It doesn’t tell you, “You have to buy a Dell 
piece.” You see? It doesn’t tell you anything of that nature. It says you can 
do whatever you want. 

Chapter 6 | Lewis Temares:  
CIO Emeritus, University of Miami 
 
130  
Yourdon: Very interesting. I thought I’d finish up by just asking a couple 
questions about your background. I’ve read your bio. 
Temares: Sure. 
Yourdon: Is there anything about your background and rise to the CIO 
position that you feel are really unusual or unique that, you know, we ought 
to tell people about? 
Temares: My father owned a grocery store. 
Yourdon: Really? 
Temares: And I grew up in the grocery store. And after school and for the 
first 14 years of my life, what you did was you worked in the grocery store. 
When I came back home, I went to the grocery store. In the grocery store 
you learn a lot about customer service. First, the customer’s always right, 
and you get a variety of people with a variety of intellectual levels and a 
variety of economic levels.  
So one of the great experiences I had was dealing with retail and dealing 
with a variety of people face-to-face and learning you had to communicate 
and had to be proper and respectful, but yet in a convincing way. I had to 
convince somebody to buy Bumblebee tuna when they want Starkist 
because Bumblebee was more expensive. It’s a real knack, it’s a real 
challenge. You learn a lot by dealing with that kind of environment. So if I 
had anything to say, I’d say that the experience of dealing with part-time 
jobs, you can’t have enough internships, you can’t have enough part-time 
jobs, you can get various experience in dealing with people. You have to use 
the knowledge that you gain by dealing with people in your later life by 
getting people to work together as a team, by convincing them that you are 
transparent, convincing them that you are honest. Never, never, never lie. 
Yourdon: Ahh. 
Temares: Because you always get caught. And I have to say, if it’s not good 
enough to tell them the truth about it, it’s not good enough to do. You have 
to have a good reason to do something, and if you can’t tell them the right 
reason, then you did something wrong. 
Yourdon: Interesting. Well, with that background, how did you make the 
transition into IT? 
Temares: I came from the academic side in a sense because I was working 
at the university and I needed a computer to do my research. So I started 
on a 1620. I was a statistician. My major was statistics. 

CIOs at Work 
 
131  
Yourdon: Oh, okay. Yeah, I saw that. 
Temares: So I got into right away the SPSS programs, the SAS programs. I 
needed all that stuff to do my research, in terms of my field and then 
eventually what I did was I became a teacher, a part-time teacher, and then I 
became an administrator. 
Yourdon: Oh, okay, interesting. All right, one last question for you and I 
think it’s perfect for you given where you are in your life right now—and 
that is, what’s next? You know, what comes after being a CIO? 
Temares: Listen to this idea, Ed, how’s this? You know, it’s sort of like a 
Facebook mentality, but it’s a little different. I just got a site called 
matchmakerexecs.com. Matchmakerexecs.com really is my company. I’m 
going to do a company, I said. And what I’m going to do is what I have: 
the greatest attribute somebody has left is his former contacts. Or his 
current contacts. 
Yourdon: That’s true. 
Temares: And one of the things we do is we give away that information 
for free. All my contacts—you say, “Do you know somebody that’s a 
candidate for CIO?” Since I’m not in the position of being a headhunter, I’ll 
say, “You know, maybe Sam Jones is available. Let me give him a call and I’ll 
get back to you. I’ll give it to you.” But I don’t ask for any money for that. 
Yourdon: Sure. Well, that’s what LinkedIn is all about. 
Temares: Yeah, that’s what it’s all about. And so what I’m going to do is 
I’m going to, let’s see. I’ve got rainmaker.com, matchmaker.com; what I 
want to do is I want to be a rainmaker. 
Yourdon: Oh, okay. 
Temares: I want to do things to bring people together to get things done. I 
do that well, I know a lot of people, and those people know people. So what 
I want to do is if somebody wants to do something, they need a bunch of 
people to get involved, to develop something. I want to work with them to 
get the people involved developing, especially in the IT industry. 
Yourdon: Seems to me that that’s something that a lot of CIOs could think 
about, for exactly the same reasons. They’ve got a lot of contacts and a lot 
of ideas about what skills might fit certain situations. Interesting. 
Temares: Since I’ve retired, the most that people have … asked me is, 
“You know somebody in the industry? You know somebody from Cisco? 
You know somebody from Dell? You know somebody from … wherever? Is 

Chapter 6 | Lewis Temares:  
CIO Emeritus, University of Miami 
 
132  
there any possibility you can introduce me to them? Because I’ve got this 
great invention, I’ve got this great idea, I’ve got this great project, and I need 
some help.” 
Yourdon: Well, certainly among CIOs, I can get a sense that it’s a very 
clubby environment. You know, everybody knows everybody. 
Temares: Yeah. That’s right. 
Yourdon: Probably because they’ve got a lot of common problems to deal 
with and grapple with and it’s almost kind of a game of musical chairs also. 
People are obviously moving from one place to another because the shelf 
life of a CIO is only a couple of years long I think. 
Temares: I’ll let you know in a year. Ten years ago, I would have said, 
“Give me three to five years and we’ll know whether we’ll do it.” Now if it 
ain’t made it in a year, we are unsuccessful. 
Yourdon: I think that’s true. You know, that is one of the advantages of 
today’s environment. You can fail more quickly or at least get an idea if 
you’re going to succeed. 
Temares: You’re right. It is whether you can know if you failed quickly or 
you are not. Now you know it very quickly. 
Yourdon: And you can do it at almost no cost. That’s the other thing. You 
don’t have to go to a venture capitalist, which is huge. 
Temares: You’re absolutely right. 
Yourdon: That’s a big change, I think, from the ’70s and ’80s. The whole 
Web 2.0 industry has that characteristic. People are now financing it off 
their Mastercard, cash advances, and so on.  
Temares: Yeah, you know, I agree with you. We’re talking about 
thousands rather than hundreds of thousands or more.  
Yourdon: Exactly, exactly. So, all right, I agree. Listen, this has been 
fascinating. I could go on for hours and hours, but I want to keep us within 
our time limit 
Temares: Well, I appreciate it, Ed.  
Yourdon: Well, I appreciate your taking the time and it was very generous 
of you. 

C H A P T E R 
7 
Mark Mooney  
Senior Vice President and CIO,  
McGraw-Hill Education 
Mark Mooney is the Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer for 
McGraw-Hill Education, where he is responsible for developing strategy and imple-
mentation capabilities for new digital products and technical infrastructure within 
the $2.7 billion company. He manages a multi-disciplinary team of approximately 
400 personnel to provide a number of revenue-generating, customer-facing applica-
tions within the education market, including educational gaming (GradeGuru), simu-
lation gaming, data-driven classroom prototyping (State of Indiana), Connect (con-
nect.mcgraw-hill.com), Create (create.mcgraw-hill.com), and Acuity (formative as-
sessment). He is also a mentor and adjunct professor for Columbia University’s 
Executive Masters of Science in Technology Management program. 
Dr. Mooney left McGraw-Hill early this year to form two endeavors. The first is 
MyEdulife, a company that provides data governance and a life-long learning por-
tal. VeraMea, the second, creates new realities through the production of unprece-
dented results. It provides strategy and the execution for difference-making and 
bold initiatives. It also focuses on short-term results and the execution for long-
term sustainability. 
Prior to his position at McGraw-Hill, Mr. Mooney was the Chief Information Officer 
and Vice President at Reed Elsevier. There he strategically repositioned the pub-
lisher through a transformational infrastructure that enabled the use of a distribu-
tion portal and content management system, which allowed content providers to 
upload and manage their own content. Mr. Mooney was also the Chief Technology 

Chapter 7 | Mark Mooney:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, McGraw-Hill Education 
 
134  
Officer and Vice President at Houghton Mifflin and Vivendi Universal, where he 
served as the first CTO in a newly structured organization with the mission to pro-
vide governance, technical strategy, and execution across the enterprise. 
  
Ed Yourdon: There is a starting question that I’ve asked several CIOs 
now, which is, basically, what was your career path leading up to the CIO 
position? You obviously weren’t born with that title. 
Mark Mooney: Well, it was interesting. I grew up in Ohio, Irish and first-
generation Italian immigrant, and actually went to the Naval Academy in 
Annapolis, Maryland, and was an engineering undergrad. After I graduated 
from the Academy, I went into the Marine Corps rather than the Navy be-
cause I didn’t like going to sea and thought it was much more glamorous 
going into the Marine Corps … which I don’t know if it was or not. 
But they actually started the program in the Navy and the Marine Corps—
now this would have been the late ’70s—where they had two master’s pro-
grams out at the Naval Postgraduate School, which is out in Monterey, Cali-
fornia, one being in computer science and one being in information systems. 
And I thought, you know, this just sounds like a neat thing to do. … I think 
from an intuitive standpoint it made sense. So I started my master’s at the 
Naval Postgraduate School in information systems. It took about 18 months. 
So that was the first start, and then I came back to do some work mostly in 
black box, NSA/CIA software development space in the military and then 
came out from there. I then left the military to work for General Electric. 
Yourdon: Aha. Well, I’m surprised you were able to leave the Naval Post-
graduate School. I’ve been there, and it’s a gorgeous, gorgeous part of the 
country.  
Mooney: Oh, my wife loved it. I, of course, I had to study while I was 
there… 
Yourdon: Aha! [laughter] I guess that changes one’s attitude. But, then af-
ter your government work, as I recall, you went into the aerospace field, 
didn’t you? 
Mooney: Well, I was hired by General Electric. It was right when Jack 
Welch was starting to take over. He had already taken over GE, but I was 
in Washington, DC, and we were part of Space Systems, which was out of 
Valley Forge. Our group was relatively small, with the overall Valley Forge 
organization having about three to five thousand employees. And we did 
work for primarily NSA around the Washington Beltway, developing soft-
ware. It also included AI or artificial intelligence capabilities. And we lived in 

CIOs at Work 
 
135  
Annapolis, Maryland, and then commuted into Washington and actually 
bounced around, as you probably know well, too, we did a lot of “skiff” 
work. So you went to places where you couldn’t talk about what you were 
doing, you flew in unmarked planes, and all that kind of stuff, which sounds 
a lot more exciting than it really is. 
But that was really the exposure to the hard-core systems information 
technology, and it was right about the time that Digital [Equipment Corpo-
ration] had a large presence in Washington. The ARPANET1 had just started 
to take off. Obviously it was somewhat archaic at the time, but they started 
to pick up on it. So there was a large opportunity to really, really take ad-
vantage of a field that was brand new.  
Now, what happened was, I realized that as good as an engineer I was, I 
really enjoyed working with organizations and people, so what I did—I call it 
the Bermuda Triangle—I started going to graduate school at Johns Hopkins 
up in Baltimore, so I lived in Annapolis, drove to work in Washington, and 
then drove up to Baltimore to go to school either in the evenings or on the 
weekends. And actually, the work that I did there was more in applied be-
havior science, specifically about how technology affects organizations, how 
you measure it. I don’t think there was much being done at the time. I de-
veloped an acquaintance—I don’t know if you remember Paul Strassmann. 
Yourdon: Oh yeah. He’s one of the people I’ve interviewed for this book. 
Mooney: Unbelievable. Well, Paul and I developed a relationship when I 
started my dissertation at Hopkins. I was a Fellow at Johns Hopkins while 
working on my doctorate and he was doing a lot of work and actually had 
a database, which I think is part of the source of some of the work he’s 
done post-CIO with his consulting firm. And even then there was little 
work being done about how you measure the impact of technology on 
organizations. So I spent the next six years working on that and did some 
work with a small company called Pacesetter Software out of Princeton 
that did a lot of work with AT&T. So I’d pull a lot of the data, and what I 
found, which is rather common sense, is that you need to align the de-
ployment of technology and technology budget with the production of 
customer-facing and digital products—not that the back office isn’t impor-
tant, but more so on the customer-facing and product development. And 
that would have been back in the ’80s, so that was before the Internet had 
this huge effect on what we’re doing. So that was real exciting and it was 
                                                
1 Advanced Research Projects Agency Network, considered the precursor to the Internet. 

Chapter 7 | Mark Mooney:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, McGraw-Hill Education 
136  
really the foundation for the rest of the work that I was going to do as a
CIO. 
Yourdon: Interesting. Well, then, why don’t we move into what you’ve
been doing as a CIO? I’ve interviewed about a dozen people and they all have
slightly different stories. They all are involved in just keeping the lights on, for
lack of a better phrase, just running the internal IT engine. But beyond that,
they all have different stories. So what would you say are the key responsi-
bilities and activities that you have found yourself doing as a CIO? 
Mooney: Well, I’ve been at four publishing firms. I was at the Bureau of
National Affairs (BNA)2, which is still an employee-owned legal publisher. It
competes with Westlaw and LexisNexis. And then I went to Houghton Mif-
flin, and we were acquired by Vivendi, and then Harcourt and Reed El-
sevier—and each of these is sort of a little case study—and then obviously
McGraw-Hill. So you’re going back almost probably 15, 18 years. Because of
what was happening in publishing and media, in particular, the desire to have
the back office keep the lights on and run the data centers was absolutely
critical. But because of the huge paradigm shift—and even more so now at
McGraw-Hill, I’ll be very candid—most of the CEOs, the presidents, the
business leaders don’t really care, but assume that the systems will run on
time and with a certain level of quality. They want that done, they expect us
to have a dial tone much like the phone company, or the electric company,
electricity at the wall. 
And the biggest challenge and where we’re spending most of our time now
is more in customer space and product development around the digital
world of education, specifically in the publishing and media, moving from
print to digital. Now sometimes technology is a necessary evil. In particular,
what the struggle has been, at least within the existing budget, is that we’ve
been bypassed for the traditional back-office legacy—and so what we’ve
tried to do is increase efficiency, which is huge. About eight years ago, the
IT cost  of implementing an ERP system was under $200 million. It was only
supposed to cost $80 million, but the cost was significantly more, with the
idea that we drive efficiency through using that and then take that spend,
that technology spend, and reallocate it to the front office. And so that’s the
good news.  
The bad news is usually what happens is when there’s a budget crunch. And
the last three years as we’ve gone through the recession, when you tend to
cut, since a lot of your back-office legacy are fixed allocations or costs, they 
                                               
2 Now known as the National Institute of Standards and Technology. 

CIOs at Work 
 
137  
tend to stay and instead you cut the product and the new development and 
the proof of concept and those types of things. 
Yourdon: Aha. 
Mooney: So the big challenge and struggle and leadership requirements for 
me have been as a change agent, moving into that new customer-facing 
product space, around the digital arena, and really, really forcing it, enabling 
it, influencing it. 
I’ve done that in several ways. It’s everything from a strategic standpoint, 
having a roadmap that shows where you need to be in year three. I would 
suggest that beyond three is unrealistic because things are changing so much 
now. And then we’re going on a road campaign of convincing the businesses, 
at least in the media space that I’m in, of what we’re trying to do and why 
it’s important. Sort of forecasting what’s happening in the industry. And then 
lastly, rolling up your sleeves and actually starting to do more and more 
hands-on development work. We started doing it in the last two years, 
really developing an innovation center around the agile development of 
proof of concept. And currently we have probably about 9 to 12 proof of 
concepts going on now. 
Yourdon: Interesting. You know, having been an author myself for 30-odd 
years, there are two areas where I’ve seen a lot of change where I could 
imagine a CIO getting very deeply involved. One is rather mundane, and 
that’s just the production side of creating a book. You know, the very first 
book that I wrote took two years for the publisher to turn my manuscript 
into a book. And now everything’s done online, with the author doing a lot 
of the work that used to be done by typesetters and editors and all kinds of 
production people. So there’s a lot of technology I would assume that 
you’ve been involved in, bringing in to help speed things up. 
Mooney: Well, the other interesting thing about that is that there’s the 
technology and then there’s the whole organizational change, there’s the 
whole effect that it has on people’s roles and responsibilities and viewpoint 
and it may have a significant impact on the organization. Obviously we have 
hundreds, if not thousands of editors, and their role traditionally was to ac-
tually produce the manuscript. And what we’ve started to do, with every-
thing from publishing systems to learning management systems . . . for ex-
ample, I was on a call yesterday. We’re talking about learning development 
systems for schools. The requirements for tagging content became an issue, 
so the editor now is responsible for the digital tagging so that you can mi-
grate from the print to the digital or electronic media. 
Yourdon: Ahh. I see. 

Chapter 7 | Mark Mooney:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, McGraw-Hill Education 
 
138  
Mooney: So that technology obviously is evolving dramatically, as are a lot 
of these systems. So what happens is, we would go out to the editors and 
publishers—at least in the education field, we’ve been doing this for 20, 30 
years at times—and we would say, “Oh, by the way, in addition to that, we 
want you to do this mundane thing of tagging HTML.” And they would say, 
“Well, wait a second. That’s not my pay grade.” And I think you had a per-
cent of people who said, “Okay, I understand this,” but that was relatively 
small. Number one, just because it was change. Number two, it was intimi-
dating, because it was more related to the technology and coding. So there 
was that dynamic that continues to still go on.  
Now the good news is that throughout the media there are new com-
panies—and everybody is really jumping into the media space and particularly 
education right now because they see that there’s this chaos, there’s this 
void of tools to enable people like yourself as authors, editors to actually 
publish quickly and create something now not only for print, but obviously 
for the Web. I was actually again on the phone in the last couple of days with 
two small companies. And what they’re doing is basically taking existing con-
tent, you can repurpose it and customize it, and you can do it with little to 
no overhead in a template format online that makes it a heck of a lot easier. 
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Mooney: I would say, we’re not done yet. I mean, that whole shift is still 
ongoing and the struggle for us is the large organizations, so educational 
publishers, some of the media group. You know, it started in music. We saw 
what happened with the music, and if you use Apple … what’s happened 
with iTunes … and then you shift into any of the media spaces, in particular 
educational publishing. The shift—because of the recession, I’m convinced—
higher ed, college started it because they tend to be somewhat more pro-
gressive as far as the use of technology, plus they have more funding tradi-
tionally. For our assessments business, that started because it just made a 
heck of a lot of sense. And it wasn’t until two to two and a half years ago 
during the recession that the K–12, because of the lack of funding for text-
books, has really had a huge, dramatic, passionate shift in moving to using 
online technology, iPads, and all that kind of technology and capability. 
Yourdon: That’s an interesting area that you’ve mentioned, because ob-
viously not only has technology changed that authors, like me, and editors 
publish and produce a book, but it’s completely transformed the market-
place in terms of the consumers and customers and their expectations of 
how they’re going to get the content. And even more than that, you 

CIOs at Work 
 
139  
probably have seen some of the material that Nicholas Carr has written—
he’s got a book called The Shallows3, which basically argues that because of 
the Internet he would never be able to read War and Peace today because 
he just can’t maintain that attention span. And I assume that that has got 
to have an enormous impact on publishers, too. 
Mooney: Well, we also have a “professional,” basically it’s a type of buyer 
that borders on—I was going to say “Borders,” but I’m not sure Borders is 
going to be around. I think what’s happening is the Internet, but it’s also—I 
wouldn’t say generational, but it’s more… 
I have three children. Two are in grad school and one’s in undergrad at the 
University of Florida. He’s a senior. First of all—one’s in business school, 
one’s in law school, and the youngest is in business, he’s a business major at 
the University of Florida—hardly any of them buy textbooks. Now the pro-
fessors require that they do or there are supplemental products. In addition 
to that, I would say that my son who’s at the University of Florida, probably 
about 60 to 70 percent of his courses were online. So I feel that the shift is 
happening, and I don’t know where the cutoff is, and I don’t think it neces-
sarily has to do with age. 
But to your point there’s a medium, with the iPad and all the different de-
vices that we have now where people that are coming up are feeling much 
more comfortable with the type of technology. As an example, you can see 
the shift and transition taking place on planes. I take the train around New 
York quite a bit and you see, especially the trains going out to New Jersey, 
where people are actually using the Kindle and those types of devices. And 
I’m also an adjunct professor at Columbia University and was at George 
Washington University—and the students today—well, they’re not kids, but 
they’d be in their late 20s or early 30s—do not think anything of using a de-
vice and/or a mobile device to actually transact stuff, but to also read. 
And so I think that print will always be here. We’ve always said that. I think 
the percent is going to go down. We’re always going to have libraries, but 
obviously not as a library exists today. It’s changing within schools and other 
public libraries and the world of people that are there. And what we’re see-
ing in particular is, if you were to say, “Where should we be and what 
should we be dedicating to spend our time and energy?” It’s really around 
mobile computing. And in particular, what we’re doing is providing 
educational content and reference content. On the professional side and 
                                                
3 W. W. Norton & Company, 2011. 

Chapter 7 | Mark Mooney:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, McGraw-Hill Education 
 
140  
our career side we provide medical reference material to doctors on hand-
held devices, so that has transpired or started to transpire.  
The other area is the whole social media space. [I’ll] tell a story: [there] was 
a trivia contest, it was a product that still exists from McGraw-Hill. It 
started on the international side in the UK called “GradeGuru.” And it was 
for children K through 12, and you could actually go in and provide home-
work. And then other students could come in and provide homework 
and/or evaluations, and they got points. And through the points you could 
actually get rewarded in our system. Well, I remember taking it, the con-
cept, to one of our higher ed, college sales meetings. And there were two 
separate reactions. One was, it was good stuff. Most of those were genera-
tionally a little bit younger. I call them the media gurus or digital divas of our 
organization that are comfortable—we have several people who have come 
from the BBC, and the BBC has done some significant work in Europe 
around the whole digital idea of educational product. And so they would 
say, “Okay, how are you going to make money on this? … We don’t have 
to sell the product, but we’ll do advertising.” You go to the opposite side of 
the room, and they said, “Well, first of all, we’ve got to charge. We’re not 
sure of the business model, so there’s that whole element of change. How 
do you pay for these digital products? Second of all, we never advertise on 
our products. We’re not going to do it even if it’s appropriate for kids.”  
So it was fascinating to watch this. You had a bunch of things, you had the 
mobile issue, you had the whole media issue, you had the whole issue about 
organization, advertising, the whole business model of how to get paid. 
That’s an example which is occurring periodically and now it’s occurring 
constantly with everything that we do. 
Yourdon: Absolutely. Since you’ve raised this generational issue—it’s on 
my agenda, but we might as well talk about it a little bit more now. You 
know, the CIO is typically the person who’s in charge of deciding what 
kind of technology’s going to be used throughout an organization, and 
now you’ve got this younger generation coming in, not only into the IT 
Department, but all through the organization, in every conceivable job 
role. What other changes or differences have you seen in terms of the 
expectations or assumptions of the younger generation and how they 
view technology? 
Mooney: Well, it is rather dramatic, and I would suggest that any CIO or 
anybody who stays in the old paradigm is “dead meat.” That’s what my sons 
tell me. And part of what I do when I do presentations is I try to tell them 
that organizations and CIOs have got to change dramatically. You know, as 
an adjunct professor I get exposed to a lot of things, and I think that they 

CIOs at Work 
 
141  
help in that process. The things that I see differently [are], obviously, it’s the 
stuff that you read about, but there isn’t loyalty to an organization. In the 
case of what we’re in, people are very loyal to publishing, and creating good 
educational products. 
Then if you take the culture within a lot of the “digital divas” that we have, 
which tend to be people that either came out of computer science and/or 
they’re coming out of some of the nontraditional curriculums. And what they 
end up doing is they like to see results quickly and with speed to delivery. 
You know, we have really moved away from a traditional waterfall way of 
doing software development unless it’s some of the back office. Then it’s ap-
propriate. They’re much more agile. That’s another technique or way of agile 
development, something I call “soft discipline guidelines.” The new “digital 
divas” don’t like hard structured ways of developing software, putting things 
together. What has enabled us to keep their attention and to satisfy some of 
those changes are these proofs of concepts, and the reason is you don’t have 
a large amount to spend. You don’t have a huge amount of time for the ac-
tual development phases that enable them to create something. 
Now that’s the good news. The bad news is while we’ll create something 
that at the time is rather sexy, exciting, that satisfies the existing require-
ments, from a scalability and from a long-term production system—we do 
not provide a system that scales for the pikes of usage. And that skill set, I 
would suggest, is in the testing, the QA, V&V4 area. It’s different, you’ll 
see a lot of times. And so what we’ve struggled with is how do you get 
from those proof of concepts to startup dealing with the people that like 
to create things quickly, but at the same time developing an industrial-
strength product? 
I’ll give you an example. We had an online system—it’s still running now, 
really good, called Connect—that will allow teachers and professors at a 
university to come in and customize their curriculum. They put it out online 
to the students. They can do a form of assessment on a Monday morning. 
So, all good stuff. So what happens is, you build it. You figure, based upon 
the forecast that you can handle maybe a thousand or two thousand stu-
dents. And the first quarter or two, that’s good. But then what happens is, 
you’ve got these great salespeople that are out there selling this, and on a 
Sunday evening, at about midnight, when all the college students are trying 
to get their homework done or practice for this form of test on Monday 
morning with the professor, it goes from the initial load of 2,000 to 5,000 to 
actually 30 to 35,000 students. And it crashes. And so that’s just an example. 
                                                
4 Quality assurance, Verification and Validation 

Chapter 7 | Mark Mooney:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, McGraw-Hill Education 
 
142  
And by the way, there’s a whole dynamic of hearing back from the profes-
sors and the students. There’s a whole dynamic of ensuring that at least 
within the media space, where there hasn’t been a lot of background expe-
rience in these types of transactional systems to ensure that you provide a 
level of quality, how do you shore that up, make sure that there’s a life cycle 
process that ensures that you produce products that are worthy of the 
quality that you want them to be? 
Yourdon: Okay. Very interesting.. One of the things that I’m hearing from 
a lot of the CIOs is that they finally have accepted the fact that they can’t 
really control what kind of technology today’s young workers bring into the 
office because, in fact, it’s their technology, it’s their smartphone or what-
ever. What they can protect is the network and the data and the infrastruc-
ture and that that seems to be where they’re drawing the line between 
things you control and things that you are much more flexible about. Is that 
generally true in publishing companies too? 
Mooney: Well, publishing companies tend to be somewhat conservative. 
Having said that, what we have done both with handheld devices and 
hardware servers, and also the use of cloud… [I]nstead of saying that 
there’s one device or there’s one tool that you have, what we try to do is 
give either two or three alternatives and then let them work within that 
framework. The reason we do that is, number one, it gives them flexibility. 
I’m convinced too that it allows them to explore, which is good for the or-
ganization. Having said that, what we don’t enable is having 20 devices, 30 
vendors—which we’ve had in the past, where everybody’s got their own 
thing using their own tool using different open-source capabilities in one 
area but not in the other. 
And so, by doing the soft discipline and having the option of maybe two or 
three capabilities, it allows them to play, create, and also satisfy the re-
quirements and at the same time, from a corporate standpoint, provide 
some level of standardization. And a good example of that is we were tradi-
tionally a BlackBerry shop. Obviously, in the state that we’re in, when the 
iPhone came out, it made—and this is even before the iPad, a couple of 
years ago—it made a heck of a lot of sense for us to just transition to the 
iPhone. Most of the students in the K–12, let alone the college space, were 
using them. We had big internal battles about how to do that. So again, go-
ing back to this proof-of-concept theme that I seem to continue to be on, 
we had a higher ed, college sales meeting. Traditionally we have about 800 
sales reps, and honestly they tend to be not technical in nature. There’s 
probably a cluster that are. 

CIOs at Work 
 
143  
And so what we did is we actually bought 100 iPhones and we enabled 
the e-mail capability—which doesn’t sound like a big deal, but when 
you’re “breaking a standard,” it was. Two, what we did is we were using 
salesforce.com. They had just started. We gave the capability for them to 
actually do transactions using salesforce.com. Third, we have an Oracle 
supply management system—that’s the ERP that I made a reference to 
and is the foundation now of our orders, and they can actually take or-
ders and place orders and look up pricing and catalog and product infor-
mation, all on the iPhone. It was the most I’ve been liked as a CIO, I think 
in my whole career. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Mooney: You know, we’re giving them a device, we paid for them, and it 
was basically placing them in front of a customer where, as an institution or 
an organization, a vertical market we were kind of conservative, but meeting 
the needs of our customers. And traditionally the majority of our customers 
were using it at the same time. 
Yourdon: Very interesting. Let me circle back for just a second and ask 
one last question about the day-to-day job. One of the things that has be-
come much more clear to me after about a dozen of these interviews is that 
no CIO operates alone. He almost always has a team of people reporting to 
him who handle various aspects of the overall job. And I’m curious to know 
what you think are the most important attributes or characteristics of peo-
ple that you would have on the CIO team helping you carry out your over-
all mission. 
Mooney: Well, something about computers, because I was on a panel 
about a year ago and we had a heated argument about this. Obviously, you 
have to have a level of technical skill set—and again, my undergrad is in en-
gineering and I think it helps with credibility. I’m not a good engineer any-
more, you know, because I’ve been so far removed, but I do think that 
there’s a level of technical expertise that is absolutely required. And maybe 
it’s 30 or 40 percent of the makeup. The other 60 to 70 percent, even more 
so today, is the whole issue of strategy or being able to execute strategy, 
the whole issue of communicating and aligning the technology goals with the 
business goals. The whole issue as we commonly refer to it as sitting at the 
table and coming across as a peer as opposed to a techie person, as some-
body that people have to tolerate or somebody that they don’t understand. 
And that is more through influence, business development, being able to 
communicate and present and provide competitive intelligence and knowl-
edge about your marketplace that, back when I started or even in the last 
five to ten years, was necessary but not as critical as it is now. 

Chapter 7 | Mark Mooney:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, McGraw-Hill Education 
 
144  
I see nuts and bolts, too, in that all organizations have a high dependency on 
technology. Depending on the culture of the organization, it will depend on 
how they leverage that skill set and the individual that is in that role. Now 
we got into a little bit of a tiff on the discussion, and it’s come up a couple of 
times even in the last month or two—I’m convinced that what’s happening 
now is the CIOs ended up reporting into the CEOs and everybody was clap-
ping and saying, “We finally get a seat at the table and get some influence.”  
And then I believe there’s a dynamic going on where they’re going back and 
they’re either reporting to the COOs or chief administrative or chief of 
staff. And I am convinced that—and this is where we got in the heated dis-
cussion—that that is not good. People say, “Well, it has to do with who’s 
the CFO or who’s the COO,” and I agree with that, but I believe that if 
we’re not careful as far as the role of the CIO and the impact that good 
CIOs can have on an organization, that where they fit, how they fit, and 
who and when they get access to people about that is critical. 
Yourdon: Interesting. But does all of this apply equally well to your imme-
diate subordinates, that is, the team that helps the CIO do his job? 
Mooney: Well, it’s different. The answer’s yes. As you move down through 
the career spectrum, if you look at the vice president level and the director 
level, the same attributes that are necessary with the CIO I believe are ab-
solutely critical at that level. Now what’s happened with us—I don’t know 
about other industries—we pushed quite a bit of the hard-core technical 
development offshore. So we have relationships with Tata, Wipro, HCL, and 
that was a major push about six years ago, well, even when we did the ERP, 
so I would even say seven, eight years ago. 
Now it was done for a myriad of reasons. One is to keep costs down. Two, 
if you look at the way that the offshore companies work, you’ve got people 
that have the technical skill set. The problem is we have lacked the level of 
technical skill set residing within the organization—where the business’s 
knowledge, communication, and influence for technical people is absolutely 
critical. At the lower end of the career spectrum, the technical skill set is 
still absolutely critical. And what we found by pushing too much offshore—
and we’re actually bringing it back in—specifically around the media devel-
opment and digital products development, is that we lost some of that tech-
nical skill set that was absolutely critical. And the reason is because the 
world’s changing so fast. I mean, you take all the change and then you com-
press it within a short period of time… 
The example I use is with Salesforce.com and those using the cloud: look at 
what happened to them as an organization, let alone their growth, let alone 

CIOs at Work 
 
145  
how you use Salesforce. It’s an example where you need that hard-core 
technical skill set on-site. Secondly, I made reference to the fact that we did 
pretty well on some of the proofs of concepts, but what we have not done 
well is the testing systems integration and scalability testing. And I’m con-
vinced that you have to have that skill set resident within the organization. 
Now, for the CEOs and the executive VPs, they don’t really care what’s 
happening behind the door, but they do know that they want their systems 
up on a Monday morning or a Sunday night and not failing. 
Yourdon: Oh, absolutely. What about issues of trust and integrity and 
just being able to work well together? I’ve had several CIOs saying, 
“These days, in this economy, we’re all working 12 hours a day, and so 
you’ve got to have a team of people who get along with each other.” Do 
you find that important in terms of the kind of team you’ve built to help 
you run your job? 
Mooney: Well, two things. You’re 24/7. I do leadership conferences twice 
a year and it’s not only for the technical people, but it’s for the businesses. 
And part of it is to create what you’re talking about, so the whole trust 
thing—it’s common sense, but if people know one another really well be-
yond the day-to-day of just doing their work, they tend to be more trusting. 
If there’s an issue, they will bring it up sooner and that kind of thing. The 
issue is, you’re working 24/7. The “my dad is coming home at five o’clock at 
night” is gone. The expectation on the systems side is that people need to 
be available whenever. We’re very good from a balancing standpoint—we 
try to be good from a family balancing standpoint. But the expectation from 
the front is that this is not a 9-to-5. So within the technical organization, we 
have been able to achieve the balancing act by being flexible and supportive 
to the needs of our employees. 
The problem comes if you become too confident in yourself within the 
technology organization and don’t bridge that to the businesses. I’m finding 
we have little “pockets”—especially in the media groups, if one is not care-
ful, they become proud of what they do, and have their egos get in the way 
of supporting the business and ultimately the customer. 
Yourdon: [laughter] Actually, that’s a good point, because I’ve seen varia-
tions on that with just about all of the interviews I’ve done. And the ques-
tion I’ve asked of the CIO is, how do you persuade your peers in these 
other business areas to either follow a technology path that you think is 
important or to avoid a technology path that you think is dangerous given 
that they do have big egos and they’re obviously very successful in their 
business area and at best they are peers? You certainly cannot boss them 

Chapter 7 | Mark Mooney:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, McGraw-Hill Education 
146  
around and give them direct orders. So how do you get them to kind of go
along with your view of how technology should be used? 
Mooney: Well, we’ve done everything—and I don’t want this to sound silly
and trite—in New York we have made provisions where our employees do
not have to wear ties or dress formally. 
So there’s that. The other issue where I’ve had significant success is you put
them in front of the senior business leaders and you let them share with
them the excitement about what they’re doing, not so much from a hard-
core technical standpoint, but from a customer perspective. We’ve got one
individual, he’s up in New York, he looks like a model of one of these digital
media people that I made reference to. And he’s so passionate about what
he does. The only issue is, we need to make sure that his presentations and
the involvement is limited because what he does tend to do is transition
into the hard-core technical—and then what happens is we lose the senior
managers and the businesses because they’re thinking more about, “How do
you price it? This technical product, how do you actually deploy it?” and that
type of thing. 
The other thing is to foster innovation. We have departments within my
organization, one in particular over in the UK, where I have found that I
can create these innovation centers, where there just seems to be less bu-
reaucracy. We have a small one in New York. And I let those pockets,
where there’s probably between ten to twenty people, dress the way they
want, they can wear their headphones all day, and they basically behave
differently, and there’s an acknowledgment in the business that we need
those innovation centers to create what we need to do. 
Yourdon: Interesting. Let me switch gears at this point. I would like to talk
to you about what keeps you awake at night. What are the big problems
and concerns and issues that you worry about as a CIO? 
Mooney: We made reference to it: I’m talking infrastructure. I’m talking
everything from the data center to the existing hardware that we’re using
to the network. Really, for us, it’s the bandwidth and ensuring that we’re
meeting the needs of the business. It’s sort of good news because we know
the digital space and product is growing. So how do you meet that demand?
Because it’s very, very hard to predict. And how do you do that in a way
that you’re not spending too much money, but at the same time you’re not
going to catch some problems with some failures? So I said, so that’s more
one of infrastructure, bandwidth, and keeping up with the existing products
that we have. 

CIOs at Work 
 
147  
It’s very hard for us to forecast, that whole space, and I think we have some 
pretty good experts. And then the other challenge is making sure that when 
we do forecast that we can react quickly. So that’s one in particular and 
that’s more tactical, operational in nature. The other area … is making sure 
that we keep the appropriate skill sets. As a CIO I’ve worked very well in an 
organization creating an exchange of organizations, people that are proud, 
our retention is good. The concern I have is the people that you need, refer-
ring back to this new generation and the media divas. Making sure that we 
can attract them and then that we retain them and we keep them energized. 
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Mooney: And that is a space because McGraw-Hill is a great company, it’s 
a super organization, but we’re somewhat conservative in nature and bring-
ing those people into that type of a culture is very difficult. You say, “Wait 
a second. We’re all in the middle of a recession. People can’t find jobs.” I 
found that even now that finding the good and the best people is still diffi-
cult. And I would suggest that going offshore isn’t necessarily the answer to 
that either. 
Yourdon: Yeah, I would certainly agree with that. 
Mooney: And so that’s the second one. And then the third would be mak-
ing sure that we’re looking out into the future, so the innovation centers—
we don’t like to call them “R&D”—working with the appropriate people 
from the standpoint that the market is shifting so fast that we’re making 
sure that we can meet the market’s trends and needs. 
I’ll give another example. We can talk about the figures if you want to pro-
duce it or publish it. I have a friend who has a small company or used to 
have it—he just sold it. Neat guy, it’s in the K–12 business. Basically, they 
provide infrastructures for schools for wireless. And I remember the day 
and we were giving him $30,000 and $40,000 contracts and he was barely 
getting along. Now that was five years ago. He just sold his business for 
$120 million. 
Yourdon: Wow. 
Mooney: So News Corp. is creating an educational vertical. Joel Klein, who 
used to be the chancellor, the head of the schools in New York, has come 
over and he’s working for News Corp. So here’s a competitor, News 
Corp., that was, at least as far as my perspective, never competing directly 
with McGraw-Hill or the educational publishers—which has made a con-
certed effort to go digital, to invest significantly through mergers and acqui-
sitions—we were caught off-guard, if you will. So the other thing that con-

Chapter 7 | Mark Mooney:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, McGraw-Hill Education 
 
148  
cerns me is that coming from a competitive standpoint, how do you stay on 
top of the heap? 
Yourdon: Very interesting. One last major area to chat with you about for 
five minutes or so. What would you say are the key technology trends that 
have really changed the IT industry over the last 10, 20, 30 years? 
Mooney: Going way back . . . you and I talked about this back in the day 
when I was in the military and the government and, you know, the whole 
shift to the minicomputer and then you see, without telling all the stories 
that you well know, the shift to the laptop—oh, not the laptop, but the PC. 
And then what’s happened of late is you take all of that and you compress 
it—obviously, the Internet had a significant impact. Mobile devices I think 
will continue to have and are having a significant impact on the evolution of 
technology. Cloud computing has revolutionized the tech world, both tech-
nically and from a financial perspective; and whether you believe that it’s 
here or not, it’s here. The issue is it changes the game and rules we play by 
on how we use data centers, those types of things. 
It’s fascinating, because I also have a franchise and a small business, which I’ll 
share with you quickly … here in a little bit. If you look at the way busi-
nesses do business as a result of the whole social networking side and if you 
go out and you watch Social Network, the movie, and then you see what’s 
happened and then you look at the Middle East, and we’re getting a little bit 
on sort of the political side here, and what’s happened in these countries by 
the use of these technologies that probably didn’t even exist ten years ago. 
Facebook has enabled the shift in political power in the Middle East. What 
that is, is an indication that we’re compressing a type of technology such as 
that, that has a huge impact on the way, not only on the way we do busi-
ness, but on the rest of the world. 
So I think social networking will continue to have a continued significant 
draw. Now it’s interesting. I’ve been in discussions with the people out in 
Silicon Valley. They say that they’re concerned that if you talk gaming, mo-
bility, social networking—those three things—that they anticipate we’re 
starting to get into a little bit of a bubble. But those three in particular I’m 
seeing, at least in the education space, and if you take gaming in particular, 
the way people learn will continue to change dramatically. 
Yourdon: That’s interesting. I hadn’t thought about the gaming aspect of it. 
There’s one aspect that I would think would be enormously relevant to 
publishers in the education world. You know, we now live in a society 
where we’ve got the technology to support it but also the available time so 
that any of us individually can create intellectual content for the greater 

CIOs at Work 
 
149  
good of humanity. It’s out there and free to be used, in Egypt or Libya or 
whatever, and we obviously didn’t have that ten years ago. 
Mooney: Absolutely. And to your point, sometimes we tend to think U.S., 
domestic, and so your point is what is happening is the impact it’s having … 
worldwide, and it’s more than just business, generating money. I mean, 
you’re talking socially, you know, having been in the military, my son was in 
Iraq for a year. The impact of technology can have to help the world. I was 
real proud that the “one laptop per child” concept originated out of MIT 
Media Labs and [Nicholas] Negroponte. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Mooney: And you know, it’s taken off but not to the level probably that we 
would have wished, but we actually got involved in that and started putting 
content on the OLPC computer. And the idea included everything from us-
ing solar energy to help generate enough electricity for the computer and 
those kinds of things. It was just fascinating. 
Yourdon: Let’s see . . . you mentioned cloud computing also as something 
that you think is very important. Do you see that continuing on as a major 
trend into the future? 
Mooney: Absolutely. I think we’re in the early stages, so there has to be 
some level of structure, and I know “structure” is probably not the right 
word, but capable of security and things like that. And I’ll tell you why I 
think it’s going to happen. If you look at what transpired in our industry and 
how we behave differently, we have large data centers, building large data 
centers. It enables businesses and its CIOs throughout to compress the 
amount of time and the amount of money that you spend on product devel-
opment, which if you put that in a tool set in the CIO’s bag of tricks, will be 
very powerful. It will enable everyone to produce proof of concepts quicker 
and for less of an investment. Now, they’re not production-ready-type sys-
tems, but we can actually prototype them and show them to the businesses, 
and say, “Touch and feel this. Do you like it? Do you want to change it?” 
Well, obviously, it keeps the costs down. It allows you to fluctuate—I made 
reference to this little case study story about college students on Sundays—
so you can scale up when you need to and back down and do it in a way 
that’s cost-effective. 
I’ll give you another real quick story. We had the sales meeting and we were 
using Salesforce.com. It was out in Phoenix. There was a large Marriott. 
Something happened with the network coming out of the Marriott, so all 
these products that we had going back to the data center in Princeton, New 
Jersey, we couldn’t have access. What we did, we were able to reroute—

Chapter 7 | Mark Mooney:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, McGraw-Hill Education 
 
150  
well, the sales reps were able to use Salesforce.com. I mean—we all sat 
there and looked at ourselves, saying, “My God. The world’s changing.” 
Yourdon: Interesting. All right. One last question, which is: where do you 
go from here? Now that you’ve been a CIO for a long time, what kind of 
future do you see for yourself at this point? 
Mooney: I’ve gotten to this aspect of my life for a myriad of reasons, so I 
want to give back. Not that I haven’t, but I mean more so. And what I mean 
by that is through mentoring. I want to continue to mentor. We as a family 
have a foundation—I’m on the board of MOUSE5, so those things become 
more important to me. Number two is there’s been an entrepreneur part of 
me that I’ve beaten up and hidden, probably out of my desire to create a 
family lifestyle. Separate from this, we started a franchise. I have another 
business, which does not conflict with McGraw-Hill. And I really see me 
starting, being an entrepreneur, being on the business side. And what I’ve 
enjoyed, having fun with the franchise in particular, we’ve been able, in the 
worst recession, to hire probably about 40 people. And independent of the 
fact that we’re making money, what’s been good for me is just being able to 
hire people. It’s the same people that wouldn’t have had jobs in the past. But 
again, it’s mostly in education and wellness and mostly around the technology 
side of the business. 
Yourdon: Interesting. So you intend to keep your hand in, but maybe go 
into more of an entrepreneurial direction. 
Mooney: Absolutely. 
Yourdon: Well, that’s very, very interesting. All right. Well, I certainly ap-
preciate this. You know, we could probably talk all day long about some of 
these things, but my time’s up, so I probably should bring things to a close. I 
really appreciate your taking the time.  
 
                                                
5 MOUSE is a youth development organization, with locations throughout the United States, 
“that empowers underserved students to provide technology support and leadership in their 
schools, supporting their academic and career success.” 

C H A P T E R 
8 
Dan Wakeman 
Vice President and CIO, 
Educational Testing Services 
Daniel Wakeman is Vice President and Chief Information Officer for Educa-
tional Testing Service (ETS), where he is responsible for all ETS information tech-
nology assets and activity. In this capacity, he also is responsible for ensuring that 
ETS strategy and tactics are appropriately informed and influenced by information 
technology. Previously, he was the CIO of the Elementary and Secondary Education 
Strategic Business Unit. Wakeman’s first position at ETS was that of Chief Tech-
nologist Officer (CTO), where he was responsible for ensuring ETS had the needed 
information technologies required to be competitive and secure.  
Prior to joining ETS, Wakeman was the co-founder and CTO for Elastomer-
Solutions.com, a business-to-business exchange for the elastomers industry. Before 
that, he was the Director of e-Business for DuPont Dow Elastomers. During his 
career, Wakeman has held a number of information systems-related and business 
positions with Dow Chemical, IBM, D&N Bank, and the U.S. Air Force.  
 
Ed Yourdon: It would be interesting to ask how you got to this position 
here. Now you had been a CIO previously, hadn’t you? 
Dan Wakeman: No. I’d been a CTO. 
Yourdon: So, how did you go then from being a CTO to your current 
CIO position? 

Chapter 8 | Dan Wakeman:  
Vice President and CIO, Educational Testing Services 
 
152  
Wakeman: Well, I was hired as the CTO here. And, initially, what I was 
doing when I first came here was business development activities, like trying 
to take the educational research that was being developed and wrap it with 
IT and bring it to market. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Wakeman: But I’ve got to tell you, those first few years here doing that, 
we weren’t enormously successful at that, and it was because the model we 
were trying to use wasn’t really the practical one, which we learned. At that 
time, the CEO was fairly new and he had brought in a lot of new people. 
Many of us saw this wealth of R&D that wasn’t being monetized. It wasn’t 
going to market, and they said, “Oh my gosh. Here’s this wealth of oppor-
tunities to bring to market.” Those of us coming from the for-profit busi-
ness world didn’t really understand the complexities of the education busi-
ness and how it works, and that it doesn’t work like a typical market. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Wakeman: In Education there are many influencers and there are many 
different channels as well as many barriers. Whether they’re government or 
union or schools or teachers or parents, you’ve got a lot of constituents 
who have influence over decision making and the market’s enormously frag-
mented. So, with the exception of selling textbooks, there aren’t many large 
sales opportunities. Textbooks and assessments are usually done at the state 
level . . . but there’s not a lot beyond that that’s done at the state level. 
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Wakeman: Most educational product sales are all done at the state level, 
district and even the school level, so it’s very fragmented and we soon dis-
covered that the only way to sell into those markets was with a huge, well 
connected sales force. And so we tried to build one and we found out that 
it’s really expensive and the revenue for each sale is small. It doesn’t fit the 
way we typically operate. Over the past 65 years, ETS has been very suc-
cessful in the creation of assessments that help institutions and test takers 
make good decisions. Typically, this is done through RFP responses or sell-
ing to a large authorizing agency, such as the GRE Board. We discovered 
that the fragmented sales model we were pursuing was not a good fit with 
what traditionally we had done very well. So, it was a retrenchment from 
that to kind of a get back to the basics of what we really do. And then for 
the last five years, that’s what we’ve been focused on—optimizing the busi-
ness model that’s been so successful here in the past and trying to really 
make that run as effectively as possible. 

CIOs at Work 
 
153  
Yourdon: Right, right. So was all that part of, did it also involve or include 
your transition from CTO to CIO? 
Wakeman: At that time, I was the CTO, but as you can see, I was not 
working in a typical CTO manner. My transition was driven by a need to 
improve the Enterprise Architecture at ETS. At that time, ETS was about 
five years into an infrastructure outsourcing engagement and the CIO had 
come to recognize that there was no formal management for enterprise 
architecture. He asked me to formally take on the job of CTO and create 
an Enterprise Architecture Origination (EAO), which I did. That organiza-
tion is still in place today and has made great strides in slenderizing our in-
frastructure, effectively managing the life cycle of our technologies, and re-
searching new technologies that can benefit the company.  
Yourdon: That’s interesting. 
Wakeman: So I ran that group for a few years, then was asked to, in addi-
tion to my CTO duties, be the CIO for the K–12 business. While this 
started out as a part-time job, it soon became a full-time one and I relin-
quished my duties of CTO to a former mentor of mine, John Taylor, who 
was the CTO for DuPont. I thoroughly enjoyed my time as the CIO for the 
K–12 business, which came as somewhat of a surprise as I always viewed 
myself primarily as a technologist. After a few years as the CIO, I was asked 
by the CIO at the time, “How’d you like to be CIO for all IT?” And I said, 
“I’d really like to do that.” And he says, “No, no. How’d you like to be the 
CIO for IT?” And I said . . . I’m looking at him and I’m going, “What is he 
talking about? Yeah, I just told you I would like to be.” [And the CIO re-
plied], “No, no, no. Right now!” 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Wakeman: What made the transition from the very technically oriented 
CTO to the more business-focused CIO was how I demonstrated a willing-
ness as well as desire to grow and learn new non-technical skills. I had dem-
onstrated in the CIO position in the K–12 business that I could learn the 
business and I could be very business-oriented, and I met with a lot of cus-
tomers, helped with f sales, and sought to help the K–12 business grow. I 
have always been good at helping the business understand how IT can help 
them win new business or improve operational efficiency. During this time, I 
really honed these skills as well as my interpersonal skills, which in a CIO 
role are probably more important than technical skills alone.  
Yourdon: Hmm. 

Chapter 8 | Dan Wakeman:  
Vice President and CIO, Educational Testing Services 
 
154  
Wakeman: I believe that I was offered the position of CIO because I 
had effectively demonstrated I had the skills to work with the business, 
lead change, manage technical staff, and bring a technical perspective to 
business challenges.  
Yourdon: Absolutely. But you mentioned something just a second ago that 
I want to elaborate on for just a moment ’cause I’ve heard similar things 
from roughly half a dozen CIOs that I’ve already interviewed. One of the 
things that several of them have said is that in this position that you’re in 
now, it’s very important to maintain a reasonable core of technical skills. 
And I was curious as to your opinion on that. That’s sort of where you 
came from, but is it important to maintain? 
Wakeman: You know, that’s interesting, because when I was at Dow, I 
worked for a CIO who came from the business side. He was a sales guy, and 
the guy had had zero IT skills. And the problem was, as anyone who had IT 
skills could see, was he lacked a solid understanding of the decisions he was 
making. He was also fairly easily persuaded to make dubious IT decisions. 
Yourdon: By vendors or just anyone? 
Wakeman: By vendors or IT people, key people, who wanted to get their 
way and once he would build a trust with a certain person, he’d believe what-
ever they’d say because he had no way to evaluate that on his own. So a guy 
who’s a very good mentor to me, John Taylor, who was the CTO at DuPont 
and then came to work here as a consultant for many years for us, he used to 
always say, “You can’t buy a product if you’re not an informed buyer. And to 
be an informed buyer means you need to understand what you’re buying.” 
And he said, “If you don’t have the skills to understand that, then you’d better 
get somebody in with you that can be your informed buyer.”  
So I think, despite the fact that the whole world of IT is changing, there’s no 
doubt about it. There are a lot of people selling services that encapsulate a 
lot of the complexity of the IT processes and systems and everything, right? 
So you can go buy a Salesforce.com and not really understand anything 
about how they built it or how it works. But if you do understand or at 
least have some understanding of it, you’re going to make a better decision 
about picking that product versus another one because you’re going to ask 
questions like, “Well, how am I going to integrate it with my back-end sys-
tems?” or, “How are you doing security?”  
Yourdon: Right. 
Wakeman: Or, “How are you doing DR [disaster recovery]?” You’re go-
ing to ask questions that the uninformed buyer won’t ask. They’re going to 

CIOs at Work 
 
155  
be asking, “Well, does this process? Can I do this? Can I do this?” which are 
relevant and important questions to the business side, but they’re not going 
to ask a lot of the back-end questions like, “Are you storing my data in 
Ethiopia?”  
Yourdon: [laughter] Right. 
Wakeman: Where is your data? They’re going to look to someone else to 
do that, and if it’s so easy to go buy those services now, they might not even 
bother to, and then only to find out later. What usually happens is, they’ll go 
and get a service, and the first thing they want to do is tie it in to all the 
back-end systems. And then they’ll start sending XML files and pretty soon 
they’ve got an unsustainable process. You can’t run a business that way. It’s 
not scalable. It works initially, but then no one in those groups wants to 
keep doing it. Over time, operational complexity and the lack of clear proc-
esses and costs outweigh the benefit that was originally sought. 
Yourdon: Okay, well, that’s good that you’ve confirmed that. You men-
tioned another thing that I want to explore just a little bit also, with the 
magic word “mentor.” You said it was a gentleman from DuPont? 
Wakeman: John Taylor. 
Yourdon: Is it just one or has there been a series of mentors? 
Wakeman: Well, it’s been different mentors in different areas for me. If I 
go way back, when I was in the military, there was a guy I worked for, Steve 
Wegrznyek who has passed away since, he was really my first mentor. I was 
just a young airman, and he was a civilian, and he taught me a lot about 
managing and leading people, organizing and he really took an interest in 
helping me out quite a bit. I ended up working for him for like three years 
and grew a tremendous amount during this time. It was his belief in me that 
gave me the confidence to grow and develop. He pushed me out of my 
comfort zones in a way that was challenging yet rewarding. I really miss him.  
Yourdon: Aha. 
Wakeman: And I did quite well in the Air Force under him, so he gave me 
a lot of confidence in myself, just saying, “You know, you can do more. You 
think you can.” You know, just those simple things. But it was just enough 
to get you going. He was a great mentor to me. And another one—this is a 
kind of a funny one—there was this guy that at DuPont-Dow, who was a 
sales guy to us. He was our CSC sales rep. And so you could call him a 
Friendster, a vendor—you know, Dilbert has that thing… 
Yourdon: Right. 

Chapter 8 | Dan Wakeman:  
Vice President and CIO, Educational Testing Services 
156  
Wakeman: So I knew that, and I knew he was trying to sell us products,
but he was a very insightful guy and he knew a lot about IT and the business
of running IT. I learned a lot from him. I don’t know if I’d call him as much a
mentor as [much as] somebody who was willing to share a lot . . . we would
just get together and talk, and he would just talk a lot about how his com-
pany sells its products and how they go to market, and how they win clients.
And I learned an enormous amount about how vendors work from him. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Wakeman: I also learned a lot about the whole IT industry from him, to
be honest with you, because he had a real keen insight into the IT industry.
When you’re young in IT, you don’t think of it that way. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Wakeman: It’s a job. But it’s really a big business in itself. And so he gave
me this whole perspective that I had never had, so I learned an enormous
amount from him. And then there is John Taylor, somebody I met at
DuPont, and he was just a very insightful person who really has a keen
awareness of IT and how to practically use it. I can remember—I don’t
know if I should repeat this, but—he was really not a big fan of Microsoft.
And so he and I and a few others went to meet Microsoft, and we’re repre-
senting DuPont, and they were trying to sell us all their products. And they
just came across like they knew it all and they understood big business, and
John just let them have it. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Wakeman: John remarked, “You guys don’t understand a thing about how
big businesses work. You don’t know what you’re talking about.” He ex-
plained it all to them. What I learned from John was how to ask really good
questions because that’s one thing he really did, and how to know when
you’re being bamboozled. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Wakeman: By asking the right questions, you could quickly determine
whether the vendor, or somebody you’re working with, really knew what
they were talking about and whether they could deliver. That was his special
skill, and one I have tried for years to emulate. 
Yourdon: That’s very interesting. One last question in this general area.
Either before or immediately after coming into the CIO role, were you
given any specific training? Did they send you back to get an MBA or any-
thing of that sort? 

CIOs at Work 
 
157  
Wakeman: Not anything specific to a CIO role, but I have many courses in 
leadership, interpersonal skills, communications skills and other soft skills. I 
already had an MBA, and after I became CIO, I attended the Gartner CIO 
Academy. knew that was available. Years before I had become CIO, I had 
read the book called The New CIO Leader by Marianne Broadbent and Ellen 
Kitzis, and had met these two at a Gartner conference, and I thought to 
myself, boy, if I ever became a CIO, this is what I’d do. So, guess what hap-
pened when I became CIO? I pulled this book out and I called Ellen up—she 
was the first one I called—and I got her at Gartner and I said, “Would you 
help me do this? I want to do what’s in your book.” And she said, “Sure.” So 
she came to ETS, and she worked with us to do what’s in this book. We 
actually implemented pretty much everything that’s in here in my first cou-
ple of years here. 
Yourdon: Aha. 
Wakeman: Working with my leadership team at the time, we launched 
the initiative “Getting to Great,” G2G. The plan was to take this fairly good 
IT organization and make it into a really great IT organization, and the way 
we’re going to do it is by following the ten-step process that’s laid out in 
chapters of The New CIO Leader. Probably the most critical thing we learned 
during that process that really stuck is the demand-supply model. We split 
IT into a supply-demand organization and built a process framework around 
that split. It has worked very well as a way to understand the work we are 
asked to do, the demand, and how we supply resources to do that work. 
We have discovered that the most challenging process is effectively manag-
ing demand into supply. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Wakeman: Today, I have leaders that managed both the demand and sup-
ply side. On the demand side, the IT relationships managers work closely 
with the business units to understand the needs and requirements and con-
vert them into demand that is captured in our Book of Work. The supply 
side is responsible for providing the services, whether they’re through ven-
dors or they’re through our own capability. And then there’s Development, 
whose job it is to build the IT services used by the supply side to satisfy de-
mand. Development is a supply side function, and is also responsible for So-
lution Design, so Development straddles the line between Supply and De-
mand at times. Once the model was conceived, we went to work imple-
menting it, which was a major change initiative in and of itself. There was a 
new language for everyone to learn and many new processes to be devel-
oped, taught and monitored. 

Chapter 8 | Dan Wakeman:  
Vice President and CIO, Educational Testing Services 
 
158  
Yourdon: Aha, okay. 
Wakeman: The critical role on the supply side is the BTL. Are you familiar 
with IT account reps? 
Yourdon: Yes. 
Wakeman: At ETS, the Business Technology Liaison plays the role of the 
account representative. They work with the business to understand the 
needs and communicate our capabilities.  
Yourdon: Oh, okay.  
Wakeman: Each BTL has a small staff of business analysts to help them 
quantify the demand. And many of them sit right within the business teams 
and they work with them as part of the team. Our struggle continues to this 
day, though, to be the management of demand [from our business users] 
into supply [by our IT project teams]. 
Yourdon: Aha. 
Wakeman: That business process is the most difficult—if there’s anything 
I’ve learned, that’s where the hardest process is, is getting the demand and 
supply, because to do it effectively  you need to know your capacity and to 
match it against the demand. Given that this is a formidable challenge, we 
looked to see how others are effectively doing this. This has led us to begin 
implementing ITIL version 3, as our service management framework. 
Yourdon: Interesting. Well, you’ve also said something very interesting 
here that I’ve not pursued with some of the other people I’ve interviewed, 
though I’ve seen examples of it elsewhere. I don’t know how best to put it, 
but kind of creating a common mindset, in this case perhaps by getting eve-
ryone to read the book or— 
Wakeman: I must have given out hundreds of copies of the book. 
Yourdon: Yeah. Well, that’s kind of what I was going to ask, that’s occa-
sionally happened, I’m delighted to say. 
Wakeman: Everyone had this. This was everywhere. 
Yourdon: That’s occasionally happened with one or two of my books, 
which took me by surprise, but I’ve not heard other CIOs say that a critical 
thing in the development of their organization was creating shared values, 
shared vision—and it could be accomplished either by bringing in a consult-
ant or a book or various other things. 

CIOs at Work 
 
159  
Wakeman: That was the key. It was really to get people focused on, 
“We’re going to become a great organization, and here’s how we’re going 
to do it.” Because our mission as a company is to provide fair, valid and reli-
able assessments that advance quality and equity in education. Well, if we’re 
going to do that, and that’s critical and that’s important, we’ve got to do it 
without making errors and we have to do it well. So how do we support 
that? And one of the things The CIO Leader instructs you to do is to create 
your business maxims. Ellen Kitzis, one of the book’s authors, was hired to 
run three workshops composed of the senior leaders of the company. It 
was in these workshops we created the business maxims. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Wakeman: And from the business maxims we created the IT maxims. In 
fact, I have a meeting coming up to revisit those and to make sure they’re 
still relevant, which we do from time to time. To make sure the maxims we 
originally created are still our maxims, because they should be, right? 
They’re supposed to be long-lived. One of the things that came out of that 
was, given that we were struggling with trying to say, “We’re a learning 
company,” was “We are an assessment company.” And that became one of 
the business maxims. So we went from this kind of diffuse maxim, and 
reached outside of our core of assessment … and then we came back. We 
said, “No, first and foremost we’re in assessment.” And that became one of 
the business maxims. “We are an assessment company.” 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Wakeman: Another one that came out of that that’s still used widely to-
day—and it got reworded a little bit—was, “Do what we do best and part-
ner for the rest.”  
Yourdon: Aha. 
Wakeman: Thanks to these workshops I gained some much needed credi-
bility, because I was a brand-new CIO, to run those workshops. It demon-
strated that I was really interested in first focusing on what the business 
wanted and how I was going to ensure that IT fully supported the business. 
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Wakeman: I wouldn’t have done that had I not read this book. Ellen was 
just such a thrill to work with, so I’ve kept up with her over the years, just 
giving her updates on how we’ve been doing, but she was very influential in 
helping me work with that. And Gartner was too. I’m part of their EXP pro-
gram, so I have an account rep that I talk to every couple of weeks. 
1

Chapter 8 | Dan Wakeman:  
Vice President and CIO, Educational Testing Services 
 
160  
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Wakeman: And he helps me if I have questions or ideas. I can go get re-
search. I can talk to other analysts. I take my team every year to Gartner’s 
headquarters in Stanford and we pick four or five topics that we’re going to 
focus on.  
Yourdon: You’ve mentioned three related things in that explanation that I 
want to follow up on because I’m hearing a lot of common threads in my 
interviews. One of them was this point about being able to establish some 
credibility early on, and that’s something I’ve heard in different ways from a 
lot of the other CIOs. Some of them have said, “Here I am doing my job 
within the IT empire, and I’m pretty good at it—but obviously I’m at a peer 
level with other business leaders in other parts of the organization who 
have risen to some position of authority or power because they’re very 
good, but also because they’re very strong and they have very strong ideas, 
including they think they know how to do my job better than I do.”  
And I’m curious as to whether you ran into that, or this whole question of 
how to establish a relationship of trust and working together with business 
peers, especially ’cause you came in and you were the new CIO on the block. 
Wakeman: Right. There’s no doubt there are very strong personalities 
that are here, and many of them have their own ideas about how things 
should be done. The interesting thing about working here than other com-
panies I worked at—probably because the compan’s roots are in acade-
mia—it’s a very collaborative environment. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Wakeman: And people do tend to respect people with certain skills that 
they’re supposed to have, so you see a little bit more of that. Because of the 
jobs I had before here, I was known to many of them and they respected my 
technical skills—so when it comes to the domain of technology, I’m usually 
fairly credible. When it comes to the domain of business or R&D, I’m not an 
academic, nor do I pretend to be one. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Wakeman: And I’m definitely not from the R&D side of education, so I’ve 
had to be careful to respect my peers and know when their judgment or 
their input, combined with mine, will lead to the best answer. So that does 
mean there are times where we have respectful conflict We have to hash 
things out, but I think by building relationships with those key people first, 
when you get into those tense situations, you can depend on your relation-
ships to come to the best conclusion. 

CIOs at Work 
 
161  
Yourdon: Aha, okay. 
Wakeman: That’s how I’ve done it. I feel pretty good about my relation-
ships with my business peers. There’s one group at ETS, the vice presidents 
that run the functional centers where most of the operational work hap-
pens. And there’s the one group above that, the senior VPs that are 
responsible for all the functional and business areas.  
Yourdon: Well, it leads to the next kind of related question, which I again 
heard from almost all the CIOs. They all say, “You know, I’ve got a team of 
people who help me get the job done.” It may have been, for example, the 
three who were in your meeting earlier or whoever. And the question is, 
what characteristics do you look for—what are the most important charac-
teristics for people that you want to have on your team? What is it that you 
prize most? 
Wakeman: That’s a tough one because I definitely prize their ability to 
execute and [have] knowledge of their domain, but it has to be done with 
the ability to work with and lead people. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Wakeman: So I don’t know if I can say one thing. It’s a combination of 
leadership, personal integrity and the technical—I don’t know if I’d call it 
technical—but domain knowledge.  In leadership roles I seek people primar-
ily with strong interpersonal skills that can bring people together to get 
things done. Not people with an excess of persona, but people that truly 
care about other people and revel in the challenge of bringing out the best 
in those they lead. 
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Wakeman: So in different roles I may look for different skills, but at the 
same time, personal integrity is very high on my list. 
Yourdon: Well, I’ve heard that from several people. 
Wakeman: Very high. 
Yourdon: One or two other characteristics I’ve heard and I’d be curious as 
to your feeling about them. A couple of people have said, “I need people 
who are willing to work hard because with kind of the economy we’ve got, 
we’re all working 12 hours a day. And if you’re going to work for 12 hours a 
day with a group, they have to be people that get along with each other and 
who I get along with.” 

Chapter 8 | Dan Wakeman:  
Vice President and CIO, Educational Testing Services 
 
162  
Wakeman: Absolutely. I look for people to join the team, which is a very 
collaborative, highly functional team that really works well together, that I 
believe will contribute to the team. We have all used Gallup’s Strengths 
Based Leadership program to better understand and appreciate each other’s 
strengths. A small group of us worked with a coach for a whole year. The 
coaching focused on how to leverage each other’s strengths to do more 
than we can as individuals. It was a fantastic personal growth experience 
that has had great results.  
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Wakeman: I’ve come to the conclusion that sometimes you have to work 
a lot of hours, it’s not hours that define how much work gets done. 
Yourdon: True. 
Wakeman: And that’s a misconception a lot of people have. I have people 
here who work 8-hour days, and they get far more done than some people 
who work 12-hour days because they’re just a lot more effective and they 
know how to do work. They don’t waste a lot of time, and they go from 
task to task, they get things done, and they keep their meetings just to the 
right length, and if they’re done with that meeting they move on to the next 
thing. They’re just very effective at managing their time and getting and pri-
oritizing the work, and knowing what needs to be worked on and what can 
be not worked on. They have focus. 
So I tell this to my staff all the time: “One of the critical things you’re hired 
for is judgment. Judgment is very important in what I’m paying you to do. 
And by ‘good judgment,’ I mean judgment in how you manage your people, 
judgment in how you use your time, judgment in how you make decisions 
about what technologies and products you use. So I’m counting on your 
judgment. And that’s what I’m evaluating you on—the decisions you make.”  
Yourdon: Interesting, interesting. 
Wakeman: When you have a person with good integrity who has great 
judgment you have a star. 
Yourdon: That’s very interesting. Let me go into a couple of the more 
general questions. What would you say are the two or three top priorities 
that you tend to focus on? You’ve already said it’s the balancing the supply 
and demand side. Is that kind of the general answer there? 
Wakeman: No. I think that what I need to do is make sure that we are 
delivering, more than anything, the appropriate level of service to ensure 
that ETS can fulfill its mission. That’s the most important thing I need to do. 

CIOs at Work 
 
163  
Are the tools, the capabilities, the people, the processes and all the things 
we’re doing here helping ETS to fulfill its mission? And can I see a direct link 
between what we’re doing and the advancement of what the company’s do-
ing. I don’t want IT to be viewed as having to align to a mission. I want IT to 
be the mission, or part of the mission. We’re no different than marketing, 
we’re no different than sales, we’re no different than R&D. We are part of 
the company. We don’t need to align with it. I want to see us as ingrained 
into the business as everyone else. We work together. We build products 
together. We explore new markets together. We advance the company 
together. And where we can take what we know that’s special and unique, 
we do that, and we combine it with the other skills so that we actually get 
something that’s “1 + 1 = 3.” We’re really looking for that synergy and try-
ing to get more than just each of us working independently towards a com-
mon goal. We’re working together towards a common goal. 
Yourdon: And certainly, ETS as a business is very much about packaging 
and selling information—those assessments or whatever. Even an automo-
bile company these days is not really just making tangible widgets. It’s a 
whole bunch of code flying in close formation. 
Wakeman: It really is. 
Yourdon: But it’s more obvious that within ETS, you guys are in the infor-
mation business. 
Wakeman: Oh yeah. When you walk around our campus, you can’t find 
anything to describe us except people and buildings. It’s all in the intellectual 
property. There’s no factory creating tangible widgets. 
Yourdon: That certainly is true. Speaking of factory, one of the phrases I’ve 
heard quite often from some of the CIOs is that at least a part of their job 
is just keeping the lights on in the factory. How big a part is that for you? 
Wakeman: It’s a huge part. Operational excellence, as you know—any 
mistake we make in an assessment affects a person’s life and that means 
they might not become, for example, a teacher when they wanted to be-
come a teacher, or they might not get in the school they wanted to get into. 
Whether it’s GRE, TOEFL, Praxis, or the SAT. So we have to be very care-
ful, in that what we produce has accurate, reliable, and fair scores. And that 
all runs through the IT engine. That’s our factory. 
Yourdon: Some of the numbers you gave me when I was here last time 
were staggering in terms of the millions of tests that you process. 
Wakeman: We have to do them all, they have to be done perfectly. So our 
objectives are 100 percent on-time, 100 percent accurate score reports. And 

Chapter 8 | Dan Wakeman:  
Vice President and CIO, Educational Testing Services 
 
164  
the only way you can get there is to continually improve by learning from 
mistakes and making use of great quality programs such as Six Sigma. Great 
process plays a critical role as well, thus the reason we are implementing the 
ITIL v3 process framework. We continue to train staff in quality methods, 
defect detection, and continual improvement techniques. And it’s paying off. 
Defects continue to decrease and our customers are noticing. 
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Wakeman: We also embraced standardization in an effort to reduce com-
plexity and reduce variation. We’ve reduced the number of opportunities. 
The standardization effort is looking not just at where can we standardize; it’s 
focused on where can we standardize that will reduce our defect rates. From 
an IT perspective, one of the big areas I have to focus on is defects in code. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Wakeman: I have quite a big effort under way right now. I introduced the 
Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) process and the Reference Archi-
tecture over the past year. These are efforts to bring high-quality code 
that’s defect-free to production. And by “defect-free,” we mean there are 
no critical defects. There’s no such thing as perfectly defect-free code.  Our 
goal is to have no defects that have an impact to the business, such as a test 
taker getting the wrong score. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Wakeman: This has been an area of continuous focus for us and one in 
which we still have a lot of work to do. We will not yield until we have 
eliminated defects that can result in severity 1 incidents. We can settle for 
nothing less if we wish to serve the test takers with the level of service they 
expect from ETS. We have created a scorecard to ensure we are effectively 
measure our progress.  
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Wakeman: I’ll send you a copy of the scorecard, and an article that was 
written by Gartner about it. They actually did a best practice research note 
on our scorecard. 
Yourdon: You know, it’s interesting you mentioned this now. None of the 
other CIOs I’ve spoken to so far have mentioned scorecards.  
Wakeman: We worked really hard on getting a simple, one-page score-
card that defines what’s most important from a business perspective of what 
we do. And we track it. We use Six Sigma techniques to ensure our proc-
esses are in control. There is a control chart for each process metric. 

CIOs at Work 
 
165  
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Wakeman: Being a CIO of a big organization like mine, I’m always open to 
competition. There are many excellent firms out there that would like to 
run the IT department for ETS. It is my desire to be in a position where 
even if such a firm gains a sympathetic ear with ETS management I can say, 
“Compare us to anyone. Can they reach this level of quality? And if they 
can, what are they going to charge you?” We must be competitive, we must 
be service oriented and we must know ETS better than anyone else as the 
business has many other sources of IT supply now. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Wakeman: I don’t ever want to be in the position where it isn’t clearly 
visible the value we add to the organization. I want to quantify the value we 
add, not just through quality, but also through our costs being competitive.  
We benchmark ourselves each year, too, from a cost perspective. 
Yourdon: Well, that was going to be my next question. It’s one thing to 
have a scorecard for internal discussion, review, and so forth, but the next 
obvious step is benchmarking, which everybody’s aware of and lots of com-
panies do. But I’m intrigued that that also has now been part of the conver-
sation that I’ve had with other CIOs, that it hasn’t been right up in the front 
of their radar screen. 
Wakeman: We benchmark our costs each year using two firms’ yearly 
benchmark studies. Being in a small industry, it’s difficult to find good com-
panies to benchmark against, so we look to industries that are highly infor-
mation intensive, such as the financial industry. Each year we strive to be-
come more cost competitive.  
Yourdon: Okay. 
Wakeman: Currently I find that our costs as a percentage of revenue are 
higher than other information intensive industries. So I’ve been trying to 
bring that down, and I have. I’ve been able to bring down IT expenditures as 
a percentage of revenue by four percentage points over the past five years 
while delivering more projects and services than we have in the past. That’s 
one measure of value.  
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Wakeman: And we will continue to bring this down by standardizing our 
systems, processes and taking advantage of new technologies such as virtual-
ization and cloud computing.  
Yourdon: Right, right. 

Chapter 8 | Dan Wakeman:  
Vice President and CIO, Educational Testing Services 
166  
Wakeman: We also analyze how much of the revenue goes to innovation
or new products, O&M [operations and maintenance]. Our objective is to
change the split so more of our IT dollars go towards growth and less to-
wards maintenance.  
Yourdon: Interesting. Now, there’s one other related thing that I had
scribbled in as a question to ask you. Aside from metrics and quantitative
benchmarking, one of the things that seems to be almost universal is this
sense of being part of a club—the “CIO club”—so that you can ask ques-
tions, compare notes, just sort of schmooze with your CIO buddies. How
important is that in your case? 
Wakeman: Yes I do. I do some of it through Gartner, but I do more of it
through the CIO executive board. I go to a few of their events and I get in
group conference calls with them. But I also have picked up some great
ideas from the Accenture CIO board. 
Yourdon: Oh, I didn’t know that. 
Wakeman: Yes, they’ve had some pretty good meetings with other CIOs.
I attended a few calls  on consumerization, which is something we’re trying
to do here. Accenture hooked me up with a bunch of people who are doing
it, so did Gartner. And Gartner introduced me to not only  their CIO, but
to a whole bunch of other CIOs who I got to meet and actually learn about
how they’re doing consumerization in their company.  
There have been other examples where speaking with other CIOs has been
a great benefit, such as with the Security Standards Council PCI Standards
were introduced and those of us that process many credit cards were trying
to figure out how to comply. 
Yourdon: Well, certainly, it does emphasize this point that regardless of
what industry you’re in, uhh, you all share a lot of common issues. 
Wakeman: We do, especially in security, where we all are facing similar
threats like you are. We deal with that every day, as do many other CIOs. 
Yourdon: I’ve got a whole section of questions here on problems and is-
sues and so forth—of which the first one was, what are the main problems
and threats that concern you? Obviously, the one that’s at the top of every-
body’s list has been security. 
Wakeman: Security is a very sensitive area for us as we must ensure the
integrity of our score results and the personal identifiable data maintain
for our customers. It’s without a doubt one of the risks that keeps me up
at night.  

CIOs at Work 
 
167  
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Wakeman: It is disconcerting to know that there are organized groups out 
there, very sophisticated groups, that seek to steal information or shut 
down a company’s ability to operate on the Internet.  
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Wakeman: We work hard to protect the information we are entrusted 
with and use leading edge technologies to do so. A few years ago I created 
the position of Chief Information Security Officer and was fortunate enough 
to staff it with an outstanding security leader. He has built a great team that 
works every day to improve our ability to protect ETS’s information assets 
and monitor for potential threats.  
Yourdon: Right. 
Wakeman: His team is constantly looking for vulnerabilities and we always 
take care of them. Protecting the enterprise is a balancing act between the 
threats we may face and the costs to protect against those threats. 
Yourdon: And I assume that’s something you share with your business 
peers. Because ultimately it is a business decision. 
Wakeman: It is a business decision. Well, yeah, because they fund how big 
our security budget is, or how much we’re spending on security. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Wakeman: We participated in a security benchmarking study on how 
much we’re spending on security a few years ago and came back and found 
that we’re under-spending. And I used that as justification with the Board of 
Trustees and the Office of the President to get more money to staff up, to 
beef up my security organization. And luckily using this information I was 
able to persuade the board and Office of the President that we should 
spend more money on security. We were able to increase staffing and we’re 
completely redesigning our network. It’s really, really amazing what we’re 
doing, and it’s going to allow us to take advantage of virtualization and cloud 
computing in a very secure way.  
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Wakeman: There’s a lot of great new security technology out there. 
Yourdon: Funny you should mention that. That was the very next thing on 
my list of questions. What are some of the new trends that you think are 
really going to influence your situation over the next couple of years? 

Chapter 8 | Dan Wakeman:  
Vice President and CIO, Educational Testing Services 
 
168  
Wakeman: Well, call it virtualization, call it cloud computing, call it private 
public, or call it infrastructure as a service. That is huge. The ability to buy 
infrastructure and software as services is having a tremendously disruptive 
impact to the IT industry.   
Now, I think for my IT organization, where we outsourced our infrastruc-
ture nine years ago—we’re on our tenth year of that contract—we’re bet-
ter prepared for that transition than others because we don’t own our data 
center or the staff that manage it.  This gives us the opportunity to more 
quickly adopt these new offerings as our transition will be a bit less painful 
than for those that are still saddled with a data center to contend with.  
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Wakeman: We welcome the benefit these new technologies offers us, 
such as being able to move away from the concept of renting servers to 
buying infrastructure services to run our workloads only when we need 
them. This increases our ability to respond quickly to business demand 
while simultaneously reducing costs. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Wakeman: So, to me, that is an enormous change for IT because it’s going 
to change how we buy and use infrastructure.  But it will not be without 
new risks and challenges. We will have to change the way we operate to 
take advantage of these new offerings.  
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Wakeman: What really surprises me, Ed, is how fast it’s happened. Really, 
cloud computing is really new. Didn’t Amazon start this trend about five 
years ago?  
Yourdon: At most, yeah. 
Wakeman: And look where it is already! 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Wakeman: Now, I know there are security concerns, I know there are 
other things, but you know what? You can’t be stymied by those because this 
is so disruptive and the costs are so big, different—the storage costs, the 
compute costs, everything. Because if I have to buy a server and run it for a 
year for something, I’m going to use [it] only a portion of the year, like some 
of our assessment programs. I was just quoted in an article in the Wall Street 
Journal about this topic, where they were asking me, “Well, why would you 
even want to buy these on-demand services?” I said, “Well, because I have 

CIOs at Work 
 
169  
demand that fluctuates.” I said, “We have large scale assessment programs 
that happen only once a year and I need a tremendous amount of computing 
power. You know what that computing power does the rest of the year?” 
Yourdon: Just gathers dust. 
Wakeman: Right, it does nothing but burn up electricity. 
Yourdon: Yeah. And it’s amazing how many situations there are like that. I 
think of the Oscars or the Olympics. 
Wakeman: Super Bowl. 
Yourdon: Super Bowl. Yeah. On and on and on. Christmas shopping sea-
son for most of the retail industry. 
Wakeman: Mm-hmm. 
Yourdon: Yeah, it is, it is amazing to think about it. In terms of futures, I’ve 
got a related kind of social question. This whole issue of the “digital nation,” 
the Gen X or Y or Z or whatever generation it is that’s grown up with 
computers, how do you see them impacting what you do here at ETS? 
Wakeman: Well, first, I’m going to say something that’s a little bit contro-
versial. I don’t believe any of that Gen-Xer stuff. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Wakeman: Because—well, how old are you? And you’ve got an iPhone? 
Yourdon: True. 
Wakeman: And I’ve got an iPad right here and I’m not a kid. We adopt 
technology just as rapidly as kids. Now, granted, there are some people who 
don’t, but there are plenty of kids who don’t either. 
Yourdon: That’s a good point. 
Wakeman: There’s a whole slew of kids out there who don’t know much 
about technology. Oh, they know how to play a video game. They know 
how to program the VCR. But that doesn’t mean they know technology. 
You know, there’s this sort of misconception that they’re all geniuses and 
we’re not. And I’m telling you, it’s wrong, because if you look at the demo-
graphics for adoptions of Facebook, for example, the biggest group of 
adopters is the baby boomers.  
Yourdon: [laughter] Sure. Well, I certainly agree with that. I guess the only 
area where I might disagree—and it may not even be significant—is the fact 

Chapter 8 | Dan Wakeman:  
Vice President and CIO, Educational Testing Services 
 
170  
that in my case, it still takes a conscious mental process to say, “Oh, I 
should Google that,” whereas it’s “wired” into my kids. 
Wakeman: Well, that’s wired into them, but guess what won’t be? What’s 
going to come next. This isn’t going to stop here. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Wakeman: This is just going to keep changing. And it’s going to keep 
changing faster. So they’re going to be at the same disadvantage we are in 
just a few short years. 
Yourdon: I completely agree. But now you’ve got not just people coming 
into IT but the entire workforce coming in out of university to ETS with 
whatever expectations or assumptions they have. 
Wakeman: Well, so, here’s how we’re dealing with that. And believe me, 
it’s not just the kids: a lot of the people are just here, too. I’m getting it 
from people here. “I want to use a Mac. I want to have an iPhone.” 
Yourdon: Aha. Okay. 
Wakeman: You know, it’s not just the new people coming in. It’s even 
the existing staff. Now it’s not as much. I’ve got people here like my boss, 
who says, “Just give me a computer. I don’t want to manage it. I don’t 
want anything to do with it.” And I’ve got another group who is saying, “I 
want to use my technology and I want it to use it to do my job the way I 
want to do it.”  
So we’re introducing a consumerization program called “Computer 
Choice,” and the idea is it’s a volunteer program. We’re starting with cell 
phones. There’s a certain group with business uses for cell phones that we 
can work with, and smart phones, and they’ll be able to go out and get one 
through Verizon or AT&T, put it on our network, get access to our e-mail 
and whatnot. You have to sign something that says we have the right to 
remote-wipe it and you have to have a firewall and you have to have it en-
crypted and—you know, there are certain rules. But the idea is, for most 
of them, that they’re going to get a stipend to pay for it. For some we’re 
just going to say, “You have your own phone and you want to use it, but 
you’re not authorized for a stipend. Well, we’re going to let you connect 
anyway, but you have to follow these rules.” 
Yourdon: Right. 
Wakeman: There has to be some security that we can control. So luckily 
the iPhones and some of the others have encryption, they have the ability for 
remote wipe, they have the ability for password lock. So as long as they meet 

CIOs at Work 
 
171  
those minimum constraints, which seem to be almost universal across plat-
forms, BlackBerries do, too, we can let them on the network. The next thing 
we’ll introduce is Computer Choice on the laptop front, and that one’s a 
little more challenging—the problem is the technology’s not quite there yet. 
Yourdon: Interesting. Ahh, one last question—and I think it’s the perfect 
wrap-up question: where do you go from here? After you’ve been a CIO 
here for X number of years, do you have any thoughts, plans, dreams, 
hopes, aspirations? 
Wakeman: Well, the one thing I look at is where is the role of the CIO 
going? 
Yourdon: Oh, that’s a good one. Okay. 
Wakeman: And, it’s something I read a lot about and I try to get some 
understanding. I’ve talked to other CIOs to get their perspective and, 
there’s a lot of debate about where the role of the CIO is going. Some think 
it’s going to disappear. The CIO Executive Board has sure made a case that 
it’s all going back into the business, it’s going to be bought as services, 
there’s really no need for a CIO. Others have said, “Well, in a company like 
ours where intellectual property and IT play a big role or like a bank, there 
is still a need for someone who is the technology leader.” So I foresee my-
self staying in a technology leadership role, but the scope may expand to 
more shared services, beyond just IT. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Wakeman: So maybe some operations services or whatever. So the role 
may get a little bigger, I’d say, because so much of those other functions de-
pend on IT to operate. 
Yourdon: Sure. 
Wakeman: So you can see that there’s a synergy between them, and you 
do see some CIOs, like Dave Kepler at Dow, who I know. He eventually 
rose up to be vice president of all of the services— HR and operations and 
quality and other similar shared service areas. Do you know Martha Heller?  
Yourdon: No. 
Wakeman: Anyway, she’s made kind of a case that the role of CIO is go-
ing to broaden out to a more service basis. It kind of makes sense. If we’re 
really moving to a world of buying services, and you know as well as I do, 
the future IT organization is not going to be about running a data center. It’s 
going to be about buying these services and packaging them in such a way 
that you can use them to run your business. 

Chapter 8 | Dan Wakeman:  
Vice President and CIO, Educational Testing Services 
 
172  
Yourdon: Well, and integrating them. 
Wakeman: And integrating them, right. 
Yourdon: But the involvement in the business leads to another possible 
future, and that is running the whole bloody business. 
Wakeman: You could, yeah. 
Yourdon: And that’s up to the CEO level, which at least a couple of CIOs 
have done. 
Wakeman: I think if you’re in a very technology-centered business, if 
you’re in a Google or something that technology plays a very big part in 
where you could do that. I think it would be harder for me to do it here 
because the CEO here really needs credibility in the education space. 
Yourdon: That’s right. 
Wakeman: There are a lot of CIO information-intensive positions I could 
see myself doing, financial or something else where they still value IT as a 
core competency. This is why I so enjoy working for ETS. I’m not really in-
terested in going to work for some company that doesn’t value IT as a core 
part of their business. 
Yourdon: Why would you? [laughter] 
Wakeman: Right. And you’re seeing that, though, in a lot of businesses 
where they see IT as just a service they buy from someone else, where 
they’ve outsourced everything. I believe over time many companies that do 
that come to regret it as they soon find that that they lost a tremendous 
amount in intellectual property that was locked in heads of those they dis-
missed. Innovation slows and it takes longer to get things done. 
Yourdon: Well, I think I will hit the stop button on that one. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
9 
Lynne Ellyn 
Senior Vice President and CIO, DTE Energy 
Lynne Ellyn is the Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer at DTE 
Energy, a Detroit-based diversified energy company involved in the development 
and management of energy-related businesses and services nationwide. Ellyn 
leads an organization of approximately 700 people who provide information 
technology strategy, development, and computer operations for all of the DTE 
Energy companies. 
In 2002, Crain’s Detroit Business named Ms. Ellyn as one of the 100 Most 
Influential Women Business Leaders in the metropolitan Detroit area. In 2003, the 
Association for Women in Computing named her as one of the Top Michigan 
Women in Computing. In August 2004, CORP! Magazine named her as one of 
Michigan’s Top Business Women. She is a member of IBM’s Board of Advisors and 
the DTE Energy Foundation Board of Directors, as well as an appointee to the 
Smart Grid Advisory Committee of the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST), and a fellow of the Cutter Business Technology Council. 
 
Lynne Ellyn: Hello. 
Ed Yourdon: Hi, Lynne. 
Ellyn: I’m sitting outside in Ocala, Florida. 
Yourdon: Aha. So you’re not in Detroit. I very much appreciate your 
taking the time. I can start you at the beginning in terms of how you got to 
where you are today. Were there any early heroes or role models or 
mentors that shaped your career path and future? 

Chapter 9 | Lynne Ellyn:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, DTE Energy 
 
174  
Ellyn: Well, not formal mentors. I think particularly for women who got 
into the IT field when I did, there weren’t very many mentors. And that may 
also be true for men, but I think it was particularly true for women. So no 
really formal mentors, but fairly early in my career, I worked at Henry Ford 
Hospital, and I worked for a gentleman by the name of Jim Shipley. I was too 
young at the time to appreciate how extraordinary he was, but as I 
encountered other people that I worked for, time and time again, I came 
back to what an outstanding boss he was, what a visionary thinker as well as 
a person who was just so effective with the larger system, the people 
system, and the organizational work. And he was just an imminently good 
human being. Not to say that I worked for a lot of bad human beings, but 
the point of all this is: I found myself over the years wanting to be the kind 
of boss that I felt Jim was. 
Yourdon: Ahh, interesting. And your comment about mentors is 
something that I need to keep in mind because I’m trying to pin down the 
woman who’s the CIO for General Electric at the moment, Charlene 
Begley. And I’ve got another one, Joan Miller, the woman who’s the CIO of 
the entire UK Parliament. I’ve pinned that one down. So, I’ll be curious to 
see whether you know, whether your experience is a common one or 
unique. It certainly makes sense from what you’ve said. 
Ellyn: Well, I’m often asked to speak to women’s groups. Even in China I 
got these questions: What’s it like to be the only woman in the room? And 
the other is: Who were your mentors? And I have a smart-ass answer for 
both of them. I had four brothers, so being the only woman in the room 
started really early. 
Yourdon: Aha.  
Ellyn: And I had no sisters. And the smart-ass answer to the mentors is, 
and you’ll chuckle about it. When I was growing up, all the grown-up 
women around me were mothers: my mother, my grandmother, my aunts, 
the neighbors. The closest thing I had as a model of a working woman was 
Marlo Thomas in That Girl. 
Yourdon: Ah, interesting. 
Ellyn: And people crack up because, of course, she was a comedienne. She 
was always in some kind of ridiculous situation. Umm, they never really let 
you know what kind of work she did, but she was independent in the sense 
that she had her own apartment in New York City and, you know, she 
seemed to be having a lot of fun and she was really cute. So, it’s a joke, but 
the truth is, not only were there not any women in IT, I mean, I heard early 
about Grace Hopper, but I never met her, and there were no professional 

CIOs at Work 
 
175  
women, certainly not somebody with a title like a senior vice president that 
I ever met. And for probably the first two thirds of my career, umm, I didn’t 
know very many women executives, and if I did, they were at a very large 
distance, so there was no model. 
Yourdon: Now that is very interesting. Now you spent an early part of 
your career out in Silicon Valley, didn’t you? 
Ellyn: I did, I did. 
Yourdon: And there were no women out there? 
Ellyn: Just to recap, the first five years were in hospitals, and I did a lot of 
medical computing. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ellyn: The next ten were at Chrysler Corporation. 
Yourdon: Oh right. 
Ellyn: Where I was in advanced technology software planning and managed 
the artificial intelligence group. Then I went to Xerox and from Xerox went 
to Netscape. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. What about out in Silicon Valley? Was there also an 
absence of female, you know, really strong IT managers? 
Ellyn: Absolutely. There were . . . like at Netscape, the chief counsel was a 
woman, the head of HR, which isn’t too uncommon, was a woman. There 
were a couple, umm, more senior-ish product development managers who 
were women at Netscape, but only a few compared to the number of men 
and certainly at Xerox there were women. As a matter of fact, Anne 
Mulcahey was the head of HR when I was there and Ursula Burns—I didn’t 
know her, but I had met Anne a number of times—but Ursula Burns I think 
was in a product division, but certainly was not an executive. The CIO at 
Xerox was Pat Wallington, so she was, but Xerox was the first place where I 
encountered women with the senior kind of titles. To this day it remains the 
organization I worked for where there were the most executive women. 
Yourdon: Well, that’s a nice segue into my next question area, which is 
basically, how you got your current CIO position? I mean, without going 
through your whole career, how did you begin moving into more and more 
senior executive positions that led to a CIO title? 
Ellyn: The opportunities always came to me. I can’t say that it was my 
intention to be a CIO. It was always my intention to do really good, really 
energizing, interesting work. And whatever I was doing, that’s what I was 

Chapter 9 | Lynne Ellyn:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, DTE Energy 
176  
focused on, and the next opportunity just sort of showed up. I will say that
lots of opportunities showed up that I said no to because they weren’t
interesting. They weren’t going to be motivating. They looked like a grind. 
And I let them pass. So this idea that, you know, every opportunity that
comes along, you better jump on it or it’s never coming back, I think it’s
totally wrong. 
Yourdon: Did you get any kind of specific training along the way to be a
CIO? Did you go back to school to get an MBA or anything like that? 
Ellyn: Yes, Chrysler sent me to an executive MBA program with Michigan
State when I was managing the advanced technology group. 
Yourdon: Okay. So that was just part of a general training provided to
people, executive people once you got to a certain level?  
Ellyn: No, no, no. They only sent a few people a year and you had to be
recommended. Obviously, you had to be admitted to the program. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ellyn: And they had to have a good reason to do that. You had to have a
pretty strong advocate. And I was nominated twice before I was accepted.
The senior executive review selected me. So the year that I went, which
was when Chrysler was doing pretty well, in the ’90s, they sent five people
from the company. 
Yourdon: Oh, okay. Well, that leads into the next general area of questions,
which is basically what you’re doing now. You know, if you had to divide
your day or your general kind of work activity into three or four categories,
what would they be? I assume one is just sort of keeping an eye out for the
operational area. You must have tens of thousands of servers and all that
stuff. Are there major kinds of clumps of responsibilities that you have? 
Ellyn: Yes, but let’s talk about the directly IT responsibilities. You know, it’s
the usual. I have three large data centers, I support all of the DTE family,
which is two large utilities and a number of non-regulated businesses, which
operate all over the United States, including two energy trading floors, one
in Ann Arbor and one in Houston. We have rail and transportation
activities, power and industrial. So what I have is a diverse portfolio of
companies, and they are very different in character. Energy trading is like a
typical trading floor, and then I have highly regulated utilities. So my day is
spent switching hats from a mentality around startup and growth to a
mentality that’s conservative and careful.  

CIOs at Work 
 
177  
And I actually like that about the company, because I’m probably prone to 
boredom if you ask me to do something repetitive, and then I’ll go cause 
mischief, I suppose. So the diversity of that and the operational 
requirements are a complicated puzzle because, obviously, if you’re in 
trading, it’s right now, it’s “whatever I want; don’t bother me, we’re making 
money here” and if you are operating the status system that controls the 
flow of power and gas, the margin for error is zero. So, you know, those 
are very, very different things. See, the other responsibility that I take most 
seriously and is my fingerprint, is the way I manage, it is around the coaching 
and optimizing of the people system, finding the exact right place for a 
specific person so that they are not only highly productive and contributing; 
they are really, really glad to show up. Because I believe that you can pay 
people to walk in the door, but they either volunteer the best of themselves 
or don’t. And as they say, people join companies but quit bosses. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Ellyn: So the people system, I would say, is the most important thing 
and unfortunate at this time, taken a while to build it; I had the best, the 
strongest director team I had ever known anywhere, and so now I really 
am a coach, working on refinement, not working on basics. They are so 
super-confident that they’re amazing, so it’s a little bit like the symphony 
conductor. Sometimes I think that I need to be careful that I don’t mess 
it up.  
Yourdon: [laughter] By waving your baton. 
Ellyn: By stepping in when they don’t need it and whatever, so that’s kind 
of a refinement. And the last thing—and this is probably different than all 
the other CIOs that you’re going to encounter, because of the nature of the 
utility industry and the moment in time where we find ourselves with all the 
smart grid and smart grid money and expansion of the grid and the cyber 
security threats—I spend a significant amount of my time actually talking to 
the Department of Energy, the Utilities Telecom Council, lobbyists, [and] 
political people, working with the other CIOs in our industry about what 
positions we’re going to take. [I] also have a technical Congressional 
appointment, … I’m on the Smart Grid Advisory Committee for the next 
three years, so I’m spending a lot of my time on large industry issues with a 
lot of political overtones, and God knows, nobody would have ever accused 
me of being a politician. 
Yourdon: [laughter] That’s, fascinating. There are a couple of aspects of 
that that I’d like to pursue, but first I want to make sure that I understand 
kind of the main thrust that you’re talking about. In terms of coaching 

Chapter 9 | Lynne Ellyn:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, DTE Energy 
 
178  
people, I mean, you must have, I don’t know, 1,000 or 10,000 people, you 
know, in your IT empire. How far down the hierarchy do you go in terms of 
practicing your coaching work or carrying it out? 
Ellyn: Well, pretty far down, because I’m open to taking on anyone who 
wants coaching, so I do end up coaching some people. In addition to that, 
I’m actually pursuing certification through the International Coaching 
Federation, so I’m building my coaching hours. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Ellyn: Which is something else that I’m working on, so I’m actually coaching 
some women in the company who aren’t in IT. They’re in other 
departments and I’ve been asked to coach them through our mentoring 
program. So I do a fair amount of coaching, but directly in my organization 
what I’m trying to build into my directors, my managers, and my supervisors 
is their ability to coach others. 
Yourdon: Right, right, right. Now, the directors or whoever they might be 
who essentially report right to you: I’ve heard several of the CIOs talking 
about that, that whole area, you know, their team, the team that really on a 
day-to-day basis helps them get their job done. In order for people to get 
onto that part of your team, what skills or characteristics were you really 
looking for? 
Ellyn: Well, obviously, they have to be technically competent. That goes 
without saying.  
Yourdon: Sure. 
Ellyn: That’s … part of the issue. And for me, technical competence comes 
from actually having practiced in our industry, so I’m a little at odds with the 
idea that you take the guy who was great with the spreadsheets and has 
great business relationships and then you put him in charge of some type of 
IT. So, personally, I don’t subscribe to that. Maybe that’s my background.  
You know, I actually programmed, designed databases, programmed in a ton 
of different languages, so it could be a bias, but for me, you got to be the 
real deal. But you can’t just be the real deal. You also have to have great 
people skills, strong character, and the ability to live in the gray zone, with a 
ton of paradoxes, and find a good answer when you’re in the middle of 
competing priorities and seeming conflicts of interest.  
Being in IT, you’re the crossroads for everything and getting over-identified 
with your business constituents, or over-identified with the IT interests, or 
over-identified with technology. Any of those are deadly, and one of the 

CIOs at Work 
 
179  
things I just love about my director team, and I think makes for a really 
strong organization of any kind, is not one of my directors would ever allow 
one of their peers to fail at anything. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Ellyn: If someone was in trouble, they would—and we call it “swarming”—
they would swarm the problem and pull their peer out of issues because 
they understand that any problem anywhere in IT is everyone in IT’s 
problem. 
Yourdon: Hmm, okay.  
Ellyn: And that orientation, I think, is unusual because competition, showing 
up the guy next to you, has for a long time been the way that people have 
got promoted. 
Yourdon: That certainly is true. Yeah, you know, there’s another theme 
I’ve heard from several of the CIOs I’ve talked to about this area of your 
team. And several of them have said, clearly technical competence, the 
competence from being a practitioner and some of these other things are 
obviously important, but they also want to have a team of people that can 
get along with each other because, in this kind of economy and business 
environment we’ve got today, a lot of them are putting in 12-hour days and 
you don’t want to have to spend 12 hours a day working with people you 
fundamentally don’t like. Has that been a big issue for, for your team? 
Ellyn: It has not, but I’d go a step further. Of course, they have to get along, 
but I think it’s more than being able to get along. It’s again back to the idea 
that we are IT. And helping, assisting, even doing the job for your peer 
that’s necessary in order to keep the group together, to keep it performing, 
that’s what you’re going to do. Not that that should ever happen or happen 
frequently, but the idea that you and your peers are so interdependent, and 
your identity with them is bound to help everyone’s success. I think it’s a 
level of sophistication you don’t see in many organizations, and the 
organizations, whether they’re IT or otherwise, that are going to really 
perform are able to move to that level of sophisticated community and deep 
identity with the success of the group. 
Yourdon: Interesting. Now, you said another thing in this area of 
discussion that I want to pursue a little bit. When you said that you and 
your directors are very much at the crossroads because these days 
everything goes through IT, so clearly you and your team find yourselves 
interacting with a lot of other peer-level people in the various business 
areas with whom I have to assume you occasionally have some conflicts or 

Chapter 9 | Lynne Ellyn:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, DTE Energy 
 
180  
disagreements, and you find yourselves dealing with very strong, successful 
leaders, who have risen up to where they are right now at least partly 
through the strength of their personality and convictions, and so forth, and 
who feel that they really know how to do their job or they probably think 
they know how to do your job better than you do. How do you and your 
team manage to get your point across or, you know, pursue the kinds of 
policies and strategies you think are crucial from an IT perspective? 
Ellyn: Well, you’re exactly right. Everybody who has ever used the Internet 
or done a spreadsheet knows exactly how easy this should be. 
Yourdon: [laughter] Yeah, right! 
Ellyn: It’s as though everybody who ever drove a car would believe that 
they could engineer, design, build the factory, and produce cars better than 
the car manufacturers. It’s an interesting thing that the complexity in 
systems is so poorly understood and yet, and you probably know this, 
complexity scientists say the most complex products on earth are software.  
Yourdon: Right. 
Ellyn: And so we have a situation where that completely eludes people. 
The idea that software could be more complex than the vehicle they drive 
or the most complex part of it is the software, you know, people don’t get 
that. And certainly, trying to get that across to your peers is difficult. So 
back to how do we influence and work with them, again, back to the sense 
of community. When your directors, your managers, your supervisors, and 
the people in IT all understand that if they go native, if you will, and kind of 
veer outside in order to please somebody, then the whole all falls apart—
that the consequences are bad. That we have to be clear in our 
communication, consistent in our communication, we have to always remind 
people that we’re balancing competing priorities, and we have to 
continuously be educating, explaining, demonstrating, and, by the way, 
benchmarking with other companies and presenting the facts of how you 
stack up against the performance they would get elsewhere is the only 
survival technique I know to work. And that’s a survival technique, ’cause 
this battle never ends. 
Yourdon: Well, particularly these days, when a lot of the technology is 
cheap and widely available. You know, it’s been true for 25 years, ever since 
the PC came out. You mentioned your energy traders as kind of an example 
of people that I would imagine are somewhat rogue technicians. You know, 
if they don’t like the answer they’re given by you, they’ll go down to Radio 
Shack or whatever the equivalent is today, or download an app for their 

CIOs at Work 
 
181  
iPhone and say, “Screw you. We don’t need you. We’ll do it ourselves,” 
until it gets out of hand and then they come begging for help.  
Ellyn: Actually, I don’t have that problem with them. 
Yourdon: Oh, really?  
Ellyn: Because they are also subject to daily scrutiny around what they’ve 
done, you know, when the trades are over at the end of the day, there has 
to be an audit trail, so it turns out they’re very impatient and they want 
what they want, but they don’t color outside the lines. It’s actually more 
likely in other…in engineering areas. 
Yourdon: Ah, okay. 
Ellyn: And the like. 
Yourdon: Yeah, yeah. 
Ellyn: But to be truthful, we monitor and police our network and we 
manage the desktops to such a degree, it’s really hard to do that. 
Yourdon: Well, one of the other things you mentioned is very consistent 
with what I’ve heard from other CIOs, and in fact, one, I forget which one 
it was now, said that he’s beginning to think of his job as being the chief 
media officer in terms of the effort he puts into communicating and 
educating and spreading the word about not only what they’re doing, but 
as you just said, benchmarking against what … the competitors [are] 
doing, what the peers in our industry doing—I think that is going to 
become increasingly important. 
Ellyn: Oh, absolutely. That is a big part of my job today and the work my 
staff does. Last year, we belonged to UNITE, which has 17 of the largest 
electric utilities. We spent a thousand hours collecting the data for our 
benchmark with them. 
Yourdon: Wow. That’s amazing. One other thing you also mentioned that 
kind of fits into this whole thing, that is kind of a no-brainer, and that is the 
importance of staying in touch with other CIOs both in your industry and 
really all industries, uhh, to keep track of what other people are worrying 
about and thinking about and planning for, and so on. How much of your 
time do you spend doing that sort of thing? 
Ellyn: Well, I’m guessing it’s like five, seven percent, which isn’t such a big 
part of my time. But, it’s a really critical part. It’s absolutely essential, to get 
a handle on the sort of the lobbying efforts or industry positions. 
Yourdon: Ahh, good point. 

Chapter 9 | Lynne Ellyn:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, DTE Energy 
 
182  
Ellyn: That’s been hugely important. Becky Blalock from Southern 
Company and I collaborated to do some policy discussions with the lawyers 
at the Department of Energy. I have another one coming up and we 
strategized around those things. 
Yourdon: Let me switch gears to another question area that I imagine you 
would enjoy talking about. What are some of the new trends that you see 
coming down the line that you think are going to influence the IT industry in 
your world of utilities in the next few years? 
Ellyn: Well, the big one, of course, is the “smart grid.” The problem with 
that title is that it implies that there is a stupid grid. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Ellyn: The grid is highly automated now. This is a re-automation of the grid. 
For example, at one time (this predates me) Detroit Edison had 140 
engineers that just operated it. Today it’s done with just a dozen or fewer. 
As we go into more grid automation and smart meters and we can debate 
how smart they are, but meters to the extent that homeowners adopt a lot 
of home automation, and that remains to be seen, but there are a lot of 
people who are juiced about it. And we start to bring on a fair amount of 
electrical cars; electric vehicles; and the automation, billing, and management 
that is going to be in here. It’s a big deal for our industry, a big deal. Great 
opportunities. I don’t believe the opportunities are where the popular press 
or Silicon Valley want them to be, but there are great opportunities to 
improve the manageability of the electrical distribution grid. At the same 
time, we have been railroaded into doing that as an IT-based network. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Ellyn: So if you go back to 1995 and ’96, ’97, and ’98, when I was out in 
Silicon Valley and we were IP-ing everything, none of us, none of us 
anticipated the volume of security issues that we would face in the future and 
how that volume would ever be increasing in diversity and sophistication.  
And so back in those days, we had a few security tools. You know, every 
company is now running, what, 20 different security tools, spending 5 to 10 
percent of their IT budget on security issues, just managing the IT networks 
we know well. So now we’re getting to IP electrical grids. So, in one column 
are all of these amazing possible things that we will be able to do, some of 
which benefit the consumer by reducing the cost, improving the reliability, 
allowing for better management, some of which may help the consumer if 
you believe all of the venture capitalists (VCs) who are funding all of this 
stuff out in Silicon Valley, in giving them iPod applications and smart phone 

CIOs at Work 
 
183  
applications that allow them to turn their lights off and on and cycle their 
pool filters and whatever if we believe that, if we believe that’s what people 
are going to do.  
And by the way, I don’t believe that that’s going to be anytime soon, 
because every experiment with that has shown that people play with it for a 
couple of months and then they’ve got better things to do, but we’ll see if 
over time… So we have this, you know, bright, shiny future that we are in 
this process of creating. And we always have as an asterisk attached to it: 
“Oh, by the way, it ought to be secure.” 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. Right. 
Ellyn: Well, what do we know about IT now? They are not secure. We, we 
get a new security tool, a new security patch constantly. We have a “patch 
Tuesday” to fix problems that have already been exploited. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ellyn: So logic tells me that the future for these IT networks can’t be hugely 
different. So I see great and exciting things. I see deeply worrying and 
troubling things. And trying to enable without overly enabling potential 
problems is [like] walking a tightrope right now. And the IT industry is being 
hugely out-lobbied in Washington by the tech industry, because this is a lot 
of money for them. 
Yourdon: I want to get to the problems and gists and so forth in a second, 
but let me just finish off this area we’ve been talking about. How much of an 
impact on your world do some of the other hot buzz words have that we’re 
all seeing in the press these days, just like cloud computing and virtualization 
and so forth? Are those just sort of things that you use, or are they going to 
fundamentally change the way that you guys do business? 
Ellyn: Well, about seven years ago, I was faced with huge capital 
investments to knock the walls out and make the data centers bigger. I said, 
“You know, we can’t do this. We’ve got to find a better way.” So it’s pretty 
early in the virtualization game. 
Yourdon: Oh, okay. Really, I thought so. 
Ellyn: But we moved very strongly to virtualize our data centers. And 
today, I have so much white space in all three data centers, it’s not even 
funny. So, we moved very strongly ahead of the game on virtualization. We 
got rid of the mainframe after we implemented a new enterprise business 
system based on SAP and some other technology. And we’ve moved along 
the virtualization path very strongly. So the few times we’ve looked at 

Chapter 9 | Lynne Ellyn:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, DTE Energy 
 
184  
“cloud computing”—if I could set aside my concerns about security, which I 
absolutely cannot, you know, I’m so highly virtualized—there’s not much 
money in it for them. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay, interesting. 
Ellyn: So my point of view on virtualization is very similar to the 
outsourcing discussion 10 to 15 years ago: Get your house in order before 
you ask somebody else to do it. Because otherwise all you’re going to get is 
your mess for less. 
Yourdon: And your mess is farther away that you can’t even see. 
Ellyn: And the point of view 
Yourdon: Yeah, right, I agree.  
Ellyn: So . . . and then, you know, depending on your industry, and again, if 
you’re a fast startup, you don’t have any data centers. You’re more at risk 
of running out of cash than you are if somebody is stealing your secrets, 
well, of course you’d go to a cloud. But when you’re a 150-year-old utility 
company, you are the target of terrorists, criminals, and mischief makers, 
you’ve got a different set of considerations. 
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Ellyn: So, you know, if I was in another company, I’d view it differently. 
Yourdon: Sure. 
Ellyn: But for us, virtualization—absolutely three stars, four stars. Cloud 
computing—a big question mark. And if I was going to do any cloud 
computing, I sure wouldn’t do it with the likes of Amazon or Google. So 
for us, that’s probably not a big deal, but of course, we watch it. All of the 
consumer device stuff, the edge devices, big deal. We’re in the process of 
moving to a point of view where we’re going to enable a bunch of these, 
but we’re going to view them as consumer devices; we’re not going to 
provision them. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Ellyn: So, you know, everybody’s budget is cut. This year iPads were hot. 
Five years ago BlackBerries were hot. Three years from now it will be 
something else. I think our role is to keep up with the technology where we 
can deliver the corporate connection to you, the corporate mail to you, 
possibly some of the corporate applications. But it’s your choice what you 
want to bring to work. 

CIOs at Work 
 
185  
Yourdon: Hmm, okay. Well, that leads into, I guess, the final part of my 
questions in this area, and that has to do with the social media, which may 
or may not be brought to work by whomever. Twitter, Facebook, and 
related things, do you see those having a significant impact on the world that 
you live in, in the next few years? 
Ellyn: Well, we have two points of view about that. We’re on Facebook, 
we’re on Twitter, but that’s really only for corporate communications and 
the service part of our business, customer interface. We are not enabling 
our workforce to be spending time on these things because, frankly, we 
view it as a productivity hit.  
At the same time, we are rolling out and deploying social media tools inside 
the firewall, so that we can have our own Wikipedia-like locations, we can 
have collaboration going on, we can have chat rooms about problems, you 
know, two people working on a problem in different power plants being 
able to use internal social media to show each other what’s going on, what 
part is failing, and draw on other people.  
I think [it] is a real win and a real enabler. Expanding that across the firewall 
boundary, we haven’t seen a business reason for us to do that. The most 
important thing we do is keep the lights and power on. If I were a marketing 
company or a consumer products company, I’d probably view this 
differently. So my context is the company I’m currently in. 
Yourdon: Sure, well, what about, you had mentioned consumer service? 
What about using things like Twitter so that citizens out there on the 
streets of Detroit can communicate back to you guys about the problems 
they’re seeing or questions they have? 
Ellyn: We do have that. 
Ellyn: But, again, it’s only open in the business context to those people who 
would be responding to that corporate communications customer service. 
Yourdon: Right, right. 
Ellyn: Not, not open to power plant personnel, IT personnel, whatever, 
because we’re not responding to that. 
Yourdon: Sure. That makes sense. Now, in the whole area of problems 
and concerns you certainly mentioned security, and that’s something that I 
hear from everybody as being if not the central ingredient, certainly one of 
the biggest problems of all to worry about. Are there any other big risks 
and problems and so on that you’re worried about over the next few years? 

Chapter 9 | Lynne Ellyn:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, DTE Energy 
186  
Ellyn: A moderate concern for my company, but a big concern across our
industry, is under-investment in IT infrastructure, tools and technology,
training, [and] recruiting. You know, most IT budgets have been viciously
constrained, that we’re not building the farm club for the future and we
aren’t across the industry making the kind of investments. And part of this I
lay at the feet of the vendor community because the durability of their
products over time is an issue. You know, I have an enterprise business
systems policy that includes SAP, Maximo, Advantac, a bunch of other
products, sitting on IBM hardware with a million tentacles into other
systems. Well, you know how this is. There’s a new release of the operating
system as soon as you are up and you have to go to it, because otherwise
you lose support. As soon as you make that change, then you have to
upgrade another product. And if you upgrade that product, then you have
to upgrade a third product. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ellyn: We spend such a significant part of our budget just in life support
for these large systems that doing the new thing becomes very, very
difficult from a budget perspective. And that’s problematic. That is very
problematic. You know, back when we all embraced the idea of
component-based architecture, object-oriented programming and
whatever, and the idea that Java was going to be multi-platform-portable,
we thought we were going to get to a point where there was enough level
of abstraction between components and enough granularity that you
wouldn’t have to change everything in order to change one thing. We have
not gotten there. And this is a serious problem for expansion, growth,
agility, flexibility, and responsiveness. 
Yourdon: That’s a good point, and I don’t see that changing in the next few
years either. 
Ellyn: Not until somebody says, “Enough is enough. I’m going to fund a very
different kind of company that is not going to be dependent on support
revenues to keep my focus and product market.” You know, in the utility
industry, we have an 11 percent limit by law. That’s the best we can do. We
have to deal with the likes of Oracle and Cisco, with huge profit margins. So
they can out-lobby us, they can demand that level of increase in order to
just keep running what we already paid for. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ellyn: We have to maybe tax it. It’s a problem and it requires radical
change. You know, I wish I were young and had less to risk. I’d want to take 

CIOs at Work 
 
187  
this problem on, but I hope somebody . . . but I think you might have to be 
old to see the problem. [laughter] 
Yourdon: That’s true. 
Ellyn: But I’m hoping one day it will change. 
Yourdon: I have two relatively small question areas left for you. One is the 
whole generational issue. Do you see significant differences in the behaviors 
and attitudes of the new generation of workers that you’re hiring out of 
university today as compared to, I don’t know, five or ten years ago? 
Ellyn: Yes. However, because I’ve always been at the edge of advanced 
technologies and the new, new things, even back in my Chrysler days, I had 
the fresh-out-of-the-university rotational. Everybody wanted to be in the 
advanced technology group for at least one rotation. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Ellyn: When I was in Silicon Valley, the two times I was there, obviously, I 
was doing the adult supervision thing. I think, there are some characteristics 
about being young, not being jaded, having your whole life in front of you 
that are kind of durable. Whether that was your state of being in 1970, 
1980, 1990, 2000, or 2010, and then the whole context around you kind of 
colors in that outline. So yes, there are differences. I keep hearing about all 
of this conflict in the workplace based on those differences. Maybe we just 
don’t have enough difference for me to have experienced that. But my 
observation is, there is a norming sort of pressure whenever you work in an 
industry or company that over time you are going to be more like them or 
you are going to leave. And so, I’m just optimistic. With young people 
comes a lot of energy, a lot of naiveté, a lot of “just do it,” and you’d like to 
preserve some of that. At the same time, you’d like them to start building 
judgment. And I think it’s a great process, I like it, so I don’t know. I’m not 
concerned about it. 
Yourdon: What about the fact that they now bring with them a whole 
lifetime, literally since birth, of familiarity and maybe some degree of 
competence with, I hate to say IT, but the computerized toys and gadgets 
that they’ve had access to? 
Ellyn: Well, when I get people who think that because they drive a car they 
know everything about designing and engineering them… 
Yourdon: [laughter] Yeah, yeah, okay. 
Ellyn: I usually try to give them a tour of the data centers. 

Chapter 9 | Lynne Ellyn:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, DTE Energy 
 
188  
Yourdon: Ahh. 
Ellyn: The systems operations center where we’re managing the flow of 
power. Get them on the energy trading floor. Get them a visit to a 
nuclear plant. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Ellyn: And knock some of the stardust right out of their eyes, and they 
start to realize that an edge device doesn’t tell you much about what goes 
on in the center and smart people get it. I mean, they get it. 
Yourdon: Oh, okay. That’s very interesting. Well, one last question in that 
area which kind of goes back to the very beginning of your comments. What 
about differences, generational differences in terms of female IT people? 
You know, the young women coming out of engineering schools, are there 
more of them or fewer of them? Are they smarter or whatever than they 
were, you know, when you first came out of university? 
Ellyn: Well, there are fewer of them. You know that statistically. 
Yourdon: Sure. 
Ellyn: That women signing up for engineering and science programs and IT 
are fewer and fewer. One, they believe all the jobs did go somewhere else. 
Two, there are now much wider opportunities to choose from, so they 
have opportunities that I would have never even thought of. Three, I think 
there are some, and my daughter would be an example of this. She always 
said, “Mommy, you work too hard.” 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Ellyn: She’s a very talented designer. She’s done museum design and 
whatever, and she kind of balances between periods of working and periods 
of raising her kids, so she was able to make a choice that I can’t think of any 
opportunity I had like that. And I don’t know what I would have done. But 
they have choices we didn’t have. So having said that, though, the young 
women who are in IT today and I meet a lot of them, I’m an advisor to the 
Michigan Council of Women in Technology. They have over 600 members. 
They are far more ambitious, aggressive, technically educated and savvy in 
so many ways, so the ones I do meet are pretty awesome, and I hope we 
can attract more to the field like that. Now, instead of being systems 
analysts, we have women who are computer architects. You know, we 
didn’t have that back then. 
Yourdon: Hmm, yeah, yeah. That’s encouraging. Well, one last question, I 
guess it’s kind of appropriate for the end of a discussion like this, and that is, 

CIOs at Work 
 
189  
what’s next for you? You know, do you hope to be a CIO for the rest of 
your life? Where do you go from here? 
Ellyn: Well, remember I told you all the opportunities always showed up? 
Yourdon: [laughter] Oh, okay. 
Ellyn: Rather than me finding them. So I have faith there is something else. 
It’s going to show up. Now, having said that, I think it’s likely that I will finish 
out as a CIO, but I’m expanding right now in two directions. One is this 
coaching thing, because I’d like to help other CIOs, would-be CIOs in 
organizations work on how do you get appropriate synergy between 
computer systems and technical systems and the big human system?  I think 
that’s where all the opportunities are. The second thing I’m doing I start 
next month. I’m pursuing a postgraduate certificate in the neuroscience 
leadership from Middlesex University in London, and this kind of harkens 
back to my science and roots. I’m very interested in cognitive science. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Ellyn: How we apply that to . . . we now know so much more about the 
role the brain plays, the structure, the chemistry of the brain, and how 
successful you are, how you relate to people, how deficits in one area of the 
brain do . . . I’m passionate about how that relates to building really effective 
organizations, but also in how that relates to building really effective 
systems. So I don’t know where it’s going other than I’m going to spend ten 
months studying my brains out. 
Yourdon: [laughter]  
Ellyn: But, you know, something will happen from here. 
Yourdon: Sure.  
Ellyn: I’ve been tracking challenges on our remote access capacity because 
of the number of people who are out, so… 
Yourdon: I can imagine. 
Ellyn: You should be glad you’re where you’re at and I’m certainly glad I 
was able to get out of Dodge. 
Yourdon: [laughter] I’m sure. All right, well, we’ll, I’m sure we’ll schedule 
for sometime later in the spring, and I look forward to seeing you in person 
then. So, thanks again. 
Ellyn: Great. You take care. 
 

Chapter 9 | Lynne Ellyn:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, DTE Energy 
 
190  
Yourdon: Thanks a lot, Lynne. Bye-bye now. 
Ellyn: Okay, bye. 
 

C H A P T E R 
10 
Becky Blalock 
Senior Vice President and CIO,  
Southern Company, Atlanta 
Becky Blalock is Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer of Atlanta-
based Southern Company, where she directs the electric service provider’s IT 
strategy and operations across nine subsidiaries and 120,000 square miles. She 
leads more than 1,100 employees in a company that has been consistently 
recognized as one of the 100 Most Innovative Companies by CIO magazine and 
one of the 100 Best Places to Work in IT by Computerworld.  
Since beginning her career at Georgia Power in 1978, Ms. Blalock has provided 
broad leadership in many positions, including accounting, finance, marketing, 
corporate communication, external affairs, the office of the CEO, and customer 
service. She serves on the CIO advisory board for Sierra Ventures, as well as the 
Customer Advisory Boards of Oracle and AT&T. She is listed among the Who’s 
Who in Science and Engineering, and in 2006, she was inducted as one of 
Computerworld’s Premier 100 IT leaders. 
 
Ed Yourdon: One of the things that I find that people are very interested 
in is to get a sense of how you got started and particularly whether there 
were any mentors or guiding lights that pointed the way when you were just 
getting started in the field. 
Becky Blalock: I believe my background growing up influenced where I 
ended up. I’m an Air Force brat. When I was growing up, we moved a lot. I 

Chapter 10 | Becky Blalock:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, Southern Company, Atlanta 
 
192  
went to four high schools, three junior high schools, and eight elementary 
schools. I don’t think I realized it then, but one of the things that all the 
moving around taught me was to be very adaptable and unafraid to go into 
new environments. A lot of people fear change and going into new 
environments because they grew up in the same town, went to the same 
schools, know the same people. I came into the corporate world and wasn’t 
afraid to do things that I really had no background in because I’d been doing 
new things all my life. 
Yourdon: That’s very interesting. I mean, it hits close to home. I’m not an 
Air Force brat per se, but my dad worked for a defense contractor and we 
were stationed just outside Air Force bases, so I went to 17 different 
schools, but only one high school as it turned out, but every year we moved 
to a new town, and my parents said, you know, “The school is down the 
street. Go check yourself in,” and so I can relate to what you’re saying. 
[laughter] 
Blalock: You’re the only person I’ve ever talked to that’s been to more 
schools than me, ’cause I went to 15. 
Yourdon: Well, I was lucky that I ended up in just one high school, but I 
understand what you’re saying. To be able to adapt to completely 
unexpected circumstances must be a very valuable skill? 
Blalock: When you go into a new environment, it’s all about how you 
adapt and how you fit in with people. I think my background taught me a lot 
of adaptability. I don’t think I put all those pieces together until later, 
because I hated moving around in middle school and high school. Loved it 
when I was young because you’re the new kid in the class, but when you get 
to high school and middle school, it’s tough. 
Yourdon: Oh yeah. Absolutely. 
Blalock: And I got my undergraduate degree in marketing and then moved 
into finance inside the company. I went back to school at night to get an 
MBA in finance later in my career. I ended up in IT was through my stint as 
assistant to our then-CEO at Georgia Power. He had me working on an 
initiative to get better information and better metrics for how we could 
manage the business. He wanted an executive information dashboard and 
he was having a really difficult time trying to get that data out of our 
financial organization. At that time, our systems weren’t designed to pull 
information in those formats, but we did make some progress when I 
reported to him.  

CIOs at Work 
 
193  
At that same time, IT was going through a big reorganization. They were 
pulling IT out of our operating companies and centralizing it. They created 
regional CIO jobs, and the Georgia Power Management Council decided I 
would be good in this role. So the CEO walked into my office and said, 
“You know, we’re creating these regional CIO jobs, and I want you to go do 
that.” And I said, “You’ve got to be kidding me!” 
You know, I had no background in IT other than the fact that I did some 
systems development work early in my career, but I really didn’t even know 
any of the people in the organization.  
My CEO said to me, and I have really carried this with me throughout my 
tenure in IT, “It’s a job about information … You know that I am struggling 
because I do not have the information and the metrics I need to run this 
business.” And he said, “Help me get the information that I need to more 
effectively run this business.”  
You know, when the CEO asks you to do something, you don’t really have 
a choice about it! 
Yourdon: Yeah. True. 
Blalock: As a regional CIO, I had responsibility for Georgia Power, for our 
telecommunications company, and then system-wide, across Southern 
Company, I had responsibility for marketing and customer service. It was a 
fabulous time to be there because we were going through a major 
transformation. We had to downsize, which was tough, as I’d never been 
through anything like that.  
And the mindset that I took into IT is the mindset that I got from Allen 
Franklin, who was [the] CEO at the time. He said, “Let’s not be so 
enamored with the technology. Let’s think about how we use the 
information to more effectively run our business.” 
I was in the regional CIO job for nine months when the job of running 
corporate communication at Georgia Power opened up. The company 
decided we were going to be an Olympic sponsor, so what a great 
opportunity to run PR for a company that’s going to be an Olympic sponsor. 
So I left IT after those nine months and ran our corporate communication 
group and then had an opportunity to run our business and economic 
development group. I was named the Vice President for Community and 
Economic Development and had been out of IT about six years when the 
CIO job opened up again.  

Chapter 10 | Becky Blalock:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, Southern Company, Atlanta 
 
194  
It was the third time it had opened up. There had been a lot of churn, a lot 
of turnover in the position, and there was not a good, clear, strong 
candidate for the job. And I was fortunate that I had some brief experience 
there. I had a lot of success on the business side and did many things in the 
business and then got the opportunity to come here and lead this group for 
the past nine years. 
Yourdon: Wow. Well, would you consider the CEO who got you started 
on this path to be a mentor in the traditional sense? Any others? 
Blalock: Absolutely. He was not a mentor in the sense that he knew a 
lot about IT, but he was a great mentor in terms of staying focused on 
what really drives business success. One of the things he said to me, and I 
share this a lot when I mentor others, is, “Normally, when somebody 
comes into a role like this, I tell them to think about the three most 
important things you want to leave as your legacy when you walk away 
from the job. Normally, I’ll write those three things down for people and 
tell them what they are.” And he said, “I don’t know what to tell you 
when they are in IT.” 
He said, “I want you to think about what those three things should be, then 
come back and let’s meet again.” So I did. I went off and I interviewed 
employees. I interviewed the people we support inside the company. I 
interviewed our vendors and took all that information into consideration.  
And I told him, “I think I figured out what my three things need to be. 
Number one, you’ve got some of the smartest people in the company 
working in IT. But they grow up and they stay in IT. They really don’t get 
the opportunity to go out into the business and take that knowledge. 
There’s a huge opportunity to grow future leaders for Southern Company 
and this needs to be a big part of my focus, grooming and growing that 
workforce. Also IT changes so much that it’s important for the people we 
have to stay very current on what’s happening.” 
The second focus should be the opportunity to brand Southern Company as 
an innovative company, through the way we were using technology. We 
were doing incredible things. We were way ahead of anybody in the 
industry, but we weren’t telling that story. We needed to be more 
proactive in making people aware of how Southern Company was a leader 
in the way we applied technology. 
And then the third focus would be to look back—at the end of my career—
and show that we rolled out incredible technology, which delivered 
significant business value and drove our business to be a leader. I didn’t 

CIOs at Work 
 
195  
know what these technologies would be, but that to me, I’d like to look 
back and know we did some things that were significant in terms of the way 
we applied technology.  
And he said, “Okay, I think those are the right three things. Now, write 
those down on a sheet of paper and every Friday, you pull that sheet of 
paper out and say, ‘Is this where I spent my time?’” 
He said, “With these jobs, these very senior-level jobs, there’s all kinds of 
minutiae that people are going to want to pull you off to do and distract 
you from this focus. It’s very important that you always keep these three 
things in front of you because it will keep you focused on the most 
important things you need to do for Southern Company. If you can look 
back each week and say, ‘This is where I spent my time,’ you know your 
time was well spent.”  
And really, I have used that as a guiding principle to keep me focused and to 
say no to things that did not fit this focus. 
Yourdon: Well, it’s a good one. It’s kind of the first-things-first maxims 
that you hear in a lot of other places and it leads into the next area of 
questions that I had for you, which is basically what you’re doing and what 
you have been doing as a CIO to make your company more successful? And 
it sounds like those three things you just mentioned, I would assume, 
continue to be at the top of your list today. 
Blalock: Well, they are. We have focused a lot on our workforce. IT 
was—I think it was a demoralized organization. We were viewed only as a 
cost center. I think we’ve turned the corner now. Some of the feedback I 
got from the executives we support is, “I don’t need a bunch of order-
takers. I want people to show me what’s possible.” 
Yourdon: Aha. 
Blalock: We’ve turned the corner in a couple of ways. First, we focused on 
making sure our people got recognized for things. We had no intellectual 
property patents nine years ago, so we started an intellectual property 
program and made sure that our people got financially and otherwise 
recognized for their creative ideas. Today we have 56 items that have 
cleared the hurdle to go in the pipeline for patents. We only have eight that 
have actually cleared because it takes a while to get there, but we actually 
got our first three last year. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 

Chapter 10 | Becky Blalock:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, Southern Company, Atlanta 
196  
Blalock: An employee who received one of these patents asked me to
come to his office. He said, “I’ve been in the company 34 years, and I want
you to know this is the thing I’m most proud of in my career.” And we
had given him a plaque and $1,500, and I thought, “A 34-year employee
and this is the most important thing,” and it was really so little of an effort
on our part.  
Second, we started winning awards. We started getting picked by CIO
magazine as one of the most innovative companies for IT. We started being
on the InformationWeek’s 500 list of the most creative. A number of people
on our senior team have been picked as one of the 100 top leaders in IT by
Computerworld. In fact, this year, Dave Coker, our VP of Computer and
Networking Services, got that recognition. Aline Ward and Marie Mouchet,
who are regional CIOs, have gotten that recognition in the past, and I’ve
gotten that recognition in the past. But it’s not just us. We have people
across our organization who are getting recognition for phenomenal
achievements. In fact, one of our employees was named Engineer of the
Year by Georgia Power last year. 
Yourdon: Wow. 
Blalock: We try to make sure our successes get highlighted and celebrated.
Computerworld magazine has a survey of the 100 best places to work in IT in
America. 
Yourdon: Right. They do that every year.  
Blalock: And we have been honored for the last five consecutive years
with that recognition. This year we received our best ranking—#18! I take a
lot of pride in this ranking because it is based on a survey our employees
complete. 
Yourdon: Ahh. 
Blalock: It’s not just the programs you have. It’s not just what you say
about yourself. They are surveying our own employees. Morale has
improved dramatically in the organization, and we have a lot of folks in our
organization who get opportunities to go into other parts of the business
now. In fact, our new CEO was the CIO when I was regional CIO. It’s the
first time we’ve had a CEO who used to be a CIO. 
Yourdon: Interesting. Yeah, I don’t think I’ve run into that in the various
other interviews I’ve done. That is very interesting. 
Blalock: Yes, so we are very excited about that. 
1

CIOs at Work 
 
197  
Yourdon: You know, I can’t resist the temptation to ask a question that 
normally comes up more toward the end of this conversation, having to do 
with the new generation—the digital natives—the young kids who are 
coming out of college right now. How do you view them in the context of 
what you’ve just been talking about, as potential leaders and so on? Are you 
optimistic, pessimistic? Do you see them as being any different than the 
generation that came out 10 or 20 years ago? 
Blalock: I think they’re going to make life very exciting for us. In the past, 
IT was trying to push technology out, trying to get people to embrace it and 
use it. These people are coming out of college and they’re pushing us. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Blalock: IT needs to embrace them. Gone are the days when corporations 
are going to be deciding what PCs employees use. I think you’re going to 
come to work and bring your own PC, just like you do with your phone. 
We’re a ways away from that yet, but we’re headed in that direction. If you 
don’t embrace technology and really allow people to use the tools they’re 
comfortable with, they’re going to go work somewhere else where things 
are more open and flexible. 
Yourdon: Well, that’s one area where I’ve gotten a pretty consistent 
response from everybody, very much the way you’ve just said it. And I’m 
sure if I had asked that question five years ago, I would have gotten a very 
different answer, because people were still pushing technology down the 
throats of all the new employees. 
Blalock: Well, in knowledge today, it’s not so much about what you 
know, but what you know about where to get the knowledge. And I’ll give 
you an example, it was just this weekend. I was at the lake with a bunch of 
my relatives and my niece was there. And she said, “I need to call my 
brother.” I said, “What’s his number?” She said, “Well, I don’t know what 
his number is. I have to go get my cell phone to tell you that.” You know, 
they don’t even know phone numbers anymore, but they know where to 
go get them. 
Yourdon: Yep. 
Blalock: So much of what it’s going to take in the future to be successful is 
knowing where to find information. No one person can know it all, and they 
have the Internet at their fingertips. Young people know how to really 
leverage these tools, and they’ve grown up with them. 

Chapter 10 | Becky Blalock:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, Southern Company, Atlanta 
 
198  
Yourdon: Well, you’re certainly right about people—and it’s not only 
that they know where to get the information; they don’t even have a 
conscious pause. It’s just wired in, whereas in my case, it requires a 
conscious recognition that, “Oh, I can go to Google and get that 
information.” Or “Oh, that phone number is already on my speed dial 
list.” So the younger generation has got a split-second jump on me usually 
in terms of getting that, but I think that phenomenon is true everywhere. 
On the other hand, does it give you any concern that the younger 
generation can afford to operate in a more superficial fashion, for lack of a 
better phrase, because the stuff is right at their fingertips? They don’t have 
to do any deep thinking. 
Blalock: No. I still think you’ve got to be smart enough to know what you 
need to look for. I still think you’ve got to have some thought leadership. 
The research might be easier. It might be easier to find the information, but 
you’ve still got to be researching the right things. 
Yourdon: And you’ve got to know what you can trust and what you 
can’t trust. 
Blalock: Right, and also, I think it’s 24/7. Work is. You used to have to be 
in your office between 8 and 5 and wait for the phone to ring. People can 
work from anywhere now and they work all the time. 
Yourdon: Well, you know, another thing I’ve heard from almost every 
CIO, and I assume it’s going to be true for you as well, is the notion that 
even if their business is ostensibly a local business, everybody’s business 
these days is global, so that you’re going to get a phone call at 3 in the 
morning saying, “There’s a revolution in Egypt. What are we doing about 
it?” And, I’d be curious to know how that plays itself out for the Southern 
Company. For example, when there was the earthquake in Japan, did your 
phone start ringing? 
Blalock: Our phone did ring because we are building the first new nuclear 
unit in 30 years in this country. I can assure you that it was a very busy 
time for us. 
It was a very busy time for us now because there are a lot of tornadoes 
touching down, and they don’t touch down just in the middle of the day. 
They touch down in the middle of the night. Our systems have to be 
working, so that our crews know where those outages have occurred and 
know where to go and restore power. We are definitely a 24/7 business and 
IT, of course, is 24/7, too. And there are events around the world that 
impact us. 

CIOs at Work 
 
199  
Yourdon: Well, I think that’s the thing for everybody. It doesn’t matter 
what kind of business you have these days, IT is central to everything. And 
as a result, we are not only 24/7, but global, no matter what we think we 
might be doing with our business, and so that’s a good confirmation. I’m glad 
to hear that.  
I’ve gotten a lot of feedback that the next generation of workers do not 
have the same passion for work or the work ethic of our generation. What 
do you think? 
Blalock: I think we’re going to be just fine with the next generation. They 
embrace change. They are not nearly as bureaucratic as my generation. 
We’re going to need them to be flexible and adaptable because there’s 
going to be fewer of them having to do a whole lot more work. Their 
innovation and their creativity are going to be very, very badly needed. 
That’s really what sets the U.S. apart, but they’re going to be competing 
against all the people around the world. 
Yourdon: I hadn’t thought of it that way. 
Blalock: And these kids are bright. You know, they adapt so much better 
than my generation did. They’re so much more open to new things, and I 
think so much about success is being willing to take some risks. If there’s 
one thing that we’ve got to be cautious about, it is that they’re too open to 
risk. Some things that they may think are okay to do, like downloading 
copyrighted movies—you can’t do that in the corporate world. 
Yourdon: Well, you’re even more straightforward; they may think it’s okay 
to run an app that they got on their iPad in a safety-critical part of your 
business that you just can’t afford to do. So, I hear what you’re saying. 
Blalock: Communication and education will be essential, because it is a 
little different in the corporate world than it is in working for an 
entrepreneur or when you’re in college. 
Yourdon: That’s true. I want to ask you about another area that you 
mentioned on this list of the top three priorities that you have. One of 
them was—I think it was the third one—was rolling out technology to 
enhance the business now. 
Blalock: Yeah. 
Yourdon: Speaking of people, how does a CIO create a successful team? 
Blalock: As CIOs, our success is most directly tied to who we surround 
ourselves with. You cannot be successful as a CIO if you don’t have a good 

Chapter 10 | Becky Blalock:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, Southern Company, Atlanta 
 
200  
team of people around you, and those people need to be very different. You 
may need to have someone who knows a lot about finance if you don’t 
know a lot about finance. Or you may need to have someone who knows a 
lot about marketing because no one person can know it all, and the beauty 
of IT is that you get to see the whole company. It touches everything, but 
that’s also the challenge in it. 
Yourdon: What are the key criteria or characteristics you look for on the 
part of the people that are your team, the direct reports? And your point 
about having a wide variety of skills is interesting. The two other more 
interesting responses I’ve got are a deep sense of integrity. That everybody’s 
got everybody else’s back.  
Blalock: Absolutely. When I got this job, one of the things I heard was that 
it was not a team and that people didn’t like each other; they didn’t support 
each other, and that the first thing I had to do was fix the team. It’s like the 
book, Good to Great1, but you’ve got to get the right people on the bus. The 
first thing we did was focus on building a much stronger team. Today, I think 
the IT team at Southern Company is probably one of the stronger senior 
teams anywhere in the company.  
My senior team—there are 14 people on the senior leadership team—we 
actually complete a teamwork survey twice a year. We rate how effective 
we think we’re working together as a team. And the first time we did 
that, I think we rated ourselves a 5.4 on a 10-[point] scale. The last time 
we did it, everybody gave us a 9. We have some people who are never 
going to rate everybody a 10, but we rated ourselves a 9 as a team. As 
part of the survey they also rate each other individually, to remind the 
team that no one of us can do what we need to for this company. We 
have to do it together. 
This survey keeps the focus on teamwork. We don’t really need to 
continue doing the survey, but we do it because it’s affirmation that we 
need to continue to look out for each other. You are really under such 
scrutiny from the business that you support. The survey pulls you together 
cohesively as a team in IT, and it’s only together that we can be successful 
in doing what you need to for this company. We have each other’s back. I 
can’t reiterate that enough, how important it is to have a team that pulls 
together. Generally it doesn’t take more than one person to mess up a 
team. You have to just nip that in the bud if it’s going on. 
                                                
1 By Jim Collins [HarperCollins, 2001]. 

CIOs at Work 
 
201  
Yourdon: Well, that’s a good reinforcement of what I’ve heard from 
others. I want to ask you about another area that you mentioned on this list 
of the top three priorities that you have. One of them was—I think it was 
the third one—was rolling out technology to enhance the business now. To 
some extent that’s something every CIO would say he feels responsible for 
doing, helping the business become more competitive or more successful. In 
your case, are you and your IT people expected to come up with 
completely new things that the business has not even thought of doing, but 
have become possible with new technology—or just enhancing the 
efficiency of what’s already going on? 
Blalock: I said earlier that when I got this job and interviewed people in the 
business, they said, “We don’t need a bunch of order-takers. You’re here 
inside our business. You understand our business, and you should be helping 
us figure out what’s the next great thing that’s coming in, in the way of 
technology.” We have embraced that, and we have two processes in place 
at Southern Company that I think have really helped us with that. We have 
teams that are made up of people from IT and people from the business 
called Technology Leadership Teams (TLTs). There are 14 of those teams. 
Some of them meet once a quarter, some meet every month. 
For example, one of the TLTs is in the distribution organization, the wire 
side of our business, the folks that actually distribute electricity to the 
homes. They’re one of the most active teams that we have. They meet 
every month, people from the business and people from IT. IT will discuss 
some emerging technologies that are becoming available in the market. We 
will work with the distribution team members to determine if we can pull 
together a business case to evaluate doing this in our business. 
Sometimes, people in the business will go to a conference and talk to a 
vendor, and they’ll bring back an idea to IT and say, “Here is what a vendor 
says they can do.” And then IT will get involved and we’ll say, “Well, that’s 
vaporware.” 
Or we’ll say, “Hey, that’s a really good idea.” And then we work together to 
prioritize the money that’s in the budget and make the decisions about how 
we proceed. IT has absolutely got to be aligned with the business. IT should 
never push technology that doesn’t drive value to the business. And these 
TLTs work very well for us. Engaging the business in the decisions that we 
make helps them take more ownership and helps them not to see us as a 
cost center but as a partner who’s truly driving value and success to the 
company. This process has helped us deliver tremendous value from the 

Chapter 10 | Becky Blalock:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, Southern Company, Atlanta 
 
202  
projects that we roll out, which is critical because we have about 100 active 
projects under way at any point in time in IT. 
The second thing that we did is develop a technology lab where vendors 
would give us the beta version of a product and we would test it, because 
you need to have these products ahead of time so that you can then build 
the infrastructure to support them. We have since evolved that lab into a 
showcase where we can bring our employees in and show them what’s 
coming in the way of technology. We also use it as a place where we can 
brainstorm about how we should apply some of these technologies to move 
the business forward. 
And it has been a huge success. Incredible ideas have surfaced in that center. 
Yourdon: I’m sure you have. 
Blalock: We live in a world where the consumer market leads the business 
world. Look at what’s going on with sensor technology. That really came 
about in the consumer market, and there are huge opportunities to take 
that technology and develop a business case for saving money and applying it 
inside the corporate world. But sometimes it’s very hard for people to 
visualize that unless you get into a brainstorming session with them. 
Yourdon: Ahh, interesting. 
Blalock: And this facility, actually, it was showcased in our 2008 annual 
report. It talked about how we’re bringing in lots of innovative ideas in 
terms of how we drive this business forward. We really empower our 
employees to use technology to be more efficient. We’re doing things that 
help the company apply technology, because most of the customer-touch in 
our company today is not through people, it’s through technology.  
Most of the people who call the Customer Care Center talk to the voice-
response unit, our unit that’s computerized, or they go online and do self-
help, and never talk to a person. You think about the banking industry: most 
people go to the ATM when they want to get cash. 
Yourdon: Sure, yeah. 
Blalock: They don’t communicate. And so how do we in IT play a role in 
enhancing that experience? That is an important question, because one of 
the most important strategic things we focus on as a company is making 
sure we provide world-class customer service to the people we serve. And 
we want to make sure we are looking at the technologies that are out there 
and utilizing them in the most efficient way and in the way that our 

CIOs at Work 
 
203  
customers will embrace in terms of how we serve them. It also saves us 
money when we use technology. On average, it costs $3 per call to have a 
customer service representative handle a request. And to the extent we can 
apply technology, we not only enhance the customer’s experience, we also 
save money. 
Yourdon: Well, that leads me into the next obvious question—which is 
what interesting technologies do you see coming down the road in the next 
few years that you expect you’ll be able to take advantage of? 
Blalock: Mobility is exploding everywhere. As a company, we have to think 
about is how do we better serve our customers on mobile devices. Not 
everybody’s going to have them, so you’ve got to have some traditional 
ways of reaching people, but there’s a new generation of people coming and 
they want their information in a different fashion. So I think how we provide 
mobile solutions to our customers and how we put mobility out there in 
the way of dashboards, so that our employees always know what the state 
is of the things that are going on inside the company.  
One example I’ll give you is when there’s an outage. To be able to give 
every employee in the company information about how many customers are 
out and where they’re out is helpful. When the power goes out in my 
neighborhood, who do you think people call wanting to know when it’s 
coming back on? 
You can imagine, as an employee, if I have that information at my 
fingertips, I’m a lot better equipped to answer those questions. One of the 
things we’ve started doing is tweeting what the status is on our outages. 
And a certain portion of our customer base really likes getting information 
that way, so I think there’s a great opportunity in that mobility space, 
especially to engage our customers in more two-way communication. 
The second area where there’s a huge opportunity for us is on data 
analytics. Business intelligence is going to be huge because we have so 
many sensors out on our network now that we can better predict when 
an outage will occur. We’ll never be able to predict them all because you 
don’t know where lightning’s going to hit. You don’t know when 
somebody’s going to run into a pole in their car. But there are sensors 
that allow us to look at our equipment and better tell if you’ve got a 
transformer that’s getting ready to blow. Predict it, so that you replace the 
transformer before that happens, and the customer’s power is never out.  

Chapter 10 | Becky Blalock:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, Southern Company, Atlanta 
 
204  
Also, analytics allow us to perform better service. when somebody does hit a 
pole, instead of it taking down electricity to 200 homes, there’s enough 
intelligence in the network that it only takes down power to, say, five homes. 
Yourdon: Wow. Okay. 
Blalock: In many cases, the system is self-healing and can automatically 
switch the flow of power to keep some customers from going out. Instead 
of 200, like I said, it would only take a few homes down until you can get a 
truck to the location. And the trucks are equipped with analytics, as well. 
They receive information about the exact location of the outage to save 
time. In addition, the analytics can be shared with out call center. The 
customers don’t even have to call us. We can call them and say, “A pole in 
your area has been damaged. Crews are on site and repair should be 
complete soon.” 
All of that is coming in the very near future. And the other thing is that in 
the future there will be a lot more distributed generation. For example, 
there may be customers that are generating their own power through solar 
panels. We’re putting smart meters on everyone’s home so we can tell 
them—in the future—how much electricity they’re using at different times 
of the day. If customers want to be more efficient, these smart meters have 
the intelligence to tell them when they’re using a lot and determine what it 
is that’s driving usage up. 
Yourdon: I assume that’s just one small part of the overall buzzword of the 
“smart grid” that you folks in your industry are looking forward to over the 
next 10 or 20 years? 
Blalock: Absolutely. There is lots of transformation coming in that area, 
and we will be leaders in helping move in that direction. I could talk forever 
about the things that we see coming, but I do think mobility and business 
analytics are going to be huge. I think the smart meters and the electric 
vehicles are two technologies, not necessarily in IT that are going to 
revolutionize our business in the way people are going to use electricity. 
Yourdon: It certainly makes a lot of sense. You know, there’s one kind 
of mundane answer that I was expecting everybody to give me that I 
haven’t really heard, and that is the response from people who say, 
“We’re depending on Moore’s Law to continue for another decade”—
you know, the fundamental law that says computing power doubles in 
price performance every 18 months. I’ve been around since that started, 
and there were all these predictions it was going to stop after ten years, 
that we were going to run out of ideas for continuing to improve 

CIOs at Work 
 
205  
technology. And the latest I’ve heard from Intel is that it’s going to keep 
going ‘til at least the year 2026, beyond which I won’t really care, but 
that’s very reassuring. 
Blalock: And I don’t see any of this slowing down. If anything, we’re going 
to continue to reinvent.  
Nobody really even thought about virtualization—that was a buzzword five 
years ago, and now it’s commonplace. Cloud computing—most large 
enterprise groups were saying, “Not in my lifetime.” Well, guess what? 
We’re figuring out how to do cloud computing. Maybe not everything, but 
we’re taking higher chunks of it to the cloud, so it’s coming. 
Yourdon: I would certainly agree with that. 
Blalock: And these leapfrog innovations that will continue to surface 
because the amount of data is … it’s mind-boggling how much data we’re 
going to have. We think we’ve been growing at about 35 percent a year at 
Southern Company, which is I think pretty much on par with what we’ve 
seen traditionally in the world. It’s already starting to double every year. 
We haven’t seen that yet, but we’re bracing ourselves for the fact that 
we’re going to have a lot more data in the future. 
Yourdon: Yeah. I’ve heard one or two people, CIOs that I’ve interviewed 
focus on the same thing, the importance of the data analytics in this new 
world, but I don’t think there’s quite enough appreciation for it yet. You 
know, there’s one last thing I’d be curious about in terms of futures to see if 
you think it’s important.  
There’s a buzzword that was introduced by a futurist named Clay Shirky 
called “cognitive surplus.” He argues that we are at a point now in society, 
for the first time, where we have enough spare time supported by 
technology that mankind can contribute its surplus cognitive energy, and do 
things that have never been done before—the classic example of which is 
Wikipedia. You know, we now have a society that can give back in 
thousands of different ways. And I’m curious whether that’s something 
that’s meaningful to a utility company. 
Blalock: Absolutely. This can actually go back to the history of mankind 
because mankind used to have to spend all their time growing food, just to 
survive. Then, farming technology progressed enough, so that today, you 
don’t worry about food. You go to the grocery store and there is a ton of 
anything you want. In the developed world, we’re even growing stuff out in 

Chapter 10 | Becky Blalock:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, Southern Company, Atlanta 
206  
the middle of the desert now. And genetics has allowed food to get even
more progressive.  
I do believe more cognitive time has been freed up, but I also think there’s a
lot of stuff consuming our time. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Blalock: The Internet has changed the way we live and think. And it has
turned us into a global society, more so than anything ever has, and I think
we’re continuing on that evolution. And that you’re going to continue to see
big changes in medicine. And you’ll see big changes in energy and the way
energy gets produced and consumed, and it’s all because of all this
knowledge-sharing that’s going on. I don’t think it’s so much that you’ve got
free time. It’s the collaboration and the fact that we’re bringing all of this
brainpower together so that you can problem-solve in ways that we
couldn’t have done.  
You wouldn’t have had somebody from China and someone from the U.S.
collaborating 20 years ago, solving a problem. 
Yourdon: Yep, yep. That’s true. 
Blalock: The power of that combined thinking is what I think is driving
innovation. It’s not that people have more free time. They have more time
and better tools to collaborate. 
Yourdon: That makes sense. I want to make sure that I have some time
to ask you about the other side of this—the dark side of the force. What
are the things that give you nightmares and keep you awake at night, if
there is anything? 
Blalock: People ask me that question a lot, and it’s really not that much to
do with IT. I think the single most challenging thing you deal with as a CIO is
personnel. Anytime you have a challenging personnel issue, to me, that’s
difficult, because it’s not black and white. IT is pretty black and white. You
solve the problem and you move on. Human beings are not, so those are
the things that keep me up at night. I also worry about cybersecurity. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Blalock: I’m not inordinately worried about it because I think that
Southern Company has some of the best thought leadership in the
country. We do a wonderful job managing threats, but will always have to
stay on top of it. There are people who are always trying to move the
company to become more and more dependent on this technology. As we 

CIOs at Work 
 
207  
become more dependent on technology, there are also people who would 
love to be disruptive in that world. And so I think it’s a challenge to stay 
on top of that.  
I love a challenge and I like learning new things and doing things in different 
ways. So I think that’s one of the most exciting things about IT. The systems 
are getting more and more reliable. I can remember when I came to work 
for the company: We had a mainframe system and I was out in the field, and 
if this microwave tower went out, you were out of business. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Blalock: And it used to happen on a regular basis. You kept microfiche by 
your desk. And I knock on wood, but we rarely ever have anything go down 
now. And it’s because we have such great intelligence and redundancy in the 
system, and it’s only going to continue to improve. But the people aspect of 
it is crucial. As CIOs, we are responsible for leading all this technology, but 
you can’t do it alone. What I do not see enough of sometimes is the 
leadership around the people dimension. And that’s really what is so 
important, because you’ve got these really smart people who you have to 
keep motivated, and you’ve got to bring them along with you, if you want to 
be successful. 
Yourdon: And I would imagine you’ve got to focus a lot also on getting the 
knowledge out of their heads and into some sharable form, so that when 
they do eventually retire, you don’t lose it entirely. 
Blalock: Absolutely. We’ve focused a lot on cross-training and IT is a key 
part of the solution to all that. We did a focus group meeting in one of our 
district offices. And we talked to some of the senior linemen and asked, 
“Would it be helpful to you if we took a lot of the maps and stuff that you 
have here and we put them on a computer and you could take them to the 
field with you?” And they said, “I don’t need that. I built this system. I’ve got 
it all right up here in my brain.” 
Then we talked to some of the young engineers who were fresh out of 
college and asked them, and they said, “Could you do that for us?” They 
said, “That would be so helpful if I had those maps at my fingertips instead 
of having to go back to the district office and pull them out and look at 
them and try to reengineer the system. If I had all that knowledge right here 
at my fingertips, I could be so much more productive.” So I think IT is the 
solution to all of that. 

Chapter 10 | Becky Blalock:  
Senior Vice President and CIO, Southern Company, Atlanta 
 
208  
Yourdon: Interesting. Well, that’s encouraging to hear. Let me wrap this 
up with the final question that I’ve asked every CIO—and that is, where do 
you go from here? What is life after a CIO, if there is such a thing? 
Blalock: Life after a CIO? Umm, I think CIOs can go anywhere they want, 
because you’ve gotten such great knowledge about the business. I think the 
real challenge is when I talk to a lot of my peers, they really don’t want to 
go anywhere else. They really love running and working in IT. Nothing else 
really quite compares to doing this, and the fact that you’ve always got to be 
one step ahead, in thinking about how you apply this technology and how 
you embrace it.  
Yourdon: Well, certainly, if your company continues to grow and take on 
more challenges, that keeps your job from being boring. 
Blalock: And like I said, our current CEO was the CIO. We’re very proud 
of him. 
Yourdon: That was very unusual. 
Blalock: But it is becoming more of a trend. CIOs today have such broad 
knowledge of all business processes across the enterprise. The technology 
they provide is touching the customer in a powerful way. This knowledge is 
a strong foundation for the CEO of the future. 
Yourdon: Hmm. Well, maybe it will continue to do so. All right, so your 
idea is that a lot of CIOs would probably be perfectly happy continuing to 
be a CIO, maybe, of a bigger and even more challenging company as time 
went on. 
Blalock: Yeah, a lot of CIOs do move around, and they go up to bigger 
companies. 
Yourdon: Yeah, I certainly have seen that as, you know, I’ve been tracking 
these people down everywhere. And I’ve also run into a lot of CIOs who 
are at the end of their career and who have said, “It’s been a great run, but 
now I’m going to go out and be a university professor or do stuff in the 
community.” But, you made the point that if one wants to, one could go on 
to be a CEO or any other position in the company. 
Blalock: You’ve got to know the business to apply technology. It’s 
interesting because I have talked to two former CIOs recently. What they 
have elected to do is sit on boards for small technology startup companies. 
And they love it. They are having fun, and they are bringing incredible 
knowledge to make these companies successful. 

CIOs at Work 
 
209  
Yourdon: Yeah, I have heard that from a couple of them. Yeah, you’re 
right.  
Blalock: There are many young companies who are just starving to know 
how to get in, and how to sell to CIOs. 
Lately, I have had some headhunters contact me about board positions. 
Companies are beginning to think about the fact they need somebody with 
IT expertise, somebody who can counsel them regarding cybersecurity, 
disaster recovery, and how the company should be embracing and applying 
technology. CIOs are certainly great at this. 
Yourdon: Well, that certainly makes sense. I’ve been on a few boards, and 
there’s been a huge vacuum in that area for some of them because the 
people they bring in have got very strong finance backgrounds or marketing 
or whatever, but not that IT component, so I think you’re right.  
I very much want to thank you for your time. We could talk all afternoon 
about any one of these topics, I’m sure—but hopefully, this will at least get 
people thinking about some new ideas and directions.  
Thank you, Becky. I very much appreciate it.

C H A P T E R 
11 
Ken Bohlen 
Vice President and CIO,  
Arizona Public Service Company (APS) 
Ken Bohlen is Vice President and Chief Information Officer for Arizona  
Public Service Company (APS), Arizona’s largest electric company. Based in Phoe-
nix, APS serves more than 1.1 million customers and is one of the fastest-growing 
investor-owned electric utilities in the United States. Bohlen heads APS’s Informa-
tion Technology department where he oversees the company’s vital electronic in-
frastructure and manages the digital challenges faced by a major electric utility. 
Bohlen also leads the Lean Six Sigma improvement process for APS. 
Before joining APS, Bohlen spent 10 years at Textron, Inc. where he served as Ex-
ecutive Vice President and Chief Innovation Officer. Prior to joining Textron, he 
served 25 years as an information/supply chain executive at both AlliedSignal Inc. 
and John Deere. Bohlen is a member of the American Production Inventory Control 
Society and a senior member of the Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Computer 
and Automated Systems Association. He was recognized with the 2005 Stevie 
Award for “Best MIS and Systems Executive,” and is a member of IBM’s board of 
advisors. Bohlen also was recognized by his peers as one of Computerworld’s 
Premier 100 Leaders for 2006. 
 
Ed Yourdon: I find that a lot of people in the IT industry—especially young 
aspiring IT professionals who think some day they’re going to be a CIO—
are curious how executives like you get to where you are. Is this your first 

Chapter 11 | Ken Bohlen:  
Vice President and CIO, Arizona Public Service Company (APS) 
 
212  
CIO position, or did you move up through the ranks to get to where you 
are? 
Ken Bohlen: It’s kind of an interesting story. I knew early on in my life, in 
high school, that these things emerging as computers or intelligent work 
environments were growing, so I looked into what they had at my high 
school, which was a co-op program with local companies. 
Yourdon: That’s common in college, but not in high school. That’s interest-
ing. 
Bohlen: Yeah, I did it in high school, I wanted to find something different. 
My school advisor gave me the opportunity that if I could find something I 
liked, she’d sponsor it. So I worked for a small company that had computer 
processing and they made cardboard boxes. 
The company was Doerfer Engineering. I worked with the old punch-card 
routines and the slot machines, and the wires around for sorting. I realized 
that, “This thing is something. I don’t know where it’s going to take me, but I 
like it.” So when I went to college—I went to Iowa State—I majored in com-
puter science. But I wasn’t a geeky techie guy, so I took several minors, in-
dustrial relations, psychology, sociology. I knew that I wanted to focus my 
energy with computers, but I felt I needed to know how to use them in so-
cial settings as well. So I kind of visualized a plan early on. I didn’t realize 
where it was going to take me or that I would land in manufacturing, but I’ve 
just retired out of the manufacturing industry after thirty-five years. Now I’ve 
jumped into the utility or energy industry. Completely different worlds. 
Yourdon: Wow. That is interesting. 
Bohlen: And it’s been kind of fun, exciting. I look back at your historical  
basis. I was a part of PDP minicomputers, with DECnet and some of the 
communication activities from the CIM, the old computer integrated 
manufacturing. 
Yourdon: Oh, right. Yeah. 
Bohlen: So it was a lot of diverse backgrounds, trainings, opportunities. In 
my last job, I was actually the CIO with the “I” being “innovation.” 
Yourdon: Oh, really? Hah!  
Bohlen: And Michael Tracy—I don’t know if you know Mike or Clay  
Christensen. 
Yourdon: Oh, yeah, Christensen I do know. Yeah. 

CIOs at Work 
 
213  
Bohlen: Well, Michael Tracy wrote some of the original books on innova-
tion. He said, “You know, Ken, you’ve got to be one of the first in the For-
tune 100 companies with the title of Executive VP/Chief Innovation Officer.” 
At that time I managed all of engineering, IT supply chain, worldwide ops in 
India, so it was an interesting way of growing, but it’s because of the very 
beginning, diversity, branching out, knowing the computer’s going to be 
prevalent in many areas. So my counsel to young people is never say no to 
an opportunity to learn something outside of your bailiwick, particularly if 
you’re in an industry field outside of technology. 
Yourdon: Well, I was going to ask a similar kind of question because I’ve 
heard this from other CIOs that a broad education is far more valuable 
than you might think it is, as opposed to a very narrow, geeky computer 
science education. 
Bohlen: Well, I think it kind of depends. If you want to stay in the Internet, 
gaming, social media development area, then you are okay! I think that pro-
vides you an awareness in areas that are still unknown territory. I think huge 
riches remain to be made there. But I think that’s a very small group of very 
talented people. If they’ve got that calling and that desire, God bless them, 
let them go. 
Yourdon: [laughter] Okay, one other related question. Did you have any 
particularly important mentors or role models along the way? 
Bohlen: You know, I’ve had several. There were a few at John Deere, one 
in particular, Jay Harmon, who was head of production control. I had to 
step inside of that while I managed the worldwide billing materials and inter-
factory buying and selling for John Deere Waterloo operations. Jay would 
spend time talking with me after hours and actually even come over to my 
home. We would talk about people, progress, and relationships. John Deere 
was a very family-oriented company, but we had some tough times in the 
’80s, and Jay spent a lot of time mentoring me on the soft skills, if you will. 
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Bohlen: And, again, this was outside of the IT arena, which I find reflec-
tive of the fact that many of my peers in IT at the time were growing and 
bumbling through the process of turning it into a legitimate profession. 
Yourdon: Yeah, I think you’re certainly right on that. And what you’re say-
ing here is similar to what I’ve heard from other people that the mentoring 
is far more likely to be outside of technology per se. I don’t know about you, 
but when I went to college, I never took any courses on management or … 
you did take a broader range of things than I did, but I knew nothing about 

Chapter 11 | Ken Bohlen:  
Vice President and CIO, Arizona Public Service Company (APS) 
 
214  
interacting with the human race [laughter] until I started getting manage-
ment positions. One last question in this area: as you rose up through the 
ranks, did you go back to school or get any special training? Did you get an 
MBA or anything of that sort? 
Bohlen: Yes, I did. I went back and got an MBA in my early 40s. I had no 
intent of ever leaving John Deere. They were really good to me, and my 
family, everybody was there in Iowa—but after getting the MBA, I ran into a 
person by the name of Jerry Stead. Jerry was part of the AT&T environ-
ment. Anyway, he was a traveling executive. And Jerry and I developed quite 
a relationship. At the conclusion of the MBA program, where we did a lot of 
case studies with Allied Signal, I told Jerry, “If I ever had a chance, I’d proba-
bly go to work for Allied Signal and leave Deere.” 
Yourdon: [laughter] Interesting. 
Bohlen: Well, guess what? I got hired at Allied Signal after my MBA 
graduation, as the director of supply chain. So I essentially got two MBAs, 
a legitimate academic MBA and then an experiential learning MBA from 
Larry Bossidy. 
Yourdon: Interesting. There have been a few people I’ve spoken to who 
have gone back to get an advanced degree, but it’s been less common than I 
might have thought. Well, I think we get a sense of what brought you to this 
point. In terms of where you are now, the central thing I’m interested in 
finding out is how you view IT as making a significant contribution to the 
organization’s strategic success in the future. 
Bohlen: Well, we look at the future and the prevalence and the ambiguity 
going on in hardware platforms. IT, if not prevalent in the industry group, 
will have to be in the future. As I look at manufacturing, IT had a tremen-
dous impact on processing speeds, billing cycles, cash cycles, customer rela-
tionship opportunities. All of those kinds of things, I think, were really good. 
We’re seeing that in the financial industry. Just the beginning. In the energy 
industry, I have been a little surprised at IT’s lack of credibility in many of 
these organizations, as a platform from which to operate. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Bohlen: So I have a little hypothesis—and then there’s what I see. In the 
manufacturing arena, it’s not uncommon to find the CIO—the super CIO, if 
you will—in some of the annual reports and proxies. In the utility business, 
it’s difficult to find any CIO in the proxies of their companies. Now, that’s 
just one indicator, Ed, but it’s an indicator that I see the IT profession losing 

CIOs at Work 
 
215  
ground. I see many IT executives are now becoming subservient to CFOs. 
Some in the utility space are reporting to HR generalists. 
Yourdon: Really? 
Bohlen: Yes. When I first came to the utility business, I met with 19 CIOs. 
I told them I was underwhelmed at how many organizations and the indus-
try looked at IT. Much to my surprise, they came back and said, “You’re 
right.” I understand you’re talking with Becky Blalock [of Southern Com-
pany, interviewed in Chapter 10]. She was one that said, “You’re absolutely 
right, Ken.” I said, “You know, I don’t know how to change it, but it’s my 
opinion that, if anything, the power, the grid, the energy environment that 
we’re operating in is just one huge infrastructure.” 
Yourdon: Right. 
Bohlen: Who better to run that than people that have grown up managing 
the growth of this tremendous infrastructure called the Web in our com-
pany infrastructure? So, it’s a mental note that I’ve made to myself. That’s 
why APS is a new, exciting challenge for me. I have been helping improve 
ways to manage infrastructure, including security. I jumped back in as a way 
to “give back.” I also find myself speaking more at conferences trying to en-
ergize potential future CIOs to get out of the techie world in the business 
environment, grab hold of ERM, grab hold of disaster recovery, business 
continuity because that’s what we grew up with. 
Yourdon: Interesting. So, how will you use IT to make APS more success-
ful in the future? And it sounds like you’re saying that IT has to take more 
responsibility for things involving the grid and the infrastructure. 
Bohlen: I think that’s one of the components. The other is technology. Too 
often in my career I’ve noticed these problems are loosely understood, but 
the solution is clear. I got to know Jim Womack really well in my last job. 
He has influenced me to focus first on making clear the problem we’re try-
ing to solve. And if we can’t articulate it, I’m not throwing dollars at tech-
nology. Inside this arena, what I’m finding is that people really don’t know 
what problem they’re trying to solve. So you get a lot of little pilots. I’ve 
seen these pilots have different technology directions, some of which are 
counterproductive to each other. Overall technology direction always needs 
to be very clear. 
Yourdon: Ahh, interesting. 
Bohlen: Then, the third thing is business value. I sometimes find we al-
ready have technology that would indeed answer a problem. But you know 
how it goes, people see something new at a latest gizmo/whiz-bang show 

Chapter 11 | Ken Bohlen:  
Vice President and CIO, Arizona Public Service Company (APS) 
 
216  
and suddenly the organization finds itself trying to incorporate new tech-
nologies. So one of the values that I’ve added is that we are not doing pro-
jects unless we understand the business value. 
Yourdon: Okay. Well, that certainly makes sense.  
Bohlen: You know, it’s the kind of thing we all talk about. This is one of the 
first times I’ve experienced it. IT really didn’t drive that before. It was the 
old—I call it the 1970s’ management style—they would yell and scream until 
IT felt that they needed to come to the requestor. And I just don’t do that. 
Yourdon: [laughter] Now, as CIO, I assume you are also in charge of the 
thousands of desktops and servers with which all APS employees get their 
job done every day. So how big a job is that, just keeping the lights on, so to 
speak, for the internal IT operation? 
Bohlen: If you look at my budget, over 60 percent of my budget is keep-
ing the lights on. Which is very high from the industry group I came from, 
but what I’m beginning to learn is that that’s not uncommon in a lot of 
utility spaces. 
Yourdon: Hmm, interesting. 
Bohlen: So, part of the reason for that is the previous discussion. “We 
don’t know the problem we’re trying to solve, but I think this nice tool will 
help me.” So over a period of time, the organization had accumulated hun-
dreds of different applications products. 
Yourdon: Wow. 
Bohlen: Well, that’s an opportunity for improvement. I always like to oper-
ate from a base of facts. I hired a benchmarking company. I used them at 
John Deere, Allied Signal, and Textron, and now I brought them in to help 
us at APS. They performed a benchmark for IT, finance, and HR. And that 
gave me a baseline to begin directing my efforts. Otherwise, standing on a 
platform without data, I’d sound like a wolf crying at the bottom of a hill. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Bohlen: I was able to point out that we were extraordinarily high on the 
applications compared to peer groups of our size; however, compared to 
other world-class companies, we were fourth quartile. Directionally, this 
gave me the areas that we needed to go attack. It provided a third-party 
source of data our organization could refer to as we promoted the neces-
sary changes, that it wasn’t just my personal opinion or a pet project. As 
business people, it also showed that we’ve got a lot of opportunity. 

CIOs at Work 
217  
Yourdon: Hmm. Fascinating. 
Bohlen: So yes, we’ve got to support desktops, but what was really adding
to the overall support cost was all these other apps. What we did was
unique and different for me. IT has always been in the role of saying, “No,
you can’t do that. No, you can’t do this.” When we had green screens and
then Apple came out and the Intel machines, we said, “No, we’ve got to test
them.” Then we went to distributed computing, we first said, “No,” and then
it took off. So what I’ve developed here is a program called “Just Say Yes.” 
Yourdon: Ahh, fascinating. 
Bohlen: What we’re doing is transitioning from the company buying 
personal-asset laptops, the iPads, the iPhones, to the employees buying them
themselves. We don’t care what kind of smartphone you get as long as it’s
within a certain family. We’re using products like Citrix and GoodLink, so
we have a secured venue into the device. What the person does with it out-
side of that controlled environment, that’s their legal responsibility. What
we’re trying to do is get outside of the security/privacy issues in the work-
place. All of that we’re trying to eliminate in giving people freedom. 
Yourdon: Well, I’m certainly hearing conversations of that sort from just
about everybody I’ve spoken to, and it’s fascinating to see how everyone is
grappling with this, because it is an unstoppable tidal wave in many cases. 
Bohlen: Yes, we’ve had the program in place for about four months and it’s
been positively accepted. We did the traditional return on investment and
looked at what we needed to invest, so we are providing incentives for peo-
ple to say, “You mean, you’ll give me x dollars a month and I just put the
package on my own home computer, and I don’t have to use this other
stuff?” That’s exactly right. It’s been very successful. We are doing it in
phases so we don’t tax the team as we do it, but it’s been really good. 
Yourdon: And it’s interesting to see how this correlates with the industry
that’s providing the devices and apps. So I spoke to the CIO of Google, who
said, “You know, in the old days we used to build things for the enterprise
and hope that it would trickle down to the employees.” 
Bohlen: Yes, you’re right. 
Yourdon: Because it was very expensive and very scarce, and therefore it
had to be controlled. And he said, “Now at Google and Microsoft and all
these other places, like Apple, they’re building things for the consumer
marketplace first and foremost, and if it trickles up into the enterprise,
that’s wonderful—but we start with the consumer.” And, of course, you’re
experiencing that from the other side because all these people walk in your 

Chapter 11 | Ken Bohlen:  
Vice President and CIO, Arizona Public Service Company (APS) 
 
218  
door holding something in their hand that they bought at home and that 
they’re bloody well determined to use, regardless of whether you say no 
or not, so. 
Bohlen: I love it. You know, I didn’t put the two together, but that’s a sig-
nificant paradigm shift. 
Yourdon: Yeah, I think it is, and that really is the next whole area I wanted 
to get into is. “Paradigm shift” is a term that’s overused a bit, but you’ve 
obviously been in the industry a long time, and we’ve all seen enormous 
things happening over the last 30 or 40 years. But I’m curious to let you 
speculate on what kinds of paradigm shifts or major things we should look 
forward to in the future, over the next few years? 
Bohlen: That’s a tough one. What we’re seeing more and more in this 
cloud computing environment is an opportunity to have storage of our 
company data in diverse locations. I think we’re going to see a huge move—
now this could be “what you are now” is “where you were back when.” So 
being an older person, seeing some cycles, I’m beginning to wonder about 
what is going to happen. For instance, is all it’s going to take is one security 
breach of a significant magnitude that’s going to spin companies into a tail-
spin and they’re going to bring their data back to a resident location? 
Yourdon: Ahh, interesting. Okay. 
Bohlen: It’s more an issue in the hard-line manufacturing/R&D companies, 
but also in the energy/utility spaces—but all it takes is one, and you’re going 
to have legislation. So one of my desires is to try to understand what’s hap-
pening with government legislation. And that can change so rapidly and 
change everything that’s going on. Some of the ITAR1 relationships that we 
have in the DoD2 world are cumbersome, but very important and critical. 
And I think those are the kinds of things that I think three, four years out, 
that could be a concern. Another is analytics. I think that we have a huge 
opportunity because there’s so much data that needs to be turned into in-
formation, and I think the tools that are associated with analytics can help 
present patterns and paths and directions that can allow for more informed 
decision making. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
                                                
1 International Traffic in Arms Regulations. 
2 (U.S.) Department of Defense. 

CIOs at Work 
 
219  
Bohlen: The third one I see is the generational issue inside of the compa-
nies, including IT. Being a professionally educated IT person doesn’t neces-
sarily mean you’re the best equipped, because they’re graduating accounting 
majors who have computing tools they use on the side. So everybody is 
kind of an IT wizard—I won’t say “professional,” but they’ve got an opinion 
because they’ve used it. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Bohlen: I think that may create a tough leadership role in the future, even 
tougher than what we’ve got today. I watch my grandkids: 13, 14 years old. 
They’re growing up with this thing that is significantly different. This is an 
interesting dialogue because historically, and as all the case studies suggest, 
you never take true advantage of the technology until you get rid of the 
traditional management over the top of it and usher in a new one. So how 
do we usher in the new leaders? 
Yourdon: Well, in some cases they’re starting at a much younger age than 
they were before. You and I are of the same generation, but when I talked 
to the CIO of Google—it’s staggering to see. And Google as a company is 
… well, the average age must be 25, I think. So it’s a whole different set of 
assumptions and expectations and experiences. Well, back to this issue of 
paradigm shifts. So I gather you think this move into cloud computing is one 
example where there are going to continue to be a lot more changes and 
things. Any other major things you’d add to that? Oh, and you said analytics. 
I’m sorry. That was the second one. 
Bohlen: I think analytics is going to have a place in it. Another I’m beginning 
to sense is just the huge opportunity that exists for what I’d call “home 
computing.” 
Yourdon: Hmm. Yeah. 
Bohlen: One of the things that we see at the utility is that that customers 
are going to consume more and more energy, but we’ve got coal that we 
don’t necessarily want to promote and provide, for various reasons, and yet 
we know that renewables like solar and wind, probably only can make up 15 
percent of our consumption by 2025. We are also seeing the true emer-
gence of these home entertainment or smart home concepts. Honeywell’s 
got some, GE’s got one, Control4’s got one, where you can begin to marry 
your thermostat to energy consumption models, so that during peak load 
times, you can cycle air conditioning and appliances differently. I think 
there’s a revolution about to happen in that arena. 

Chapter 11 | Ken Bohlen:  
Vice President and CIO, Arizona Public Service Company (APS) 
 
220  
Yourdon: Ahh, interesting, ’cause we’ve been talking about it for 40 years, 
but maybe we’re being driven by economic forces to really start getting se-
rious about it. 
Bohlen: I think we are. You know, you’ve got the boomers that dabble 
with technology, so they’re kind of open. If you can put the thermostat 
readings on their TV so they can actually program and control it, I think 
they would actually do that. And the economics, to your point, you can now 
put … home systems in play for under a thousand bucks. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Bohlen: So all of a sudden, there’s a market that I think the Googles or a 
different marketing franchise unit is going to come in and people are going 
to knock themselves on the head and say, “Why didn’t I think of that?” 
Yourdon: Interesting. Well, that will be interesting to watch if it develops. I 
haven’t heard that one from anyone before. When you mentioned Google, 
by the way, you reminded me of one other suggestion that I heard from 
Google in this area of paradigm shifts, and that was the notion that for the 
first time in history, with the technology that we have and everything else, 
we have what one futurist, a guy by the name of Clay Shirky, calls a “cogni-
tive surplus”—that is, an opportunity to take advantage of free brainpower 
and extra time to contribute to society things like Wikipedia or Linux. For 
that matter, the entire open software thing is one example. But this idea of 
contributing knowledge into some form that can be accessed by humanity is 
arguably what Google is all about, and several other organizations, too, and 
that just didn’t exist a generation ago. 
Bohlen: I agree with that. One of the things I’ve pondered recently here is: 
are there unintended consequences to free knowledge and growing knowl-
edge? And my reference point is as I looked worldwide—I’ve managed engi-
neering centers in India, too—and I began looking at what parents and 
grandparents were struggling with, with their children and grandchildren. 
And it led me to the thought that there is pervasive information before 
they’re willing to have the maturity, the intellectual capability to interpret 
things. So as an example, you and I growing up, we didn’t learn stuff because 
they were secret from you and me—because our parents said, “Well, 
they’re not old enough. We’re going to wait.” In today’s day and age, in this 
environment, I think that’s a social environment that we haven’t really 
thought through. 
Yourdon: Ahh, I see what you’re saying. 

CIOs at Work 
 
221  
Bohlen: Because the information is so pervasive that the parents are no 
longer, or the grandparents or the nuclear family, may no longer be the 
source of information, and I think we’re seeing that more and more as the 
new generation comes up. So I’m looking at humanity as an experiment and 
saying, “well, what’s going to happen here?” because we’ve changed the very 
knowledge transfer of nuclear families. 
Yourdon: There’s a set of terms, vocabulary from an anthropologist, Marga-
ret Mead, about a postfigurative, cofigureative, and prefigurative culture. Her 
point was that a couple of generations ago, it was just taken for granted that 
children would learn from their parents, much as you just said. And then 
there was a shift where the older and younger generations have to learn at 
the same time. It happens particularly with immigrant communities. 
Bohlen: Yeah. 
Yourdon: They both show up here in the United States, and they’ve all got 
to learn the language and customs and so on. And she argues that we’re 
now in a new area—the prefigurative culture—where the parents have to 
learn from the children because the technology is changing so rapidly that 
the kids pick it up first. They learn how to operate the TV remote controls 
before their parents, which we’ve been joking about for 10 or 20 years. And 
the parents are struggling because they have to abandon old habits and as-
sumptions, which is more difficult for them to do. So it’s a huge transforma-
tion in that sense, and of course, IT is right in the middle of that also. Now, 
does any of that directly affect your industry? 
Bohlen: I think it will and it does, but it gets back to that point we have all 
this data. We are all just learning how to interpret it. 
Yourdon: Ahh. Okay. 
Bohlen: For example, there’s a feeling that the younger people are more 
energy-conscious. Well, some of the data doesn’t show that. They may be 
even less energy-conscious as long as they get what they want in terms of 
data, information, so they don’t care when they get it if it’s cheaper. So 
there’s some interesting debates that need to occur after we synthesize 
the data. 
Yourdon: You know, there’s a trivial example of that. I grew up in the ’50s, 
and we were smacked on the hand if necessary to remind us that when you 
leave a room, you turn out the lights—because electricity was expensive. 
Today, of course, my kids wander from room to room and the entire house 
looks like a Christmas tree. Because it’s always there and they have no idea 
what the bill is—so I think you’re certainly right about that and you’re 

Chapter 11 | Ken Bohlen:  
Vice President and CIO, Arizona Public Service Company (APS) 
 
222  
probably right that we just don’t know what data could be telling us because 
we haven’t analyzed it properly. Very interesting. 
Bohlen: You know, unfortunately, in the American culture particularly, we 
tend to operate best when we have a burning platform, and that platform’s 
not quite there yet. 
Yourdon: Yeah, I think you’re right. Let me switch gears to the opposite 
side of this discussion we’ve been having, to the dark side of the force. What 
are the problems and things that keep you awake at night in terms of IT? 
Bohlen: I think the Johari Window—are you familiar with that? 
Yourdon: No, I’m not. 
Bohlen: Basically, the things I know and you know are public. The things I 
know and you don’t know, that’s my private world. The things I don’t know 
and you know are things that I try to discover. And then there are things 
you don’t know and I don’t know. That’s what worries me. 
Yourdon: Okay, that’s what Donald Rumsfeld called the “unknown un-
knowns.” 
Bohlen: Yes. 
Yourdon: We used to have a lot of conversations about that sort of thing 
when we were planning for Y2K ten years ago. There are the known 
knowns and the known unknowns and so on. Okay, so you’re concerned 
about the things we’re not even aware that we should be worrying about. 
Bohlen: It primarily comes from my work in the Department of Defense 
days, and you’re familiar with the war games. But there are some people out 
there trying to destroy our way of life. And the more I know, the more I can 
make sure I protect myself or protect our society. So as an example, what’s 
the potential of terrorists blowing up a microwave hub channel that would 
cut out power? I just don’t know what I don’t know. And that’s bothersome 
to me because I think frequently the little things we should be doing—should 
I be worrying about it, you know? But those do from time to time cause me 
to sit up and shoot off a quick e-mail saying, “Guys, what are we doing on 
these channels or these distribution hubs or these remote locations?” When 
you think about the value or the criticality of them, they’re huge. 
Yourdon: You know, there’s a related point that I heard from Google once 
again. The CIO there said it was humbling to realize just how much power 
could be brought to bear against you by an entire country. He said, “It’s one 
thing to deal with hackers, or the kid in Moscow who’s trying to break into 
your system. You deal with that, and you still have to worry about that at 

CIOs at Work 
 
223  
night. But when you’ve got a whole bloody country focusing its attention on 
you, that’s terrifying.” Especially if you’re very visible. 
Bohlen: You’re right. 
Yourdon: I interviewed the CIO of the New York Stock Exchange, and he 
said, “You know, clearly, we’re a very visible target, as is Google, as is Mi-
crosoft, as are, you know, various other organizations.” And I guess to 
some extent, energy companies in general are because of the attractive con-
sequences that a terrorist might contemplate. You know, “If I can make all 
of Arizona go dark, wouldn’t that be cool?” 
Bohlen: Right. 
Yourdon: Yeah, okay, so it’s security on kind of a grand scale that still 
worries you. 
Bohlen: The other one that I think I’ve always been vigilant on is not be-
coming complacent with where we are today. Keeping people on edge—
because I think if you don’t, it’s too easy to make assumptions. And in some 
ways, I think if you ask by having somebody coming from outside the indus-
try like myself, it allows you to ask the “dumb” questions. “Why do we do 
that? Why is that important? Why did we do it way back when? Do we still 
need to do it today?” 
Yourdon: Right. That’s a very good point. The other answer I heard in that 
area, which I’m pretty sure you would agree with, is listening more carefully 
to the younger people coming into the organization. 
Bohlen: I’ve got several focus groups, they call them “skip levels,” and my 
“Just Say Yes” program, as a matter of fact, came out of the young group. 
I’ve got them sponsored and I keep giving them the opportunity to keep 
telling me what I don’t know so that we can provide leadership for the 
company, so I give them all the kudos. 
Yourdon: Well, the other aspect of that that I would think would be very, 
very much of concern to CIOs in almost any industry is the risk of losing 
touch with existing parts of your marketplace, but also new parts of your 
marketplace.  
Bohlen: And you’ve got to be quick. You know, I’m accustomed to plan-
ning for things nine months, ten months, a year out. We do it. But we’ve 
seen this massive switch. Blogs were a big thing for a long period of time. 
Now it’s Twitter. They don’t even go to blogs. 
Yourdon: Right. 

Chapter 11 | Ken Bohlen:  
Vice President and CIO, Arizona Public Service Company (APS) 
 
224  
Bohlen: And you’ve got to be extremely sharp on the latest things that are 
coming out. Finding restaurants now, you go to Yelp—it’s bizarre to me. 
But you’re right. You’ve got to have the input of that generation because it 
is different. 
We’re going through discussions now inside the company. Should we be 
able to tweet high-power days out to our customer base so they can go and 
turn some of their lights or appliances off? So we’ve had those kinds of dis-
cussions and dialogs. Do we send out national alerts to our people on those 
high-energy days? So that’s what we’ve been talking through. We’re trying 
to gain some experience from the rest of the organization and other utili-
ties. We’re not a large utility so to speak. We’ve got 1.1 million customers. 
So we want to be mindful of how we do that, and I keep asking, “So if you 
send it, what do you want the recipient to do?” 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Bohlen: We look at what specifically we can do beforehand, so that we 
don’t annoy our audiences. Because that’s another thing you learn. The 
young kids in particular don’t like spam. They like stuff coming from people 
they know or it’s actionable and meaningful to them. So you can’t get on 
these wild goose chases where you’ve got to tweet everything. Well, why 
are we going to do that? Have we really looked at it? So there’s a lot of old 
generational thinking and new value creation thinking that needs to occur, 
and I don’t think we’ve got a good model yet. 
Yourdon: Yeah, there certainly are examples of that kind of situation that 
I’ve seen. For example, the San Diego Fire Department used Twitter as a 
mechanism for allowing citizens to report in brush fires and these terrible 
fires that they have in the fall with everything getting very dry. And that’s 
actionable and it conveys information back to the organization that they 
would otherwise not have known. Is there anything of that nature that 
might be relevant for you? 
Bohlen: I think that is something that is available, because if you think 
about it today, we typically learn first about outages through telephone 
services. That’s beginning to change with the smart meters. That’s a whole 
new revolution beginning to occur, where you get instantaneous data. Our 
challenge is to figure out, “Do we want it every 15 minutes? Do we want it 
every 30 minutes?” Then the question is, “If we get that data every 15 min-
utes from 1.1 million customers, what do we do with it? What do we want 
them to do with it? How long do we keep it?” That’s where analytics will 
really come into play. 

CIOs at Work 
 
225  
Yourdon: Exactly. That is a good point. Let’s see. I want to shift back to a 
topic we’ve talked about a little bit already and from a couple of different 
perspectives: this whole thing about the new generation, the younger gen-
eration coming in. Do you have any concerns about how they use technol-
ogy or how they think about technology? 
Bohlen: Not necessarily concerns. I think I have learned from that. I find it 
very intriguing. Some of my first meetings when I was at my previous com-
pany with the new-generation people is that they would ask questions that 
cause you to think: “Well, why do you send out meeting notices and expect 
all of us to attend the meeting? Don’t you think that’s a lot of wasted time, 
energy, and effort? Well, what are you guys talking about? Why do you have 
these meetings to discuss security issues?” is an example.  
So I said, “Okay, then what should I do?”  
“Well, why don’t you send it out as an e-mail message to everybody, kind of 
an alert, let us all respond and dialogue,”—and at that time we were using a 
blog—“And we can respond from there. That way you’ll get people feeding 
off of each other and you’ll get ideas, and you don’t have to waste all of our 
time in meetings. We can do it as a matter of course in our workday.”  
I’ll tell you, that really shook me, because all of a sudden, I’m seeing their 
social media initiatives brought into the work environment that had the po-
tential for changing the way we do work. 
Yourdon: Ahh, interesting. 
Bohlen: The other thing I found is that they’re a whole lot more concerned 
and interested in teams. In one case, I had eight engineers, young ones, I 
wanted to keep two of them, so we told the two that we wanted to keep… 
“The other six, we’re going to probably have to let go.” They said, “Well, 
then, we’re not staying. … We hired on together. We’ve bonded. We’re all 
in this together.” 
Yourdon: Well, I’m glad you mentioned that. It’s the first confirmation I’ve 
gotten. I’ve asked several other people and I’ve gotten a blank stare. I heard 
first from the CIO of Marriott Hotels that teams are being hired together. 
It’s very much— 
Bohlen: Yeah, you talked to Carl? 
Yourdon: Yeah, oh yeah, Carl Wilson. 
Bohlen: He and I have shared similar examples that it just blows you away. 

Chapter 11 | Ken Bohlen:  
Vice President and CIO, Arizona Public Service Company (APS) 
 
226  
Yourdon: Yeah. I had not heard that before. I certainly have heard of 
teams demanding to stay together, which—when they finish one project 
and want to go on to another—which runs afoul of the HR policies in a lot 
of organizations. 
Bohlen: Yeah, it does. The other one I ran into was when we started 
working through the teams of people and trying to figure out who should 
get what compensation. They wanted to have a say in that which, again, you 
would hold that close to your vest in the traditional management style. 
Yourdon: Yes, I certainly agree with that. Interestingly, some of these kinds 
of issues in the IT field in particular have been discussed and debated for 
some 20 years now. I don’t know if you’ve seen a book written by two 
friends of mine, Tom DeMarco and Tim Lister, called Peopleware3. 
Bohlen: Yes. 
Yourdon: All of those topics are still relevant today because there are still 
a lot of organizations that insist on doing things in a very traditional way. But 
I think your point is that this new, younger generation is more and more 
resistant to just sort of buckling under and doing things the old way. 
Bohlen: Exactly. 
Yourdon: Do you have any concerns about how they work or what their 
loyalties or energies or anything else might be? 
Bohlen: Well, I think that I’ve worked my way through it. They don’t have 
any loyalty, but why should they? We’ve taught them not to. 
Yourdon: [laughter] Yeah, that’s been true for 20 years also, unfortunately. 
Bohlen: I do think that they are a whole lot more mobile, but I’ve also 
found, particularly the educated group of people we’re addressing—many of 
them are family-bound or root-bound. Or they saw what happened in their 
families. I had some experience with this in Wichita, Kansas, and Fort Worth, 
Texas—huge operations we had there. We were recruiting from the local 
colleges because the kids didn’t want to leave those areas, the environment 
where they grew up. They wanted to stay close to their moms and dads. 
Yourdon: Ahh, interesting. 
Bohlen: I think the coasts were different. When I was in Rhode Island, I 
didn’t find that as prevalent. However, in Providence, it did go on because, 
                                                
3 [Dorset House (Second Edition), 1999]. 

CIOs at Work 
227  
again, that community is very family-oriented. So they’d hire from Brown
and Bryant. 
So the shift is significantly different for me. I made offers to kids to go to
Fort Worth or to go to Wichita. I know why they didn’t want to go to
Wichita, but that was another issue, but they wouldn’t go. “No, I don’t
want to leave.” And maybe that’s a Midwest as opposed to coast issue. I
don’t know. 
Yourdon: Would that still be true in today’s economy? 
Bohlen: I find it in Phoenix with ASU [Arizona State University] students.
They want to stay in the valley. 
Yourdon: Interesting. Even if it involves a lower-paying job than might be
available in Silicon Valley? 
Bohlen: Yes, and, you know, there are those highly motivated people I
think will go wherever the jobs are and they’ll grow through it. I was just
back in the Midwest at John Deere in Iowa again, chatting with a bunch of
young people, entrepreneurial startup people. I said, “What are you doing in
Iowa?” These are geeky kinds of companies, and they’re working through
some analytics and open-source modules and what have you. And I said,
“Do you want to go where the action is?”  
“No, we’re staying right here.”  
I said, “Well, you know, you’re missing out on the huge opportunity of
capital, because Iowa is a great place to be from, but you’re not going to
run into millionaires just willing to invest capital in startups.” But they have
no interest. 
Yourdon: Well, in addition to that, one of the things we’ve begun to see
with the Web 2.0 industry is that they don’t need millions of dollars to
get started. 
Bohlen: Well, that’s true, too.  
Yourdon: A generation ago, you did. You had to go to Silicon Valley and
find some rich person to give you a million dollars and then you did an
IPO—but I could give you a long list of these Web 2.0 companies that have
been started up on somebody’s credit card with a spare computer that they
had in the garage. And that means you can do it in Iowa, or for that matter,
Bangalore or any other number of places around the world, so.… 

Chapter 11 | Ken Bohlen:  
Vice President and CIO, Arizona Public Service Company (APS) 
 
228  
Bohlen: You’re right and I agree with the context—they communicate on a 
worldwide basis. So maybe there’s a little prejudice from my “what you are 
now is where you were when” perspective. 
Yourdon: [laughter] The only negative thing that I have heard and the rea-
son I kept asking about this actually comes from a man named Paul Strass-
mann [interviewed in Chapter 16], who was the CIO of the Defense De-
partment and the CIO of Xerox and NASA and a few other places. He’s 
very concerned about what he regards as kind of a superficial intellectual 
level of today’s generation. They expect to get everything instantaneously 
from Google, their attention span is five minutes, and they may not be in-
terested or perhaps even capable of deep intellectual concentration. Is that 
something you see at all? 
Bohlen: I’ve seen a correlation to that. Math and science, depth in 
knowledge and skills, particularly in North American universities, is sig-
nificantly less than other worldwide training programs. The reason I’d go 
to India is because I couldn’t find enough skilled aerospace labor here in 
the United States. 
Yourdon: Ahh, but … 
Bohlen: But the depth of that knowledge was very light. So math and sci-
ences, which is in support of that, are skills and avenues that require deep 
thought. So I do think that we’re seeing Geraldo’s “dumbing down of Amer-
ica.” And I think the kinds of attention spans also are adding to that, so 
these are one of those social unknowns I was talking about before. And by 
the way, we’re unconsciously doing it. 
Yourdon: Well, consciously and unconsciously. It’s something I began to 
hear about a while ago with something as innocent as Sesame Street, which 
are tiny little vignettes that are 30 seconds or a minute long because that’s 
all a 5-year-old kid feels like concentrating on—and it stays with them all the 
way through their education these days. 
So, we’ve got just a couple of minutes left, and I wanted to wrap things up 
with what I hope will be an appropriate final question and that is: where do 
you see yourself going from here?  
Bohlen: Carl Wilson [the recently retired CIO of Marriott International] 
and I chatted about this about a month ago, and I think part of what we’re 
doing is giving back to the profession. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 

CIOs at Work 
 
229  
Bohlen: So, trying to do some public speaking. I speak frequently at Gart-
ner events. I’ve been trying to get IT professionals to think about business in 
the terms of business. All the stuff we talked about, the desktop, yes, we’ve 
got to do that. But that’s what we do in our private world. And I’m very 
concerned that today’s IT people don’t understand the value that they can 
bring to their organizations, nor do they understand the value and the 
worth that their organizations are to the companies. And many companies 
are being led and directed by traditionalists or boomers that don’t really 
understand the technology movement and therefore aren’t rewarding the IT 
people appropriately or rightly. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Bohlen: So I’m really on a campaign to push that message. That’s one of 
the things I’ve been doing. Carl Wilson and I chatted about that. Can we 
work with groups like Concourse or Strive to get young leaders aware of 
the business language. So that’s one of the things. Am I interested in another 
CIO? No, not at all. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Bohlen: While I miss the global environment, I’m into teaching the next 
generation. I get a ton of opportunities for this at APS and to speak na-
tionally. I don’t know if I want to travel anymore. I’ve done enough of that. 
So, being in Scottsdale, Arizona, is kind of nice because people come out 
here frequently. 
Yourdon: That’s true. It’s a nice place to visit. 
Bohlen: The dialogue my wife and I are having is like, “Okay, when will 
you be ready to go on to other stuff, like retirement and grandkids?” So, 
it’s interesting. 
Yourdon: Well, that’ll be interesting to see how it plays out for you and 
for Carl—and there’s another gentleman, the University of Miami CIO, who 
has just retired also and is going through similar kinds of questions for him-
self, so I’ll be watching to see where all of you end up. 
Bohlen: [laughter] You know, I took a step. I told Carl, I said, “You know, 
I’m a life learner. Being a chief innovation officer, you’ve got to re-create 
yourself.” So I’ve decided to go back to school again. So I’m now taking 
seminary classes, Greek and Hebrew, because I thought I want to expand 
my mind. 
Yourdon: That’s interesting. 

Chapter 11 | Ken Bohlen:  
Vice President and CIO, Arizona Public Service Company (APS) 
 
230  
Bohlen: So that’s been a very interesting dialogue, a complete change of 
agendas and learning, so that’s one that I’m intrigued with right now. 
Yourdon: Well, that certainly is unique. Nobody else has told me a story 
along those lines. And with that, I think I will wrap this up. I certainly appre-
ciate your taking the time.  
Bohlen: Thanks, Ed. 
Yourdon: Thanks again. I really appreciate it. 
 

C H A P T E R 
12 
Roger Gurnani  
Executive Vice President and CIO, Verizon 
Roger Gurnani is Executive Vice President and Chief Information Officer at Veri-
zon Communication Inc., where he is responsible for information technology strat-
egy, systems development, and operations. Before being named to his current posi-
tion in October 2010, Gurnani was Senior Vice President of New Product Devel-
opment for Verizon Wireless and was responsible for the innovation, development, 
and commercialization of consumer and business products.  
Gurnani is one of the founding officers of Verizon Wireless. Until 2005 he served 
as Vice President and Chief Information Officer, helping to oversee and complete 
the integration of the domestic wireless operations of Bell Atlantic, Vodafone Air-
Touch, and GTE at the company’s inception in 2000. He previously served as Vice 
President and Chief Information Officer at Bell Atlantic Mobile. 
 
Ed Yourdon: So, why don’t we start with the background? People do seem 
to be curious as to how a CIO gets into his or her position, because you 
obviously weren’t born into it. 
Roger Gurnani: Right, right. 
Yourdon: Is this your first position as a CIO, at Verizon?  
Gurnani: Uhh, no. So, you know, I was the CIO at Bell Atlantic Mobile. So, 
most of my career, I grew up in IT, and then… 
Yourdon: Starting as a [systems] analyst, as you said earlier? 

Chapter 12 | Roger Gurnani:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, Verizon 
 
232  
Gurnani: Yeah, yeah. I was telling you about CASE tools back in the ’80s, 
and you worked on many different projects. I was with the Williams Com-
panies. They had moved into telecommunications by laying out fiber optics. 
So that’s how my telecom career from an IT perspective started, when we 
started laying fiber optic cables. So I got an early start with a startup busi-
ness, if you will. But then I joined Bell Atlantic, and after a couple of years I 
became the CIO of Bell Atlantic Mobile, which was a very small wireless 
operation at that time in the mid-’90s. Today it’s grown in the last 15 years, 
so I was fortunate to grow with that business as the CIO. And then the last 
six years I did other stuff. I ran Sales and Operations. I ran the Western 
Division of Verizon Wireless for a few years. Then I did new product de-
velopment for Verizon Wireless, which gave me some other opportunities. 
My current role as the CIO for Verizon Communications, which is the 
corporate—I’ve been in this role for about five months now. So that’s been 
my path to CIO. 
Yourdon: One of the other things people seem to be quite interested in is 
the whole question about role models. Was there anybody that inspired 
you earlier in your career? 
Gurnani: You know, I’ve had the opportunity to work with a lot of differ-
ent people. Through my career, I have had many different bosses. It seems 
like I’ve learned some things from every boss I’ve had. But here in the last, I 
would say, 10 or 11 years, I would say I’ve certainly learned a lot from our 
CEO, Ivan Seidenberg, and our COO, Lowell McAdam. I’ve worked with 
them and watched them and learned from them, the last ten years or so. 
And I guess there’s been just so much change in our industry. 
Yourdon: That certainly is true. 
Gurnani: And, there’s been an opportunity to interact with a lot of differ-
ent players—new players, you know, entering into our industry, so it’s been 
an opportunity to learn from those guys as well. 
Yourdon: I can imagine. Did you have any special training? Does one go to 
CIO School to learn how to become a CIO? 
Gurnani: I don’t think there’s training per se, but it’s really on the job, you 
know. I guess a couple of things helped me. One, my first job getting out of 
college was working for a German manufacturing company that had hired 
me and put me in a fast-start program. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Gurnani: So the first six, eight months, I did like three weeks in the Sales 
department, a month in Manufacturing, maybe a few weeks in Accounting/ 

CIOs at Work 
 
233  
Finance department, a few weeks in IT working on very quick projects, 
working on a sales proposal or sales bid or a quick design program for IT or 
whatever. And that gave me a very good, broad perspective on how busi-
nesses work. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Gurnani: I think that was probably foundational, learning in my career. 
That’s really helped me. The next thing that happened was when Williams 
Companies started WilTel, the telecommunications business. We probably 
did like 20 acquisitions in 5 or 6 years. And I got the opportunity to integrate 
these smaller organizations —and integrate the IT portfolios, the systems 
and streamline not only the IT side of things, but also the business side of 
things. So that came in very handy when Bell Atlantic Mobile merged with 
Nynex Mobile and then when we formed Verizon Wireless, which was bring-
ing in lots of different companies together. So that experience in a small scale 
came in very handy about eight, ten years later. 
Yourdon: Sure. 
Gurnani: We were putting together the largest wireless operations in the 
country, right? 
Yourdon: That’s an interesting point that I’ve not heard from any of the 
other CIOs that I’ve interviewed, but I certainly have seen it, especially in the 
Wall Street area. When these enormous financial services companies merge, 
they’ve got enormous systems that have got to be consolidated or they have 
to just pick one and turn the other one off or lots of variations, so you get 
to see quite a variety of things. That is interesting. Certainly, the one theme 
that I’ve been hearing quite a lot is the value of a broad educational back-
ground, not only in university, but also in the first few assignments after. As 
you say, you get to see a wide spectrum of things going on. 
Gurnani: Right. 
Yourdon: Because I’m sure once you get into your current position, and 
obviously you have to interact with the business peers in all different parts 
of the company. 
Gurnani: Right. 
Yourdon: So that is handy. What about your current position as a CIO 
now? If you had to summarize your role in helping to make Verizon more 
successful, what would it be? 
Gurnani: So my role right now—I have business unit CIOs, so we’re orga-
nized in consumer telecom business, enterprise business, wireless business, 

Chapter 12 | Roger Gurnani:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, Verizon 
 
234  
shared services, wholesale, etc. So, each one of these business units has a 
CIO. And then we have a team that runs all our IT infrastructure. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Gurnani: So that’s how my function is organized. But what I spend a lot of 
my own time on is IT strategy: how do we drive IT forward? A lot of time 
on alignment, making sure IT is very well aligned with the business objec-
tives, with the business goals. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Gurnani: With the business leaders, looking at our business objectives and 
seeing what change needs to happen to achieve those objectives, both from 
a business standpoint as well as from a business process standpoint. Obvi-
ously, you try to look at things from the customers’ viewpoint: what do our 
customers want? And I tell you, what’s really helped me is the five, six years 
that I spent outside of IT. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Gurnani: So the three years that I spent running all of our sales channels 
and operations, running the western part of Verizon Wireless, and then 
for two years doing new product development. So either thinking that, 
“Well, okay, 4G is coming. How do we take advantage of that? What 
would customers benefit from?” Working with others in the company as 
well, particularly marketing, but taking new products from concept to 
commercialization. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Gurnani: So that experience really helped me a lot. Having grown up in IT 
and then spending six years and then doing other jobs, I think has given me 
new perspectives on how to better leverage IT. 
Yourdon: I can imagine. I remember visiting a telephone company in Phoe-
nix. This was about 1991 and they were showing me kind of the next gen-
eration of technology, and I’d never heard of call forwarding and call waiting 
and caller ID and all these things. That was pretty mind-boggling. And I have 
to imagine that kind of process continues on—there’s going to be another 
generation of mobile technology next year or next week or the next dec-
ade. 
Gurnani: Yeah. You know, mobile technology has obviously become main-
stream. It is only about 20 years old. But this has become mainstream. 
Now people spend more time interacting with their mobile devices than 
they do with their computers and stuff. 

CIOs at Work 
 
235  
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Gurnani: If you think about personal computing, that’s not that old either. 
It’s only in the early ’80s when personal computing came about. And it is 
shifting very rapidly. I think the traditional personal computer, the desktop 
computer, is now obsolete. New phone factors, tablets, and so on. So, that’s 
happening. The devices, the people they track with, there’s a lot of innova-
tion that’s going on there. There’s a lot of innovation that’s going on with 
networks. From a wireless perspective, we’ve gone from a 2G to 3G to 4G 
now. And you’re talking about tenfold improvements in terms of throughput 
capabilities. 
Yourdon: With each one of those? 
Gurnani: With each one of those. 
Yourdon: Wow. 
Gurnani: And then obviously we rolled out fiber to customers’ homes with 
our FiOS1 product. The capabilities that we have with FiOS are unprece-
dented. So, that’s happening. The other thing that’s happening is digitization 
of content. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Gurnani: Whether it’s pictures, multimedia, music. You know, you’re talk-
ing about this [interview] is going to get recorded as an MP3 file. So every-
thing is getting digitized with the amount of information and data that peo-
ple want to consume. Now people want to watch movies and TV, download 
it through the Internet. So, we’re seeing exponential growth with data con-
sumption. And if you put all these things together, it creates huge new op-
portunities to create new innovative products and services, so … we just 
announced the launch of our 4G smartphone, which is in the U.S. the first 
LTE, long-term evolution technology-based smartphone. And some of the 
capabilities it has are very high-end games, attractive games that you can 
play with people that are literally across the country. It’s just amazing. 
Yourdon: Now, it raises an interesting question, and I’ll give you a couple 
of examples, because I’d be curious about your take on it, as to the CIO’s 
role in helping shape or support information-based products. When I inter-
viewed the CIO of Google, I asked him, “Are you in charge of Google 
apps?” And he said, “Oh, no, no, no.” 
                                                
1 Verizon FiOS is a full fiber-optic-based service to a customers home with bundled voice, 
Internet, and digital TV. 

Chapter 12 | Roger Gurnani:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, Verizon 
 
236  
Gurnani: That’s a product role. 
Yourdon: “That’s a product. That’s somebody else’s job.” He said, “I keep 
the lights on here inside the company and do a whole bunch of other 
things.” And when I talked to the CIO of Microsoft, I asked him a similar 
question, and he said, “Well, we’re the first in line in terms of dogfooding,” 
as he put it. “You know, we interact a lot with the product people.” 
Gurnani: Tony Scott. 
Yourdon: Tony Scott, exactly. Yes. “But we’re the first people who actu-
ally try it out.” So is there a similar kind of situation for you? 
Gurnani: No. I would say for, for our company, IT is a bit more involved 
with product development, product realization. Let me give you a couple of 
examples. So IT does the normal things that you would expect. We enable 
all the back-office operations, you know, all our ERP systems. The financials. 
Yourdon: I refer to that as “keeping the lights on,” running the factory in 
the background. Back office. 
Gurnani: Well, there’s more to the back office in our business, because 
we’re a service-oriented company, so keeping the lights on is making sure all 
the customer-touching channels are running as well, okay? So all our retail 
stores, all our centers, telesales, all our online touchpoints. You know, 
more than half our customer transactions, customer interactions happen 
with online mechanisms, or through cell phones, and so on. So that is keep-
ing the lights on. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Gurnani: So, definitely, IT has to be central to enabling that. But as it re-
lates to new products, as we roll out new interactive capabilities on our 
televisions through FiOS—like recently we’ve rolled out, a product which 
is called “FlexView.” It allows you to consume content from multiple 
screens and you can browse, purchase or rent, watch, archive, share, de-
pending on the content, from your big-screen TV, from your computer in 
the house, from your smartphones and tablets, no matter where you are 
connected to the Internet. 
Yourdon: Actually, I did see a commercial of a similar or an allegedly simi-
lar capability from Time Warner on TV last night, so I have a sense of it. 
Gurnani: So, making sure the product itself works … obviously it’s a col-
laborative effort. There are technology groups within the company, people 
that build and operate our networks. Those teams are involved. Our mar-
keting folks are involved: how we create demand for it, how do we price it, 

CIOs at Work 
237  
etc. And then IT has to not only be part of the product realization, from
product enablement, but also operationalize the product. Make sure our
sales channels can sell the product. 
Yourdon: I see. 
Gurnani: Make sure our customer support channels online and human-
based customer support channels can support the product. Make sure
we can bill and collect revenue for the products. Make sure we can col-
lect a product, etc. So I would say 80 percent of products we roll out
have to be supported by our central IT systems. 
Yourdon: Interesting. That raises another related question that I’ve asked
just about every CIO about, which has to do with the kind of role and influ-
ence that you have on your business peers. As you’ve been saying, you’ve
got people in marketing and various product groups, and so forth, and
they’re all obviously very successful people because (a) they’re smart, and 
(b) they have very strong personalities—and yet I’m sure you’ve seen situa-
tions where you’re worried that they’re going off in the wrong direction or
they’ve not seen some opportunities that they could be taking advantage of.
But, on the other hand, they don’t work for you, so you can’t order them.
You can order people in your own organization, but certainly not your
peers. How do you go about influencing people in terms of the technology
that you think should either be used or not be used? 
Gurnani: Yeah. So I think that it comes down to building those relation-
ships. So now you’ve touched on—you know, a lot of people ask me, “So,
what does it take to run IT?” And people obviously think IT is all about
technology. 
[both laughing] 
Gurnani: And you know this very well: IT is more about people and rela-
tionships. So you can have the best engineers, technically speaking, but they
are not totally aligned with the business objectives, no matter how good a
technical system or product they create, it doesn’t create business results,
you know? It doesn’t create the business benefits. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Gurnani: So making sure IT is totally lock-step aligned with the rest of the
business, whether it’s marketing or finance or customer support, opera-
tions, etc., is in my view just the most important factor that measures how
successful the business is in leveraging IT. 
Yourdon: Okay. 

Chapter 12 | Roger Gurnani:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, Verizon 
 
238  
Gurnani: So it comes down to relationships and interaction and I spend a 
lot of time in that regard. I encourage my people to spend a lot of time in 
that regard. And I think this thing doesn’t happen overnight. You have to 
build credibility, have that working rapport over an extended period of time. 
So once you get a couple of successful projects or a couple of successful 
laps, with your peers, whether it’s marketing or business unit presidents or 
operations or finance people, then it becomes easy, right? 
Yourdon: Yeah. And I’ve heard similar responses from other CIOs, who 
say, “You need to look for opportunities where you can achieve some de-
monstrable success, because when you get a track record of several of 
those, then they start to trust you more.” 
Gurnani: Yeah, and I think that over my 30 years—I’m rounding it to 30 
years of my professional life—I have seen this become better, easier, simply 
because today’s business environment, today’s personal environment, in our 
personal life, everything is so technology-dependent and technology-
interwoven. You know, we’re so dependent on our PDAs and smartphones 
and so dependent on all the entertainment is now in some form of digital 
interaction. All our productivity tools and what we do around the house 
now are all very technology-driven. As a human being, you interact with 
probably 30, 40 different companies.  
Yourdon: That’s true. 
Gurnani: There’s so much technology that comes into play and we’re so 
accustomed to it that it seems natural—so there’s far greater recognition 
that technology is a key part of running the business today than it was 
twenty, thirty years ago. At least, that’s been my experience.  
Yourdon: Well, as you say, now it’s a pervasive part of life in general. But 
certainly, if you’re running a technology company, any kind of information 
company in the broader sense of the term, you’re more likely to have busi-
ness executives who have a higher level of understanding and appreciation 
and so forth than might be the case if you were a widget company. As you 
know, 30 years ago, there were a lot of business executives, vice president–
level people who couldn’t even do e-mail. Obviously, that has changed for 
everybody to some extent, but especially in an information company, I would 
think. There’s, there’s another aspect that just occurred to me that I’d be 
curious about because of the news headlines every day. A lot of the compa-
nies I’ve spoken to have some degree of global presence, and the CIOs have 
said to me, “Basically, we’re on call 24 hours a day ’cause stuff happens 
around the world 24 hours a day.” 
Gurnani: Right, whatever happens. 

CIOs at Work 
 
239  
Yourdon: How does that affect you, or Verizon? 
Gurnani: It does. You know, we are a global business as well. We have a 
global IP backbone. We carry about 30 percent of the Internet traffic 
globally. 
Yourdon: Wow. Is that right? 
Gurnani: We provide not only network services, connectivity services 
globally; we also provide IT solutions and now we’re getting into the cloud 
space as well. We provide those services globally. 
Yourdon: Aha. Okay. 
Gurnani: We have employees around the globe. Our IT organization is 
also global. That gives us a little bit of flexibility in terms of running a global 
around-the-clock operation. So we’ve got systems work, for example, going 
on around the clock. We’ve got people watching the stuff and doing stuff 
from different parts of the world. And then there’s a handoff, which is like 
the “follow the sun” model. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Gurnani: Now, we haven’t perfected it, but we are maturing. We’re get-
ting better and working out the kinks, but today’s business does require that 
type of a model for our customers. 
Yourdon: Does that mean that you might get a phone call or an e-mail at 
three in the morning saying, “There’s been another earthquake someplace?” 
Gurnani: Yeah. Having been in IT most of my career, I’ve been pretty used 
to that. 
Yourdon: You mentioned a familiar buzzword a few moments ago, and it’s 
one of the next sections that I wanted to get into, which is new trends that 
might influence the industry in the future—cloud computing being one ex-
ample. There’s a lot of debate about whether it really is new, but putting 
that aside, what kind of new technologies do you see really having a big im-
pact on the Verizon kind of industry? 
Gurnani: So, cloud is definitely a trend. What’s happening is more and 
more customers want a one-stop shop and they want not only the network 
services; they want the infrastructure, the software, the applications, all to-
gether and packaged, flexible, on-demand, right? So, more and more cus-
tomers are adopting that model. This concept is not new, but the adoption 
is picking up speed, and this is a natural for small and medium-sized busi-
nesses, because they don’t have a large IT organization and it’s difficult for 

Chapter 12 | Roger Gurnani:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, Verizon 
 
240  
them to make an investment, support it themselves, and going to a cloud 
model lets you not have to worry about upgrades. As the technology 
evolves, they can be assured that they will be able to play … it’s more of a 
utility model if you will. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Gurnani: So it’s definitely penetrated the small to medium segment. The 
large enterprise customers are also interested in this model because the 
economics make a whole lot of sense. It’s a different economic model. We 
offer a full stack of cloud services and we’ve been pretty aggressive in ex-
panding our capabilities in this area.  
We acquired a couple or three years ago, Cybertrust Security practice, 
which is very well known, has done very well. Recently we acquired a 
Terramark, which runs a lot of data centers. We own lots of data centers 
around the globe. We obviously provide the network-based services, but 
we have been also providing the infrastructure services and now it’s the 
full cloud utility. So that’s a trend.  
Mobility, there’s lots happening. Now enterprise customers are beginning to 
say, “Well, we provide our employees a computer and a smartphone or a 
tablet. Why can’t the employee do everything they need to do on one de-
vice?” Or, “How can we virtualize the device?” 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Gurnani: “When they come to work, it’s a business device. When they go 
home, it becomes a personal device. How can you make it more secure?” 
All that stuff. So, the enterprises have their unique needs. The individual 
consumers have different needs, you know. The other trend that’s happen-
ing very fast is, in the ’80s, ’90s, information technology used to be created 
for, primarily for businesses and enterprises. But today what’s happening is, 
you know, a lot of technology is for consumers and then it’s being applied 
or practically pulled into the enterprise environment. 
Yourdon: Well, to some extent that’s a form of what you were just talking 
about a moment ago with cloud computing, that it’s initially very attractive 
to the startup companies and then maybe somewhat later on that the For-
tune 500 companies begin to say, “Hey, this is interesting.” 
Gurnani: The Fortune 500 are also, you know, getting into it because from 
an economics standpoint, you don’t have to spend a lot of capital. So it 
makes a lot of economic sense. 

CIOs at Work 
 
241  
Yourdon: Sure. But the general trend that you mentioned a second ago is 
one that Ben Fried of Google mentioned to me: “Instead of starting with 
enterprise-oriented apps and then seeing how we can push them down to 
the consumer, now it’s flipped around.” 
Gurnani: It’s flipped around. 
Yourdon: “And we’re starting off,” with Google being the classic example, 
with Google Mail and Google Apps. They start at the consumer level, and 
then they go up and make it more bulletproof and secure and so forth so 
that it has a market in the enterprise.” 
Gurnani: You know, a lot of the devices, the consumer electronics  
devices—the phone you’re holding there, the tablets and so on—created 
for the consumer and then very quick, rapid adoption by businesses, right? 
Yourdon: Right. 
Gurnani: Whereas in the old days, it used to be we created a computer, 
what it was for the business, and then pushed it down. 
Yourdon: Yeah. Now, part of what makes this interesting, is that some of 
these trends have been underway for 5, 10, 20, 30 years, and we imagine 
that they will continue on. Do you see any brand-new things that we basi-
cally didn’t have five or ten years ago that will become significant trends 
over the next decade? 
Gurnani: We’re still in the early stages of those trends. So digitization of 
information—that trend, we’re still in the early days. Now you’re talking 
about digitizing healthcare records and other records. So the future is all 
about digitizing. It’s a digitized world, and I think we’re still in the early 
stages of life, and it’s only accelerating.  
We talked about how, as the demand for information and data consumption 
continues to grow and people now are consuming and demanding lots more 
data, with lots of choice, flexibility, freedom. So they don’t want to buy the 
package, they want to buy a la carte: “I want to watch this show at this time 
at my convenience,” rather than when the show comes on. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Gurnani: So, I think that thread is only going to accelerate. I think it’s only 
going to accelerate—all the advances with networks, broadband networks, 
4G networks, etc., advances in devices are going to enable virtual corpora-
tions, virtual enterprises. So, sometime in the future, you won’t need build-
ings like these to run a large business. People could be anywhere. That is 
happening. For example, we run our IT help desk with a lot of people that 

Chapter 12 | Roger Gurnani:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, Verizon 
 
242  
are in different places. Three days, four days, they can work from home. 
We have the ability to route the calls to their house. And the customers, 
the end users, don’t even know the difference. In fact, we’ve seen our user 
satisfaction scores go up, our productivity levels go up. 
Yourdon: Ahh, interesting. 
Gurnani: And so that’s just a small example of what perhaps the future 
might hold. 
Yourdon: One other thing you said earlier may shed some light on it. You 
were talking about the evolution of these networks, from 1G to 2G to 3G 
and so on, and saying that each one of them represented a ten-fold im-
provement. There’s an old saying that if you improve technology by 10 per-
cent, it’s incremental and will kind of be ignored—but if you make it ten-
fold, a factor of 10, that changes the very quality of the technology, the ex-
perience and so on.  
People do things fundamentally differently if they have to drive 30 miles per 
hour versus getting in an airplane and flying 300 miles per hour. So if that 
continues—well, Moore’s Law, I think, is safe for another decade or so. So 
whatever we’ve got today is going to be 100 times faster, cheaper, smaller 
within a decade, which is pretty amazing. So that will probably create, as 
you were saying, new demands, new uses, things that we can’t even imagine 
right now. 
Gurnani: So, people working from home—that’s happening. The other 
thing, how it’s manifesting itself in the business environment, its value is 
starting to shift at very fast speeds now. You have major businesses, like 
Netflix, for example, that didn’t exist a few years ago. Now it’s so big. So 
new business models shift in value. You know, innovation can come from 
anywhere, ’cause it’s a digital super-interconnected world. 
Yourdon: Right. That’s an area that I’ve been trying to explore and I’ve had 
great trouble doing, but I’ll give you an example: I was hoping to be able to 
talk to the CIO of, let’s say, Avis or Hertz on one side and Zipcar on the 
other side—’cause there’s an example where technology has facilitated an 
entirely different business model. Do you see that kind of disruption taking 
place in the telecommunications industry? 
Gurnani: Well, it has and I think we’ve already gone through a couple of 
waves of disruption. Mobile is huge, and you look at how the ecosystem 
continues to evolve and change. Like Apple was not in the mobile busi-
ness until four years ago. Today they’re big. And they’ve created a nice 
spot for themselves. 

CIOs at Work 
 
243  
So, yes, there are a lot of disruptive forces in our ecosystem. However, our 
bedrock, our foundation is making sure that we build very reliable, state-of-
the-art networks. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Gurnani: Which takes a lot of expertise, a lot of capital, and people who 
need that at the end of the day. So, that’s the core part of our value chain 
if you will. 
Yourdon: Interesting. How do you take into account the changing market-
place, attitudes, especially from one generation to the next? Notwithstand-
ing the technology, I would not be willing to watch a movie on a tiny screen 
like my iPhone, but my kids will. I’m willing to read the newspaper on a Kin-
dle, but my wife won’t. Do you build that into your planning as well? 
Gurnani: I would say, in the last few years, yes, we have to build that into 
our planning because we, just like everybody else, we are realizing what’s 
happened, how fast things are changing. So there’s no doubt, the younger 
generation, they don’t want a wired phone, a telephone line to the house, 
apartment, or whatever. Wireless is good enough for them. We started 
seeing that trend several years ago. 
Yourdon: Yes. 
Gurnani: We are also seeing trends—as I mentioned to you before, people 
are spending more time in front of their mobile devices than they are in 
front of their stationery devices. We rolled out our service, which allows 
you to browse, purchase or rent and consume and share content on multi-
ple screens, because we know customers want choice. They want flexibility. 
So that’s what it’s all about. It’s called “customer is king.” It means flexibility, 
and the younger generation demonstrate those traits. [laughter] 
Yourdon: And how do you go about finding out what it is the younger 
generation wants or is thinking or dreaming about? 
Gurnani: We hire the younger generation as well. [laughter] 
Yourdon: And just watch them? 
Gurnani: No, we talk to our younger-generation customers as well. We 
get feedback from our customers. That’s the other change that’s hap-
pened—getting feedback from customers, I think, over the years has be-
come a lot easier. 
Yourdon: That’s true. If they can just do something right on their mobile 
device and just send it in. 

Chapter 12 | Roger Gurnani:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, Verizon 
 
244  
Gurnani: Or go online, blogs or customer forums, get feedback that way. 
You get feedback from a lot of different sources. So the online properties 
of Verizon.com, it’s become a very central customer-engagement channel 
for us. 
Yourdon: Interesting. Now you mentioned the younger generation coming 
to work here, either in the IT department or anywhere else. Aside from 
their greater sense of comfort with technology or familiarity, do you notice 
any other changes with the younger generation of employees that are either 
good or bad? 
Gurnani: I think it’s mostly good, but there are a few things. I think the 
social interaction and the face-to-face communications, interactions I think 
are still important. Maybe I’m from the older generation. I’m biased with my 
view. But in my opinion that face-to-face interaction and that teaming col-
laboration is still important. And I think the younger generation does not 
pay as much attention to that. 
Yourdon: They’d rather just text you than just look you in the eye and tell 
you something. 
Gurnani: Yes. But I think this is mostly positive, right? I wouldn’t say 
there’s anything that stands out that’s something that’s a big issue. 
Yourdon: One of the answers I expected to get in this area, from CIOs in 
particular, since part of their job is protecting the information asset, one of 
the things I expected was that the younger generation has less regard for 
the traditional kind of… 
Gurnani: See, in my notes, I wrote down “intellectual property rights.” 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Gurnani: But I didn’t know if you wanted to go down that trail or not—but 
you’re right. You’re right. We see some of our younger employees, they’re 
very comfortable going on Twitter, going on Facebook and talking, and 
sometimes they need to be guided a bit in terms of what’s appropriate and 
what’s inappropriate, in terms of what gets put where. 
Yourdon: Guidance certainly is quite understandable, but one of the things 
that I started seeing maybe three years ago, when the whole Web 2.0 world 
took off, was companies just completely outlawing blogs, saying that, “Basi-
cally, we just don’t trust our employees. We’re not going to let them blog 
because they might allow some of these intellectual property things to get 
out in the open.” 
Gurnani: I think we’ve been through that phase. 

CIOs at Work 
 
245  
Yourdon: That may be another example of things changing far more rapidly 
than they did when I was a young man. 
Gurnani: And in my opinion, that doesn’t work, just completely blocking. So 
there are some controls that you have to put in place. But I think what’s 
more effective is training awareness, coaching, guiding employees, and making 
them understand the responsibility they have in protecting information assets 
and what’s the right business judgment versus not. 
Yourdon: Sure. I agree. And I’ve always said to people, “You’ve had that 
same problem 20 years ago, that your employees could go out into the 
public and attend a technical conference or write an article for a magazine 
and the same issues applied.” Now it’s more instant. And sometimes peo-
ple do act in kind of an impetuous fashion without thinking about what 
they’re doing. 
Gurnani: So we have a code of business conduct. We do a lot of training 
and communicating what’s the right thing to do. Once in a while we have a 
violation, and we take appropriate actions. I think that’s something that you 
have to do all of the time. Sometimes you see even our older employees. 
Yourdon: That’s a good point. It’s not just the young ones necessarily. 
Gurnani: So I think it’s part of maturing and becoming a responsible em-
ployee. And I think the employers or the companies have to facilitate that. 
Yourdon: There’s another aspect of younger employees that I’m curious 
about… a phenomenon of kids coming out of college and applying for jobs 
as a team. Have you seen that at all? 
Gurnani: As a team? 
Yourdon: As a team. “Hire all of us or none of us.” 
Gurnani: No, we haven’t seen that. 
Yourdon: Okay. Well, maybe that was an exception then. Because he was 
telling me about four kids who came out of MIT, and they studied together, 
worked together, learned software together, and they wanted to work to-
gether. And three of them got a job offer from some very good company, 
and the other one didn’t, so. 
Gurnani: So they declined. 
Yourdon: So they all turned it down. 
Gurnani: Oh, wow. No, I haven’t heard that, but I have seen people from 
MIT seem to be connected and want to do things. 

Chapter 12 | Roger Gurnani:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, Verizon 
 
246  
Yourdon: [laughter] I’m an MIT graduate, and we were loners when I went 
to school there. What about the degree of control you impose on new 
hires with regard to the personal devices that they either bring into the of-
fice with them or take home with them? 
Gurnani: We have certain standards, and we have certain guidelines, okay? 
And, given that we sell a variety of devices to the consumers, our policies 
are quite open. And I often have this dialogue with the peer community, 
other CIOs—who want to restrict the devices. We can manage multiple 
devices as the security solutions work fairly well. So we practice and eat our 
own dog food there as well. 
Yourdon: That’s a good opportunity that a lot of companies don’t have, 
I suppose. 
Gurnani: Yeah, exactly right. Now, we also work with our partners, people 
who make these gadgets and make these operating systems and make the 
apps and services that run on these—we work with them as we see certain 
opportunities to improve and solidify, strengthen security aspects. But en-
terprises have to pay attention to security. You have to protect. You have 
an obligation to the customers, plus in many cases it’s the law. We have to 
abide by the law as well. 
Yourdon: Yeah. So there may be security regulations. Yeah. Well, I’m get-
ting a consistent theme from just about everybody on that score as well. 
Again, it was not too long ago that you would hear CIOs saying, “Our em-
ployees are only allowed to have a BlackBerry or only allowed to have a 
Windows PC or whatever. That’s it. Period.” And now they can’t impose 
that degree of control. They can certainly deal with guidelines and security 
policies and things of that sort, but not everybody has the variety of devices 
that you’re providing to the consumer marketplace. But almost all of the 
CIOs I’ve spoken to have backed off and have said, “Within some reason-
able limits, you can bring any gadget you want into the office. As long as you 
behave with it properly.” 
Gurnani: Right. 
Yourdon: Okay. That is interesting. Now you mentioned a second ago 
comparing notes or chatting with other CIOs—and I’d like to pursue that 
for just a second. How important is that in your role as a CIO? 
Gurnani: I think it’s very important. We obviously pick up different tips or 
ideas, suggestions. If one’s got a particular need, you can always bounce off 
different ideas to see if it helps there. Many times, our companies are trying 
to do business together and there is partnership, collaboration, between the 

CIOs at Work 
247  
business development executives, between the marketing, the sales execu-
tives. And if you strike up a conversation between the CIOs, that can fur-
ther along the partnership or the collaboration. 
Yourdon: It makes a lot of sense. I hadn’t thought of that, but you’re right. 
Gurnani: So, I find that becoming a key part of that dialogue with the CIO
community. It comes in very handy.  
Yourdon: I would think that a CIO in any company is going to be dealing
with vendors, whether it’s hardware vendors or software vendors or what-
ever—so connecting to the CIO of those vendor companies is a given. And
I certainly have gotten the impression that there’s a fair amount of—it’s al-
most like a club, particularly because some CIOs do move around from one
place to another, and there are annual conferences and so on, and after a
while you get to know who you can call up and or e-mail to ask a question. 
Gurnani: Yep, yep, yep. 
Yourdon: What about the people who work with you as part of your own
team? In your case, you said it was CIOs of the various business units and so
forth. Are there particular skills or criteria that you look for to have some-
body on your team? What things really matter to you in that area? 
Gurnani: You know, I have a fairly seasoned team—which helps out a lot.
To answer your question, it’s really focused on business results—but I
wanted to get to one of your questions here. [sounds of looking through
papers] Umm, here it is. You know, I think you were asking what would
prevent my subordinates to do my job?  
Yourdon: What weaknesses might prevent them from doing a good job as
the CIO? 
Gurnani: So, what I wanted to mention to you was two of my good subor-
dinates are ready to do my job. And they’ve been with the business for a
long time. And a couple of them I hired many years ago. I feel like I’ve been
groomed for my job for the last many years. You got rotated into the busi-
ness, worldwide sales, operations, global product development. But I think
two things are important. It’s really focusing on business results. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Gurnani: So getting an IT project done is not sufficient. Yeah, you have to
get that done. That’s table stake. But then are you extracting or leveraging
that IT capability to drive business results—so that’s what I, encourage my
team to do. So I always tell them, “Big project. Long project. A lot of hard 

Chapter 12 | Roger Gurnani:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, Verizon 
 
248  
work. You got to get it done. It’s in production. Good job,” but that’s day 
one of that project. 
[both laughing] 
Yourdon: Right. 
Gurnani: “Now we gotta make sure it’s really delivered, what we said we’d 
deliver.” So is it driving sales? Is it driving revenue growth? Or is it driving 
efficiencies or product acceptance? So that’s one. The other is really making 
sure you have very strong business relationship management, business 
alignment. So making sure IT is working on the right stuff that’s really going 
to matter for the business. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Gurnani: As I said, I’ve been through like 60 mergers and acquisitions in my 
career, so I’ve worked with many different companies and had to integrate 
IT pieces and so on. A lot of times you see IT is working on stuff that’s 
really great stuff. But does it really matter for the business? You know, if 
you think about it from a business standpoint. So those are the two things 
that I think are the key points, where CIOs can make a huge, huge differ-
ence to a business. 
Yourdon: Now how can we turn that into advice for the young IT profes-
sional who’s aspiring to become a CIO 20 years from now? What would 
you tell him or her? 
Gurnani: So a couple of things there. One, learn the business. 
Yourdon: Learn the business. Okay. 
Gurnani: And the second thing is, you not only want to be an IT leader; 
you want to be a business leader. So I’ll tell you a story. This again goes back 
to the ’80s, you know, my early days. Within IT, you had midlevel managers, 
leaders, and the business people actually had to fund the projects, okay? 
And what that resulted in was, within IT, a lot of internal competition and 
politics and it was intended to create good alignment with the business, but 
what I saw was, it was actually hurting the IT to business objectives align-
ment. And I saw what was going on, and even though the business said, 
“Okay, this is what we want, and this is what we are funding,” within IT 
there were competitive forces where—someone would try to undermine 
the project for the other, because that’s the way the environment was.  
I think that’s where I learned a few lessons about how important it is for IT 
and all the business functions to be totally aligned and all moving together. 

CIOs at Work 
 
249  
And if you can create an environment that does that, you just get the maxi-
mum leverage, maximum benefit in terms of IT. 
Yourdon: Okay. Very interesting. I’ve got some questions about problems 
and concerns and issues. What is it that keeps you up at night—if there is 
anything that keeps you awake? [laughter] And I think I know the answer to 
this, but it’s one that I’ve asked all the CIOs. 
Gurnani: I think your question was, “What political problems and issues do 
you face?” And, I would say—I’ve been with our company for a long time. I 
know all the business leaders, all the way from the top down and across 
very well. So if, if there’s a minor issue, I’m very easily able to work through 
that—and having said that, our business culture is such that there’s a lot of 
emphasis on teamwork and customer focus and results, so politics is not an 
issue per se. Your other question on problems, threats, issues, concerns 
over the next year or two: security—obviously, we talked quite a bit about 
that—is top of mine. And that’s because it’s such a large business. You 
know, hundreds of thousands of employees, millions of customers, global, 
and, you always have to keep that top of mind, not only in my mind, but 
everybody else’s. 
You know, some other things I would say in that area is, our industry, our 
ecosystem, is going through some phenomenal changes. We talked about 
how value is shifting between players and if you look at what’s happened in 
the music industry and all that. So digitization is creating some great new 
trends. And as I also mentioned earlier, our bedrock foundation is making 
sure that we build very powerful and very reliable networks, because every-
body at the end of the day is going to need networks and the ability to 
communicate, whether it’s wireless or through fiber or a global IP backbone. 
Yourdon: Something you said earlier is relevant here. I would think that 
one of your possible concerns might be that the technology is changing so 
rapidly that you may not have enough time to amortize or to depreciate 
the capital investment you’ve been forced to make in these very expensive 
networks. When I was just getting out of college, the old story was that 
AT&T/Bell Labs built stuff that lasted for 40 years, and that gave them 
plenty of time to write it off. But if a whole new generation of technology 
comes along three years later and you’ve already sunk x billion dollars into 
the previous technology—maybe it doesn’t keep you, but the CFO awake 
at night.  
Gurnani: No, that’s almost become a core competency of ours, okay? 
That’s what we do for a living. [laughter] 
Yourdon: Okay. 

Chapter 12 | Roger Gurnani:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, Verizon 
 
250  
Gurnani: Okay, so going from 2G to 3G to 4G—our 4G program is a 
three-year program, a four-year program to build up, and our 2G is still go-
ing to be around for the next 10 years, 12 years, because we have still mil-
lions of customers that are still using it. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Gurnani: Okay. So, an example I would give you is, in the early ’90s we 
built analog cellular networks. We just shut down analog about three, four 
years ago. So even though new technology had been overlaid on top of the 
old technology, it’s the same thing that happens with IT or a computer in 
your house. You don’t shut down your old computer the day you bring in 
your new computer. Either you give it to your kid or you keep it as a side 
computer, maybe for a special task or something. So all that gets factored 
into how we do our planning, technology planning each year. 
Yourdon: Well, that’s a very good point. And the other software example, 
of course, is that we’re still running COBOL, in legacy apps, 50 years after 
they were written and probably will for another 50 years. Umm, I scribbled 
down another note that just occurred to me—I don’t know if it relates to 
your industry at all, but you had mentioned music before. You know, the 
whole music industry rested on the idea that people respected intellectual 
property. And now society obviously has begun looking at that entirely dif-
ferently. IBM and Microsoft depended on the notion that proprietary soft-
ware would always be a profitable venture, and now open-source software 
changes that quite a lot. Is there anything equivalent for the telecommunica-
tions world? 
Gurnani: Not really because we are a distribution channel for the people 
who create the bits and bytes and stuff, right? So, we don’t necessarily get 
into the bits and bytes per se. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Gurnani: But we connect the end points that the bits and bytes move be-
tween, whether it’s a movie or a video or a song or e-mail or a voice call or 
a voicemail. We don’t get involved with those. We’re the distribution chan-
nel. And the other thing that we do is facilitate the commerce that takes 
place—so billing customers, collecting customers, doing revenue sharing, or 
whatever the case may be. We will produce the bits to the people who con-
sume the bits. So I don’t believe there’s something equivalent directly as it 
relates to telecom, but there’s no doubt as those things happen, they are 
massive value shifts that happen within the ecosystem.  
Yourdon: Okay. 

CIOs at Work 
 
251  
Gurnani: We are players, right? So we have to be agile enough to make 
sure that we recognize those value shifts and we don’t do anything stupid to 
get caught in the undercurrents. 
Yourdon: Okay, one last question for you, and it’s kind of the obvious end-
ing point: Where do you see yourself going next? What is life after CIO? 
Gurnani: I don’t know. As I mentioned to you, I just got to this job five 
months ago, so I’m having fun. Intellectually, I find my job challenging. Pro-
fessionally, it’s rewarding. There’s lots to be done here. We’ve got some 
challenges and some things to do, for the next two, three, four, five years, 
I’m busy. 
But, a couple of things I will add. Throughout my career, I’ve done a lot of 
things, moved into different roles. As I said, I spent six years or so outside 
of IT, ran Sales, Operations when I was the West Area president for Veri-
zon Wireless, in new product development. None of my moves throughout 
my career—and I know this sounds unbelievable—have been planned 
moves. They just seem to have happened. 
Yourdon: I’ve heard that from at least one other person. 
Gurnani: So my current job, I didn’t plan to be in this job. But I got the call. 
My previous job I wasn’t planning to be in, but I got the call. The previous 
job I wasn’t planning to be in. So I’ve not had to plan my moves throughout 
my career. It’s things have happened. 
Yourdon: Opportunities have presented themselves. 
Gurnani: Yes. So, so I don’t tend to worry about or think about, “Okay, 
what’s next?” 
Yourdon: I, I had kind of expected when I started putting this together that 
an awful lot of CIOs would say, “I enjoy this, but the next step would be 
something up to the CEO level.” Almost nobody has said that.  
Gurnani: So, three, three and a half years I was the West Area president 
for Verizon Wireless. I was running the business, I had all the sales channels, 
I had all the customer support operations, I had P&L responsibility, market-
ing, PR, etc. So it was not a CEO job, but it was close to that. 
Yourdon: Pretty close. 
Gurnani: Yeah. Pretty close. You know, I used to get involved with some 
state-level regulatory issues and stuff like that, so a lot of different dimen-
sions. And I learned a lot, but I also realized that, “Okay, where I can create 
more value for a company and business is in the job I’m in.” 

Chapter 12 | Roger Gurnani:  
Executive Vice President and CIO, Verizon 
 
252  
Yourdon: In the CIO job. 
Gurnani: CIO. And I can definitely do that job, but all my experiences, 30 
years or so, I would say have prepared me for this job better than they have 
prepared me for anything else. 
Yourdon: I would think also part of the answer that anyone would give to 
a question like that would be based on your own belief about the future 
relevance or importance of the CIO position. And I gather that’s a common 
area of debate among CIOs when they get together or at the CIO.com con-
ferences. Will there be a CIO ten years from now? 
Gurnani: As we were talking earlier, IT, information technology, is now so 
central to running any business. It’s like making sure you’re managing your 
finances. You’ve got to manage your IT, you’ve got to manage it. It’s that 
central. And I think most businesses right now realize that. 
Yourdon: The CIO of Detroit Energy, whom I spoke to, had the same an-
swer. She said, “I’ve never planned my next position, but, you know, out of 
the blue the phone would ring, and lo and behold.” 
Gurnani: Yeah. 
Yourdon: She said she got really good at deciding what opportunities to 
turn down, but she never worried about whether something eventually 
would come along. Very, very interesting. Okay, well, I could go on all 
day, but I’m sure you’ve got tons of other things to do, so I think I will 
turn this off. 
 

C H A P T E R 
13 
Ashish Gupta  
Managing Director of Service Design,  
British Telecom (BT) 
Ashish Gupta is Managing Director/President of Portfolio & Service 
Design (P&SD), BT Global Services. BT Global Services provides networked 
IT services to its multi-national customers across the United Kingdom, other 
European countries, the Middle East, Africa, Asia-Pacific, and the Americas.  
Mr. Gupta has dual accountability reporting to the CEOs of both BT Global 
Services and BT Innovate & Design (BTI&D), which designs and 
implements BT’s network, systems, and business processes for BT units 
globally. In his capacity as Managing Director/President, P&SD, Gupta has 
the responsibility for implementing global services network and IT strategy.  
Before joining BT in 2004, Mr. Gupta spent about nine years with Tech 
Mahindra, an IT outsourcing company, in various roles, including as an IT 
delivery director responsible for the company’s CRM practice.  Gupta holds 
an MBA in General Management from the London Business School. 
 
Ed Yourdon: I like to ask a starting question, which is basically how you 
got to where you are now, because people were obviously not born into 
the position of CIO. So, how did you get here? 

Chapter 13 | Ashish Gupta:  
Managing Director of Service Design, British Telecom (BT) 
 
254  
Ashish Gupta: Okay, so, how did I get here? If I just clarify the role that 
I do, because I am the CIO for BT Global Services. But I also have many 
other functions as part of my role. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Gupta: Actually, the way we’re organized in BT is we have a federated 
CIO structure, so Clive Selley is the CIO for BT Group. We have four 
legal entities that are listed, and not separately but as part of BT Group, 
and each business unit has in effect a CIO that represents the interests of 
that group but also perform a wider function, so we call them not CIOs, 
but MDs or presidents of service design. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Gupta: And we call them the presidents or MDs of service design 
because in effect, the responsibility of the role that we carry is more than 
the management of the IT infrastructure for the company. It’s also all 
about taking the ideas and product innovations functions and getting them 
converted into a set of designs and a delivered combination of people, 
process, systems and tooling capabilities for the business to use. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Gupta: In effect, that’s what I do for GS. I have other roles: BT Global 
Services is into IT outsourcing, so network IT services is what we do. 
And I also have the responsibility for the function which is responsible for 
transforming the estate that we manage for our customers. So I have the 
team around the world—of 3,200—that works with the accountants to 
transform customer accounts, when we win bids, to move them onto the 
BT infrastructure. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Gupta: So it’s a little bit wider than a typical CIO function. I do the 
systems for Global Services, and I make sure that we create the right 
tooling and capability for the operations teams. But I also run the 
portfolio for Global Services, so the product portfolio team works for 
me, and I also run this service delivery organization, on transition and 
transformation. 
Yourdon: Okay. Well, it’s similar to what I’ve heard from virtually 
everybody else in terms of their responsibility for just keeping the lights 
on, just running the operation—but you’re much more involved in the 
product area than some of the other people that I’ve spoken to.  But 
back to my original question. 

CIOs at Work 
 
255  
Gupta: How did we get here? 
Yourdon: Were you a CIO somewhere else before you took this 
position? 
Gupta: No. It’s basically been an upward career progression. I started off as 
an IT engineer out of the university. I got through several different functional 
roles, whether they were development, design through project and program 
management. I used to work for an Indian IT outsourcing company. 
Yourdon: Which one? 
Gupta: Called Tech Mahindra, which I joined out of university in India. 
Tech Mahindra was a joint venture between The Mahindra Group and BT. 
Which is how it was instituted. And I worked there for a good nine years, 
at which point I basically moved to BT to join Clive Selley’s team when he 
was the CIO of BT Wholesale, which is one of our divisions. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Gupta: And then from that it’s just been essentially career progression 
roles. I took on a role running the entire estate in BT, which was about 
4,000 systems across the world. And then when Clive moved on to be 
the group CIO, I took on his erstwhile role—which was the CIO of 
Global Services, all the product president of portfolio and service 
delivery. 
Yourdon: Okay. Well, that was the kind of story I expected to hear 
from everybody, and I’ve been staggered by the variety. And that’s given 
me the opportunity to ask you a question as to the importance or non-
importance that you might feel about your foundation, your starting core 
as an IT engineer. How important is that to what you do today? 
Gupta: For me, it is pretty important. You know, I feel the need to 
understand what it is the teams are doing, so it’s not management by 
management but by understanding how the nuts and bolts work. I do think 
though that it is a balance, because the CIO role is a lot wider as it’s defined 
today. It’s a very integral part of the business than it maybe has been in the 
past, when it was just about doing IT, so I think it’s not very surprising that 
we have economists or erstwhile chemists or whatever that are doing CIO 
functions because I think the way it’s evolved, a lot of the technology aspects.  
A lot of CIOs are now actually increasingly people who are very good at 
outsourcing stuff because lots of corporations are deciding that maybe 
there are certain aspects of what the CIO did that aren’t core 
competencies. It isn’t something that they want an IT department for in-

Chapter 13 | Ashish Gupta:  
Managing Director of Service Design, British Telecom (BT) 
 
256  
house and it actually might be better done through an outsourced 
partner. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Gupta: And then what you need is somebody who’s very good at 
managing the partner as opposed to somebody who’s good at doing the IT 
itself. So I think there’s a good sort of mix and balance depending on what 
the core strengths and what the aspiration of the organization is, in terms 
of the individual that runs the booth as opposed to whether or not you 
graduated from engineering school and then made your way up through the 
ranks. So while it might be surprising, I think it’s actually quite healthy. It 
keeps it current. 
Yourdon: One reinforcement that I heard from somebody is that having 
a strong engineering or IT background gives you, as he put it rather 
bluntly, have a good crap detector. If somebody is trying to sell you a 
story, you have a more fundamental sense of whether it’s exaggerated or 
complete rubbish or… 
Gupta: I’d agree with that. I think that’s pretty fair. 
Yourdon: One last question in this kind of starting area. As you’ve kind 
of moved up through the ranks, did you take any special training or go 
back to school to get any special degree? 
Gupta: I did. I attended a set of business courses, just through the 
career, and then I actually invested two years doing an executive MBA. So 
I was doing that at the same time I was doing my previous role. I was 
doing it at London Business School. I did it while still on the job. That was 
pretty tough, because those programs are very extensive. But I found that 
to be extremely useful. A good grounding in the wider context. 
Yourdon: Sure. 
Gupta: I brought a whole bunch of “home truths” back to bear in terms 
of how engineers think about the world and how the broader context 
thinks about work, and I found that to be a very useful experience. 
Yourdon: Well, I had expected to hear that from almost everyone, and 
it’s not been true very often. And the reason I ask these questions is that 
I run into a lot of junior IT people who say, “Someday, when I grow up, I 
want to be a CIO, just like the man sitting up there in that office.” So 
they’re very curious about how people get started and what kind of 
additional training might be appropriate or useful along the way, which is 
the reason for all those questions. But in terms of the main assignment or 

CIOs at Work 
257  
the main job that you do, you’d already mentioned that there were three
main parts of it. How extensive a job is it just to provide the IT services
to the internal organization? Is that a minor job or a major one? 
Gupta: Well, no, it’s not. It’s not minor. Global Services is a very broadly
distributed organization. We have employees in 170-odd locations around
the world, and so making sure that they’re all connected to the corporate
network and they have the right tools to do their job, whether it’s pricing
tools, whether it’s all the management functions, whether it’s just
functions that allow them to feel part of BT as an organization is quite a
difficult thing, because we have rules and regulations about data
protection acts. Each country has… 
Yourdon: Each country has a different issue. 
Gupta: Yeah. There’s all sorts of technology issues in terms of how
people connect. There’s differences in the quality of different networks in
each of the countries. But luckily for us, like I said, we have a federated
structure, and a lot of the nuts and bolts, laptop services and what goes
on the desktop, etc.—I don’t worry about that. It’s done by a group
function that’s done centrally for every employee in BT. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Gupta: I think my focus area is more about making sure that the people
in Global Services have the right systems and tools that allow them to do
the Global Services job, which is mostly to do with the billing or the
management sales functions and the services operations function for
managing the network and capabilities of that nature. So I think that is a
pretty substantial element  of my role. Especially given that we’ve built up
through acquisition, and like every other big telco, we have challenges in
terms of consolidating our systems instead. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Gupta: Keeping it current and making sure that we are on top of it as
the technology evolves. You know, if you look at iPads and stuff, how do
we make sure that we’re bringing them to bear at an affordable pace? 
Yourdon: You know, you’ve mentioned the global nature of your work,
and it’s very understandable from what you’ve said. But I must say, I’ve
been surprised by the comment I heard from CIOs whom I had thought
were just running a U.S. operation or a somewhat more local operation,
who still said that basically they live in a global world now and if
something happens, if there’s a revolution in Egypt or a tsunami in Japan,
they expect to get a phone call at three in the morning because even if 

Chapter 13 | Ashish Gupta:  
Managing Director of Service Design, British Telecom (BT) 
 
258  
they don’t have their own employees in that affected part of the world, 
their company is expected to jump in. And, of course, you’ve got your 
own employees and operations that are affected by whatever may happen 
in the world. 
Gupta: Absolutely. Japan’s a valid example because we had a team of 
people there and we were communicating with them every day to figure 
out  how they were working and it’s very interesting to understand the 
dynamics of the fact that the tsunami affected the standard phone lines a 
lot more than they affected the voice-over-IP connections that were in 
their offices. 
Yourdon: Oh, really? 
Gupta: So actually, in some cases they were able to connect in their 
offices as opposed to from some of their homes. So, you know, it’s 
interesting how all the technology actually eventually finds a way to help 
in hard and terrible situations like Japan. 
Yourdon: You know, there was a concept that got a lot of popularity a 
couple of years ago, called “hastily formed networks” about the need for 
local groups on the scene to somehow put together a network to 
support relief services and so on. Of course, in many cases the cell phone 
communications infrastructure is the most affected by an earthquake or 
something of that sort. Was that true in Japan? 
Gupta: I don’t have data points, to be honest. I do know that there was 
disruption to the communications infrastructure. You could see it on the 
broadcasts on BBC, there were a lot of people communicating over 
Skype and all sorts of other things when they were doing interviews with 
broadcasters. But the extent to which they—well, clearly, in the towns 
and cities that had pretty much disappeared, the masts went with them, 
without a doubt. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Gupta: I don’t know if there was a big amount of disruption to the 
mobile communications network in Tokyo and other parts because of the 
earthquake. I would have suggested that Japan, being a country that 
knows so much about earthquakes, they would have made sure that there 
was enough backup. I was amazed at the, the level of movement that 
some of these skyscrapers we were seeing without them coming down. I 
mean, those buildings must be engineered amazingly well. So I don’t really 
know the level of disruption that happened on the mobile network, but 

CIOs at Work 
 
259  
there was definitely disruption to the communications capabilities in that 
country. 
Yourdon: Fascinating. Now, a second area that you mentioned a 
moment ago in terms of what your job involves has to do with the whole 
product area, and I wanted to explore just one aspect of that for a 
moment. When I spoke to the CIO of Microsoft, he said that while his 
department is not responsible for the products—they don’t create 
Microsoft Office—they are evolved enormously in the activity that he 
referred to as “dogfooding,” that is, being the first users of what will 
eventually become a product. Is there a lot of that here at BT? 
Gupta: Yeah, it’s very interesting because, actually, our biggest 
customers for Global Services are CIOs. If you think about what we do 
in Global Services, because we provide outsourced network IT services, 
which is WAN, LAN, voice capability and infrastructure for CIOs around 
the world.  So, yes, in a lot of ways, clearly, we dogfood our own stuff, 
because we provide our own network. We have our own voice 
communications capabilities, and we productize that stuff, and we sell 
that as a managed service  to other CIOs. So in a lot of ways, yes, we eat 
what we produce because in a lot of ways that’s what we actually go to 
market with. 
Yourdon: All right, one last question in that general area. To what 
extent are you expected to help invent possible products that just don’t 
exist at all right now, as opposed to taking a product idea that might have 
originated from a business unit and productizing that? That’s more 
understandable, but the idea of helping to invent the future… 
Gupta: Yes, so, like I said, we run the portfolio team. I have a product 
management team that is keeping tabs with what’s going on in the market 
from an innovation perspective and bringing those ideas to bear in terms 
of innovating the next sets of products and how we take them to market. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Gupta: So we do define the propositions. We do look at how we take 
those propositions and make sure that they fit the customer needs to the 
market segments we’re going into. We obviously do it very closely with 
the market units, because they have the customer relationships. But 
we’re also working very closely with the technology companies, be it the 
Microsofts, the Avias, the Ciscos of the world that produce the 
telecommunications capability, and then we look at how we can bring 
some of that technology to bear with a wider portfolio, including the 
network, to make life easier for the CIOs and to improve the 

Chapter 13 | Ashish Gupta:  
Managing Director of Service Design, British Telecom (BT) 
 
260  
productivity of their employees. That’s the value-add that we look to 
bring to the market. 
Yourdon: Now does your group get involved in putting the services on, 
say, a mobile phone, or are you more just on the network side of things? 
Gupta: No—our core proposition—we don’t have a mobile network 
division, but we do a lot of mobility services. So we will look at mobile-
enabling voice, for instance, we will look at creating mobility applications 
for telecoms to do equipment management services for CIOs so that 
they can manage the mobile estate within their organization, they can 
manage spend levels and look at how they can control that. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Gupta: So tools that allow CIOs to manage their own organization 
better. And, yes, we do have products and services that we can put onto 
mobile devices like iPads and iPhones and other things of that nature, but 
what we’re not doing is selling mobile networks, because we don’t have a 
mobile phone network, for instance, right? We have a different target 
marketplace. 
Yourdon: Okay. The reason I asked that question is that the CIO of 
Verizon reminded me that among the many business partners they have 
to interact with, of course, there are all of the smartphone vendors. You 
know, the Apples and Samsungs and Nokias and so forth. And, of course, 
they’re busy, hopefully, innovating.  
Indeed, one of the amazing things I heard in Japan—I can’t remember 
which mobile phone company I visited—was that they have to come out 
with at least two new models each year, because Japanese workers get 
two bonuses every year—which they often spend on telephones, so 
there’s a spring season and a fall season, whereas in the U.S., Apple 
comes up with a new iPhone once a year, not twice a year. 
Gupta: Well, I just think that the productive cycles and the life cycles are 
getting much shorter and shorter all the time. And I think that’s a bit of a 
challenge for us as CIOs because we need to keep pace with it so we 
don’t start losing the advantage that some of those tools and technologies 
create for our employees. And, of course, in big enterprises like us, there’s 
a lot of other things to worry about, like how secure is the data on those 
devices? Are we making sure that we’re not opening ourselves to a threat 
of important company confidential information getting leaked out just 
through accident or through theft of these devices? And how do we 
secure all of those things, which to a large extent, makes our ability to 

CIOs at Work 
 
261  
now consume an iPad every year a lot harder? Because some of those 
things are not fixed in a day.  
Yourdon: Yes. 
Gupta: And I think a lot of policy thinking and shift needs to go on 
before we can fully exploit the ability to use these devices more widely 
through the organization because a lot of companies still have very 
locked-down estates, very stringent firewall rules, and they’re there for 
good reason. All we need to do is figure out the flexibility for an 
employee to use a mobile phone personally and for business use, yet not 
open the organization up to a threat—and I’m not sure we’ve all cracked 
how we do that just as yet. 
Yourdon: [laughter] I would agree. Well, that moves me into the next 
area that I wanted to talk to you about, which is just the general question 
of new innovations and new developments that you see coming along. 
The one that has been universally mentioned by everybody, of course. 
Gupta: Cloud? Well, yeah, I think the buzzword is “cloud computing.” 
How do we get rich on what is now well agreed as being the way we do 
computing going forward? And how do we make sure that we can 
leverage that asset and go back if you will to the—it’s very interesting to 
me because we all started off with big mainframes, that were all multi-
tenanted and multi-processed and multi-tasked to our client-server 
model, to our mini-microcomputer model, back towards a mainframe 
model, which is really what cloud computing gives us. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Gupta: Except, of course, it’s way more powerful and way more flexible, 
and a lot more distributed, and so for us, it’s very important that we 
exploit that, not just for ourselves, but also for the propositions we take 
to market for our customers. And the architecture’s evolving rather well, 
isn’t it? So you’ve got more and more of the computing becoming 
virtualized and available on demand, on a sort of utility basis. You’re 
getting a lot of the application platforms getting more standardized. So 
you can exploit the broader developer community to create apps, and 
through the explosion of the app stores, be it on the iPad or on Android, 
or maybe even increasingly on the BlackBerry and the Windows platform, 
which are the four big ones as I see them at the moment. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Gupta: See, you’ve got the IOS, you’ve got Android, you’ve got 
Windows Mobile, and then you’ve got the platform that BlackBerry uses. 

Chapter 13 | Ashish Gupta:  
Managing Director of Service Design, British Telecom (BT) 
 
262  
And, clearly, others will make plays in that space, but at the moment, 
from an enterprise market segment perspective, most people have one of 
those platforms. And then the combination of the ability to put 
applications on those devices is running on a more distributed, cloud-
based computing infrastructure, with more platformized capabilities that 
allow application development and innovation to happen at greater speed 
is all good for us as enterprises.  
We have the same challenges in terms of data protection, if you’re multi-
tenanted, are we secure? And all of those policies have to be resolved and 
clarified. But, without doubt, people are moving toward virtualizing their 
estates, to getting to more applications that can be written on standardized 
platforms. The challenge we have, obviously, is a lot of enterprise 
businesses are heavily today dependent on big software manufacturers like 
Oracle, like Microsoft. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Gupta: Like all the others, and we have thousands and thousands of 
users deployed using these applications with licensing that’s based on old 
models. And how does that evolve to exploit the new compute-utility-
based, per-use-based model? That’s the key challenge, and I think it’s very 
exciting for us, in terms of where the industry goes next. 
Yourdon: One other aspect, of course, of the cloud computing concept 
is the scalability, the instant scalability that it provides. I heard a lot about 
that yesterday when I was visiting Ladbrokes because they like to say that 
their whole business is “peaky.” I think is the word he used. In the 
moments before a big race, a big football game, the demand spikes. Do 
you see that becoming more and more common among all of the major 
computer users, this idea of extremely rapid and fluctuating demands for 
scalability? 
Gupta: Well, to be fair, what happens today is everyone has a set of 
peaky processes in their business. You know, whether they’re bill runs 
that happen at the end of the month, or whether there are events that 
happen at a certain time on a certain week on a certain day that needs a 
certain volume to be able to deal with it. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Gupta: And I think at the moment, most enterprises end up creating 
more capacity than they need, on an average running basis, purely 
because they have to deal with those peaks because they’re so important 
to their businesses. And so the benefits of being able to take different 

CIOs at Work 
 
263  
peaky businesses that peak at different times and run around a common 
shared infrastructure, economically just makes total sense. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Gupta: The challenge is getting the right mix of businesses on that 
platform and being able to deal with all the challenges around data 
protection and security and all of that stuff. But it’s inevitable. It makes so 
much economic sense to be able to do it on that basis where you’re not 
building hundreds of extra servers in your data centers. only because 
you’re going to get that peaky event on a Saturday night if you’re a 
broadcaster or end of the month because you run billing cycles or 
whatever the model might be. It makes total sense. 
Yourdon: Well, that’s a good point. So you’re saying that it really affects 
everybody, because everybody has got their own peaks.  
Gupta: And whether you are willing to live with the peak because it is so 
critical that if it failed, you’d be out of business. 
Yourdon: Good point. Now, there’s another phenomenon that you’ve 
touched on with a couple of your comments already that I’d like to 
explore. Maybe one way to explain it is to say that the traditional world 
that most of us grew up with involved new products, tools, apps, etc., 
coming into the enterprise and being controlled and locked down and 
managed very carefully, if appropriate, pushed down to the employees, to 
say, “Here’s something that you can do at your desk.” And now you see a 
world—it’s certainly illustrated by Google and some of the individual 
phone apps—things come in at the consumer level. You know, “We’re 
going to sell something to the consumer out on the street.” 
Gupta: Yeah. 
Yourdon: And then it may come up into the enterprise, with some 
problems and opportunities, but the obvious example is that all around 
the world now, employees are bringing into the office some handheld 
thing and also the memory of what they were doing last night at home on 
a computing device that’s much more powerful than what’s sitting on 
their desk. How does that impact your day-to-day world? This kind of 
upward movement, from the consumer up into the enterprise? 
Gupta: So, if I was honest, that in itself isn’t our biggest issue. From my 
perspective, right? I think we might be missing a trick in terms of 
exploiting it better, but we have other challenges to sort out at the 
moment. I think the bottom line is there is increasingly becoming a need 
for convergence of devices between individuals and their personal use and 

Chapter 13 | Ashish Gupta:  
Managing Director of Service Design, British Telecom (BT) 
 
264  
what they do in the enterprise, because everything is getting so 
seamlessly integrated. People work all sorts of hours. 
Yourdon: True. 
Gupta: You know, they’ll be working at eight o’clock in the evening over 
dinner sometimes and sometimes they’re at work and they might want to 
do something that’s personal, and that level of flexibility though creates a 
stickiness of the employees with the organization ’cause it gives them the 
flexibility to maybe work, achieve their objective in life and at work. And 
not feel like the two have to be separated out, which is, “Nine-to-five I 
use a PC. It’s locked down. I can never do anything else. And when I go 
home, I can look after my bills and whatever else on a different and more 
powerful device and with a set of apps.” 
Yourdon: Right. 
Gupta: So I think increasingly we have to leverage the convergence of an 
individual as an individual at work and at home and find a way to exploit 
the upward-based apps, but we have to find a way to make sure that we 
do that in the context of securing the enterprise data, make sure that we 
are within the bounds of the regulation we operate within, and those are 
the problems that we have to tackle and be able to deal with.  
Now, I haven’t got all the answers, and we do have lots and lots of people 
that have abilities today to connect their working with their iPads or their 
iPhones. We have sort of agreements as to how that’s managed and what the 
expectations are, like it has to be password-protected, it has to go through 
our VPN, it will get scanned, etc., so that we’re keeping all of those checks 
and balances in place. But has that got us to the point where it’s a single-
device model and your home PC and your work, or your home laptop and 
your work laptop looks exactly the same? I wouldn’t say that it is. 
Yourdon: Okay. But, if I understood you correctly, at the moment your 
primary marketing thrust and your product development thrust is still 
aimed at the enterprise first and foremost. With the expectation that it’s 
eventually going to involve all of these employees who are doing things at 
home and bringing into work, and somehow those worlds have got to be 
married up. 
Gupta: Well, if you look at what’s happening—we do a lot of work in 
the unified communications space, which is all about unifying the 
messaging capability with the voice capability with your contacts and your 
e-mail and all of that good stuff. Increasingly, all the tools that we would 
take in the enterprise would provide capability, would federate your 

CIOs at Work 
 
265  
contacts between your personal contacts and your work contacts, so that 
you can bring them all together and make it easier for employees to use a 
more unified capability for how they work.  
And so we have tools and we have products that are targeted and aimed 
specifically in that area for employees within enterprise organizations. So, 
by definition, with the nature of the architectures that are being built up, 
there is a convergence happening in terms of innovation and application 
development anyway, I think. 
Yourdon: Okay. There’s another aspect of all of this that I’d be curious to 
hear your opinions about. Partly because of all these developments we’ve 
talked about, the price of technology and devices is dropping to the point 
where almost anybody can afford it, including large parts of the world that 
previously could not afford anything at all. And so we’re now seeing 
enormous new markets in Africa and parts of Asia, with hundreds of millions 
of people having handheld devices that allow them to do productive, useful 
things. And I’m curious to what extent a company like BT is trying to 
capitalize on that or seeing that as a tidal wave?  
Gupta: Well, I think, in a lot of ways, we enable a lot of other enterprises 
that are growing in those areas. If you look at FMCG1 businesses, you look at 
what companies like several of the ones that we work with today are doing; 
they’re all expanding, they’re all seeing growth in Africa, and in a lot of ways 
we are building the network infrastructures that allow them to get there. 
Yourdon: Okay, okay. 
Gupta: To be able to then connect their employees in those countries 
back with the rest of the world. So, the mobile traffic explosion that’s 
going on and the connectivity and the ability to be able to get stuff into 
those countries and enable the factories, enable the employees is 
happening. We can see it going on.  
And we’re absolutely at the heart of empowering companies going into these 
growth markets but also making sure that we’re not just helping them with 
their employees there, but also bringing back and connecting those 
employees to make them part of the bigger, broader enterprise that they 
work in. So in a lot of ways, us and a lot of other telcos, our core business is 
to make sure we keep people connected, wherever they might be. And I 
think we’re playing a very important role in terms of keeping the world more 
and more connected. It keeps getting smaller, every month, every year. 
                                                
1 Fast Moving Consumer Goods. 

Chapter 13 | Ashish Gupta:  
Managing Director of Service Design, British Telecom (BT) 
 
266  
Yourdon: Yes. 
Gupta: There are technologies that bring people closer together, and 
we’re certainly at the heart of making sure that the networks we build, 
the resilience we put into them, the capital we’re investing allows 
companies to do that easier and easier all the time. 
Yourdon: Well, that’s an interesting point, because it does all require a 
network. Vast networks. That sometimes gets overlooked, but you guys 
are kind of in the background, so to speak, making all that possible. It 
really is an amazing kind of shift that you see. Google Apps, for example, 
is free. It may be supported by ads, but it’s free, so the social 
transformation is just phenomenal. But I think that your point is well 
taken. If you didn’t have a network there in the background, it would be 
irrelevant. 
Gupta: We were having this conversation as part of one of the 
subforums of the IMF2, which has to do with cloud and enablement of 
communities, through the ability to leverage the cloud and what the cloud 
brings to them. And I think one of the big discussions we were having 
there is, “The cloud’s all well and good if you can get at it.” And, really, 
that’s why there needs to be continued focus on the infrastructure that 
allows communities to access the cloud. Because if you can’t get at it, it’s 
not really there to help you with. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Gupta: So, yes, you can get Google Apps for free, but if you didn’t have a 
mobile network operator building a mobile network or a 
telecommunications operator connecting that country up with the World 
Wide Web, providing the bandwidth that’s required to be able to truck 
all that traffic through, yes, you can deploy smart phones, make them 
cheap as chips, but they couldn’t get anywhere near what customers 
actually need to be able to use. 
Yourdon: Yes. Very good point. Now, you mentioned bandwidth, and I 
can’t help but ask a question here. Being an iPad user or an iPhone 
observer, I’m sure you can anticipate this, which is that the bandwidth 
requirements of a lot of those devices are an order of magnitude greater 
than they were when we were just doing simple voice communications. I 
almost never use my iPhone for ordinary phone calls. It’s all web 
browsing and that kind of thing. How much of a problem is that going to 
                                                
2 International Monetary Fund 

CIOs at Work 
267  
be in the future, and as the people who have smart devices are doing far
richer things with astronomically greater bandwidth requirements than
would have been the case ten years ago? 
Gupta: It’s a very significant problem already. You only have to roam
around in India to figure out how difficult it is—you can have a full signal
but still not be able to do anything with it ’cause the networks are getting
heavily congested by the devices. You know, the operators are investing
huge amounts of capital to increase the size of the pipes, to bring new
technology to bear. We’re helping a number of the operators here in the
UK, for instance, with being able to trunk more and more data off the
cells. Providers are providing fourth-generation LTE networks. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Gupta: All of it is being accelerated because of the speed at which the smart
devices are gaining traction, the success of the platforms and the applications
on them mean more and more people are using it, much, much faster. How
many iPads were sold in the first six months? Was it over a million devices
were sold in two months or so? Some ridiculous number like that. 
Yourdon: Well, they had sold 15 million when Steve Jobs got up to
announce the iPad 2. 
Gupta: There we go. So I think it sold a million in the first four weeks or
so. And the more that happens, the more pressure it will put on
bandwidth and network infrastructure. I think people also expect them to
be more reliable, ’cause they get so used to using some of these
applications. They become so integral to their day-to-day life. There is
now more than ever the expectation that these networks are not only
quick and fast but also very reliable. So I think the core network
infrastructure is still a very integral part of the speed at which all of this is
happening. 
Yourdon: Now in terms of growing all that, is that primarily a capital
problem or a technology problem? 
Gupta: Well, it’s a bit of both, because the technology needs to evolve at
a pace which allows us to build those networks at price points that are
commensurate with the price points at which customers are expecting to
be able to pay for some of this stuff. 
Yourdon: Right, right. 
Gupta: So the cost per unit of bandwidth or the price per unit of
bandwidth drops significantly year on year, every year. The costs of 

Chapter 13 | Ashish Gupta:  
Managing Director of Service Design, British Telecom (BT) 
 
268  
building those networks needs to trend the same way and a lot of that is 
enabled by just more innovation, better technology, and greater scale 
clearly helps. But a lot of that plays in the mix. It’s a very interesting 
dynamic on cost and price and how do we as providers of networks 
enable this ever-growing desire and requirement for bandwidth but, 
equally, make sure that we’re making good positive returns in helping the 
businesses, other businesses and customers flourish? 
Yourdon: Interesting. Let me turn the conversation around about 180 
degrees now and talk about the dark side of the force, the problems, the 
things that keep you awake at night. You’ve already mentioned security. 
That’s kind of an obvious one, and the related issues of privacy and so 
forth. Are there other problems associated with the technology that you 
work with that keep you awake at night? 
Gupta: Yeah, I guess the big challenge for us is speed. How do we make 
sure that we can innovate and deliver products and services, both to our 
internal users but, importantly, to our customers at the speed at which 
they’re expecting us to? 
Yourdon: And also maintaining enough control and integrity. 
Gupta: Absolutely. So how do we get through the innovation part and 
how do we build the tools, how do we build the capabilities, how do we 
take them to market at a price and at a speed that is commensurate with 
the rate at which customer demands are changing? So one of our big 
challenges is how do we do that? And then underpinning that on a whole 
bunch of other challenges in terms of skills: how do we capture the right 
skills that we need to be able to move the business forward from a 
technology perspective? How do we retain them? How do we keep them 
excited? How do we stay relevant? 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Gupta: There’s a big, there’s a big war out there in terms of skills. 
There’s a lot of people working in very different ways. I saw one of your 
questions about, you know, what differences are we seeing in terms of 
the graduates that are coming through? 
Yourdon: Yes, I’m going to get to that in just a moment, because it is a 
big area, yeah. 
Gupta: But I think the big challenge for us is really as an IT function, we 
need to continue to reduce the cost of IT for the organization, but do it 
at the same time as improving the quality and speed at which we get 
capabilities delivered. And then from an innovation and product 

CIOs at Work 
 
269  
perspective, we have to do much the same in terms of delivering new 
products and services, innovating but doing it quicker, doing it cheaper, 
and getting it out there faster. And I think those would be some of the 
biggest challenges that I face on a day-to-day basis. 
Yourdon: There’s a slight variation on this that I’ve asked all the other 
CIOs about. When you’re dealing with these issues and problems, you’re 
also working with other business units and product managers and 
marketing people, and so forth.  
Now, in the old days, when I got started in the field, we were the experts 
and they didn’t know anything about computing, so they would come to 
us and say, “Please tell us what we need to do.” And even then, these 
peers of ours were very smart and very successful and had very strong 
opinions and certainly felt that they knew how to run their business 
better than we did.  
Now they sometimes feel that they know how to run the IT business 
better than we do, so that you can’t order them about what to do and 
what not to do, even though you may seem some opportunities that 
they’ve missed or some dangers that they’re unaware of. How do you 
influence them to deal with these problems and developments that, that 
you’ve talked about? 
Gupta: Yeah, it’s a very, very good point because there are lots of 
people out there that do understand the technology better because it’s 
become so integral to how people work, not just at work but at homes. I 
think it comes back to engagement and governance and being clear about 
what it is the objectives are the organization is trying to achieve and then 
aligning around them. I don’t think there’s any IT organization that does 
everything everyone wants at any given point in time. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Gupta: The issue is agreeing and being able to communicate effectively 
what challenges we’re trying to resolve, make sure that we have the 
broad governance and buy-in from that organization, be it through capital 
investment forums or decision-making bodies that can agree and then 
communicate not just what we’re doing, but why it makes sense.  
And then good quality execution of those elements, because I think 
people get frustrated at two levels. One is, “I can’t have what I want,” 
but, more importantly, “I can’t have what was promised I could have.” 
And I think you need to sort of solve problem number two before you 
can start tackling problem number one.  

Chapter 13 | Ashish Gupta:  
Managing Director of Service Design, British Telecom (BT) 
 
270  
Because if you’re not resolving what you promised to deliver or what 
you offered you would do for the organization in time and cost, then 
there’s a level of issues in terms of confidence and the willingness to go 
on the journey. 
Yourdon: Yeah, a lot of the other CIOs have said the first thing you 
need to do is establish trust. Because if they don’t trust you, particularly 
because you’ve not delivered what you promised, then it doesn’t really 
matter what you say. 
Gupta: Yeah. 
Yourdon: So that’s got to be the first point. I had an interesting 
comment from one of the electric utility companies in the U.S., who said, 
“Just because you can use Excel doesn’t mean that you’re a programmer.” 
Everybody thinks they understand a lot about IT, but she said, “We have 
to sometimes bring our outspoken business leaders into some of our 
more complex areas and show them that, in fact, it’s a hell of a lot more 
complex than they ever imagined.” And I have to assume that’s true for 
some of what you do as well. 
Gupta: Yeah, I think there is absolutely a broad expectation out there 
that fundamentally there must be a way that they could do it faster than 
us if they just had control of all the functions, so we centralize all this 
stuff. Without doubt, we have to have those conversations and say, 
“Look. Here’s the reasons why that aspect of the problem that we’re 
trying to solve cannot be fixed through a quick fix, which takes two 
weeks and is done.” 
Yourdon: Right. 
Gupta: Because, actually, in doing that, we create a whole suite of other 
problems that will come back and bite us later, and this is the reason why it 
has to be done this way, this is why it costs what it does, and we’d all like 
to do it faster, but this is the reason why the plan looks like the plan and 
that’s why we will execute this plan. So those conversations, just like every 
other department, or IT department, in the world—in fact, many other 
functional service departments in organizations, not just CIOs, have to go 
on that journey. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Gupta: Because you have the same conversation with an HR manager or 
the head of HR: “Why can’t I just get XYZ skill and hire them at will?” 
Well, there are reasons why you want to balance your resources a certain 
way, you want to do things, you want to train your light body of a strategy 

CIOs at Work 
 
271  
for what you’re enforcing in an organization to look like, the same way you 
need to have a strategy and an execution plan for what the technology 
looks like. And you have to go through those hard conversations and have 
those discussions. 
Yourdon: You’ve used one other word in that answer that also 
resonated with me. When I asked that question of the CIO at Educational 
Testing Services, the people that do all the college placement exams in 
the U.S., he said, “We constantly have users coming to us saying they 
want to outsource. They don’t want to have to everything through 
central IT. And our response is, ‘Fine, if you want to, but let us show you 
the detailed cost breakdowns, the detailed measurements, and then make 
sure that the vendors you’re talking to give you equally detailed 
measurements, and if you can get it cheaper, God bless you. Do it.’” 
Gupta: Absolutely. 
Yourdon: But if you don’t have the measurements, you don’t have the 
data, he said it’s very hard to carry on a rational conversation. And, of 
course, one of the dilemmas we’ve always had in the IT profession is that 
we’ve, we’ve not been all that good at measuring things. 
Gupta: My personal opinion—this is a personal thing—is it’s very 
dangerous to outsource something that you either ill understand or 
couldn’t resolve yourself. 
Yourdon: [laughter] Yes. 
Gupta: Because how do you know that the outsource is actually being 
effective? And how do you know that in the outsourcing, we aren’t 
mortgaging away a capability that is actually required to drive the business 
further forward? So, you know, at a minimum, you should be able to fix it 
yourself. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Gupta: You might be able to do it faster ’cause the skills might exist 
somewhere else or the organization that’s taking on the outsourcing has 
economies of scale and can leverage a certain type of people that can do 
it better, but if you don’t understand what you’re trying to achieve, and 
you’re outsourcing it because outsourcing is what the mantra is, then in a 
lot of such cases I would suggest that the outsource doesn’t work. 
Yourdon: Yeah, I would agree with that. 
Gupta: You end up with contract breakages, unhappy customers, big 
fights with your suppliers about what you thought you were getting and 

Chapter 13 | Ashish Gupta:  
Managing Director of Service Design, British Telecom (BT) 
 
272  
what you’re then going to get, and all of that to me is about not having 
been crisp and clear about exactly what we’re trying to achieve through 
the outsource. 
Yourdon: I agree. The last major area I wanted to talk about before I ask 
you my final question had to do with this generational issue you saw in 
my list of questions. You know, every company these days is now facing a 
new generation of employees, not just in the IT department but 
throughout the organization, that grew up as digital natives, and I’m 
curious what your opinion is of them. Is it good, is it bad? 
Gupta: Well, I don’t think it’s good or bad. I think it’s different. I think 
the population coming to work at the moment does expect to be more 
mobile. They expect to be more flexible, and I think they are more easily 
frustrated by the constraints that you might put around lots of procedural 
processes that they feel, because of the way they’ve grown up—you 
know, when I grew up in Mumbai, I used to have two TV channels that 
were only ever available from six o’clock in the evening till ten o’clock at 
night. These days, you know, the TV is on 24/7. 
Yourdon: With 500 channels. 
Gupta: They’re watching 500 channels. They’re watching something on 
TV and communicating with their friends and SMSing away on their 
mobile all at once. And they’re just used to being able to be better 
connected to be able to do things in a certain way. And then when they 
come into an organizational construct, they kind of don’t expect to be 
able to radically change their mind and work in a context that’s very 
different, not just from an IT perspective, but just generally in terms of 
the processes and the procedural rules that exist within an organization 
and how they work.  
So I think that as the mix changes and as the population gets more 
Generation Y or X, I think we will need to and will see a shift in the 
dynamics of how organizations work. Just by the pure nature that a lot of 
these people that will come through the ranks know a certain different 
way of living, not just working, and they will hope to mold the way they 
get work done in that way.  
And I think it will bring innovation, so it’s a challenge, because they have 
to be integrated, they need to feel like they can take the business 
forward, and they need to feel like they can be successful. But at the same 
time, they’ll want to start seeing a collection of them trying to change the 
way certain things get done. Through better collaboration, through 

CIOs at Work 
 
273  
tooling, through whatever. And I think we all have to just at least be 
conscious of that and deal with it as best as we can. 
Yourdon: Do you see any, any disadvantages or risks or problems with 
the younger generation? Do they create problems for you? 
Gupta: I personally see that the generation at the moment is a little 
disadvantaged. The state that the younger generation is in, because the 
state of the economies at the moment and the fact that pension ages are 
being increased, basically means that people will have to stay at work for 
longer. Which means, by definition, that the average age of an 
organization will move to the right, just because everyone needs to work 
longer to create the nest egg that they can use in retirement. 
Yourdon: That’s true. 
Gupta: Which then means, by definition, we’re not creating as many 
opportunities for the younger population. So I think they’re going to 
struggle a bit, which is not fair for them, but it’s the reality of where we 
are, and I think that’s going to create a level of tension in terms of figuring 
out how they get frustrated about not being able to get into the 
workforce, into the right sort of jobs and roles as quickly as they might 
want to.  
So I think that while there was the opportunity generation, I think at the 
moment the guys coming out of the university face some reasonably 
challenging times in terms of the number of jobs that are available and 
how they get hired, which is why companies like Google and others are 
doing so well, because they’ve started up fresh, they don’t have a legacy 
of lots of people and a very strict employment contracts that have 
worked in large organizations for many, many years, and they are being 
able to hire all of these newer generation people with new ideas, and 
that, I think, is an advantage for them. 
Yourdon: I’ll give you an amazing statistic. When I spoke to the CIO of 
Google, I had just seen an article in the paper, and I confirmed it with 
him. They get 75,000 job applications a week. 
Gupta: That is amazing. 
Yourdon: It is. He said, “We have millions of résumés on file here.” Just 
staggering. Well, let me ask one final question—and it’s kind of an 
obvious ending question. Where do you see yourself going from here? 
Are you going to be a CIO for the rest of your life, or do you have 
aspirations for anything other? 

Chapter 13 | Ashish Gupta:  
Managing Director of Service Design, British Telecom (BT) 
 
274  
Gupta: To be honest, I’m 36. I’ve done a lot of stuff in a reasonably short 
period of time, so when I get asked that question, I guess for me it’s 
about constantly being able to achieve outcomes for the business and for 
customers. I haven’t sat down and mapped out the route to being a 
president or to being a king or anything like that. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Gupta: It’s worth it for me at the moment to be able to be reasonably 
opportunistic in finding things that are of interest to me, and then moving 
on. I move on when I feel like the job and the role I’m doing is done. I can 
move on and let somebody with new ideas come in and I can go do 
something else. Do I want to be a CIO all my life? You know, it wouldn’t 
be the end of the world. I quite enjoy working with technology. I have a 
good background in it, and actually, it’s quite a fulfilling job. It will kill me, 
though, because the CIO function is not a 9-to-5 job. 
Yourdon: No, it’s a 24-hour job. 
Gupta: It’s very, very intensive, obviously. And obviously, that needs to 
play in to how long and how far you wish to go in the work-life balance 
sort of sense, but equally, I’d be more than happy—’cause I already do 
some of this in terms of portfolio and business alignment—to look at 
opportunities to move laterally, to doing more P&L escrows or deciding 
to do something different. But, we’ll see what comes. 
Yourdon: The reason I ask that question is that the traditional picture of 
the CIO is that it’s the end of the line, and a lot of the people I’ve 
interviewed are in their fifties or sixties. In fact, I interviewed one CIO 
who had just resigned—in fact, I take it back, there were three. One man 
was in his eighties—it’s understandable that he said, “I don’t want to be a 
CIO anymore.” But, particularly in the technology companies, you, the 
CIO of Google—I guess he’s in his thirties, but a lot are young people 
who have risen relatively quickly and they’re in an industry that’s moving 
quickly, and so they’ve got still 20 or 30 years ahead of them. And as 
several CIOs have told me, they never planned for this job, and they’re 
not going to plan for the next job. Opportunities present themselves, and 
when the right opportunity comes along, they’ll— 
Gupta: Jump and decide what to do then. Yeah, it’s a way of doing it. 
There are certain people who have a career mapped out and know where 
they want to get to. There are others like me who are happy that I’ve 
achieved what I wanted to achieve so far. I’m happy with what I’m doing, 
and I’m not out looking for the next step or the next thing just yet. 

CIOs at Work 
 
275  
Yourdon: It’ll come, right? 
Gupta: It’ll come. 

C H A P T E R 
14 
Joan Miller  
Director of ICT, the UK Parliament 
Joan Miller is Director of Parliamentary ICT (Information, Communication, and 
Technology) for the United Kingdom Parliament and sits on the management 
boards of both the House of Commons and the House of Lords. She was recruited 
to set up a new department in 2005, centralizing nine separate ICT offices to 
create a new and more strategic ICT function for the UK Parliament. 
In previous roles Ms. Miller managed community development programs and 
European partnerships, becoming involved in managing ICT in 1993. She 
managed award-winning ICT programs and services in local government in Essex, 
Suffolk, and London from 1993–2003, in the course of which she centralized ICT 
services three times and established substantial organization-wide change and 
savings programs to create new contact centers, new face-to-face services, and 
new transactional web services for citizens. She also led two UK national projects 
in this period, one to connect electronic information and records across several 
organizations and the other to set standard methodologies for public sector 
programs and project management. 
 
Ed Yourdon: One of the things that I’ve been quite curious about with 
everyone I’ve spoken to is basically how you get to a position like this. 
Obviously, you weren’t born a CIO—but had you been a CIO at previous 
organizations or was this your first appointment? 

Chapter 14 | Joan Miller:  
Director of ICT, the UK Parliament 
278  
Joan Miller: I should probably tell you a little bit about my earlier career,
because it is relevant. I did an economics degree. Which I think is quite
unusual for CIOs. 
Yourdon: You’d be amazed at the variety. The CIO of the New York
Stock Exchange has a PhD in chemistry, so I’m no longer surprised by
anything. But economics in your case. 
Miller: Economics lives between science and art. And I think the CIO job
lives between science and art with what people do with technology. And
that’s why it’s not so unusual. There are a number of CIOs who also come
from the social sciences. I began working in an insurance company. 
Yourdon: Ahh. 
Miller: But I took a 14-year gap to have children. So I was not working
other than caring for the children for 14 years, and I did lots of voluntary
work in that period. When I came back to work I was working with
community development, which is a long way from IT. 
Yourdon: That’s true. 
Miller: But when I was organizing voluntary organizations that work with
social care services, in Essex—a part of that was project planning. It was
business planning, project planning for a voluntary center, creating
contracts with the social care services to provide services, and that’s very
much a people-based, but organizational planning–based role. And then I
moved and worked for the director of social services, doing a staff officer-
type job, and that meant that I did anything that wasn’t social work that the
director needed done. When I was working in that area, I was working on
things like voluntary sector development, European policy, and projects.
And then this new topic of information management came along. 
Yourdon: Ahh, I see. 
Miller: I’m talking the early 1990s here, we were looking at information
management as the big development for social care, in order to be able to
keep records. In 1993 we did a very big project, a community care project,
which was about creating in an eight-week period a paper–based records
system that crossed all of the council’s social care services. It was primarily
for older people, people with disabilities, and people with mental health
problems. Looking at the workflow process and how you could record the
record of the individual being helped by social services when that individual
would see a lot of different social workers and care workers. We did it all
on paper in 1993. 

CIOs at Work 
 
279  
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Miller: When I’d finished that project, the director said to me, “So, what’s 
your next project?” And I said, “Well, I think you should computerize this. I 
think databases do this work much better than paper,” because we had 30 
different forms in the process. 
Yourdon: Mmm. 
Miller: And for each one you had to do basic repetitious stuff, like write 
names and addresses and relationships on each form, and the obvious 
opportunity is to create an electronic record that would do that for you. I 
wasn’t thinking very much more than just being able to transfer information 
from one form to the next and build up a record. So we went into a period 
of looking at what computer systems might work. And we were lucky, I 
think, to find a computer system specifically for social care but which was a 
very well-structured computer system. I learned my IT data management, 
project management from that project. 
Yourdon: Ahh, I see. 
Miller: Buying a computer system that works and that social workers could 
use. Social workers are not the easiest people to persuade to use 
computers — their focus is much more on the person they’re working with 
than it is on the computer they need to give them the information, and they 
were very much at that time used to writing paper records, long files, so my 
introduction to big-time computing as opposed to home and personal 
computing was managing and leading a project to implement an electronic 
social care record. 
Yourdon: Interesting. Well, there’s a related question then for which you 
might give a very different answer than from what I’ve heard, and that is the 
question of role models or mentors along the way, because I would imagine 
they might have been somewhat different than what I’ve been hearing from 
other interviews. 
Miller: I’ll take a little roundabout way to give you the answer to this 
question. Having implemented a social care record in Essex, which is quite 
hard work, one of the things I really discovered is that in a social care 
organization, you need good leadership. Unless the leadership understands 
what you’re going to do and what you’re trying to do, implementing 
technology doesn’t work.  
The next job I was headhunted to Suffolk and implemented a social care 
computer electronic record system there. And probably the most important 
lesson from Essex was the need to engage with the senior management. 

Chapter 14 | Joan Miller:  
Director of ICT, the UK Parliament 
 
280  
And the person who influenced me probably the most in Suffolk was the 
Director of Social Services there, who although he did not know about 
computers or technology, his point was that this technology would be good. 
And so he invited me, not as director, but as the head of information 
management, to sit with him and his directors on their management board. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Miller: So he allowed me to give strategic input to the business and 
decisions being made from an electronic record and support role. That 
meant that when we developed the electronic record at Suffolk, it had 
primary support from somebody who thought it was a good thing, with the 
freedom to work with Directors to find out why it was a good thing, and 
the authority to work with the users to help them to invent the use of the 
system, so that I wasn’t implementing technology. I was implementing a new 
way of working. 
Yourdon: Hmm. Okay. 
Miller: And so my prejudices around CIOs is not that they’re technology-
based, but that they are work-based. It’s how people work that’s important. 
Technology just supports it. 
Yourdon: Okay, fair enough. 
Miller: Now there are two things that came out of that. One is that you 
have to mediate, I think, as the head of information anyway, between what 
packages do, what systems do, and what users want to do. You don’t just go 
with the choice of the user because you may not be able to support the 
technology. But neither do you implement a perfect technology and expect 
users to adapt their working practices without understanding what they’re 
trying to achieve in their work.  
And I think the principle of all IT management that I’ve had experience with 
is around that mediation CIO role, which is about discovering what is it the 
business wants to do and finding the technology that supports what they 
want to do, and the negotiation with the business that says, “Don’t go 
window-shopping for IT systems; come and let’s work out the principles. 
We’re the experts in technology, or at least I know some friends who are 
who work for me. Let’s make technology that supports your workflow that 
we can then support and that works together across the piece.” 
Yourdon: Okay. 

CIOs at Work 
 
281  
Miller: So I think the Director of Social Services at Suffolk was probably a 
key influence then because he was an enabler of technology. He didn’t 
understand it, but he enabled it. 
Yourdon: A champion, so to speak. Very interesting. 
Miller: A champion, yeah. I think another person was also very influential, 
and that was the owner of the company, the software house, that we 
bought the system from. He was influential because he had a huge 
understanding of how to simplify IT. And I learned from him around the 
principles of data management, data flows, simplification, and the ability to 
give the same result to many different people by showing them a screen that 
looked the way they wanted it to look, but built into a common database. 
So I learned about simplifying IT, but providing it in a very intuitive way to 
users and how important that was. 
Yourdon: Interesting. There’s one last introductory question that I’m 
curious about. When people start to become groomed or moving in a 
career path toward a CIO, some of them have had additional education or 
training, and some have not. And I’m just curious, did they send you off to 
school, to CIO school of any sort? 
Miller: No. 
Yourdon: So all on-the-job training? 
Miller: I don’t think I’ve had any specific CIO training. I’ve had business 
management training, more generic training. I’ve been to many conferences. 
I’ve been to good practice-sharing groups with other people who are 
aspirational CIOs. But I’ve never had any specific training. I’m perhaps of a 
generation before the people who did the specific training. I don’t think 
there were many courses around for CIOs, in the early 1990s. 
Yourdon: [laughter] Probably not. 
Miller: But I think also this role of CIO is not a Technology Officer. It’s 
about a business manager who is that translator between business 
requirements, and therefore the training in the business skills is as important 
as the training in the technology or the understanding of the technology. So 
my training has been much more about organizational change. And I’ve had 
some good training on organizational change. It’s been about principles of 
business management, not about technology. I rely on other people to be 
experts in technology. 
Yourdon: Okay, interesting. All right, probably the central question I’ve 
been asking everybody, for which the answers are all over the place, is how 

Chapter 14 | Joan Miller:  
Director of ICT, the UK Parliament 
 
282  
you see information technology playing a role to make your constituents, or 
the people you serve, more effective. What are your dreams in terms of 
using it to make the world a better place? 
Miller: That’s a really good question because I work in the public sector. 
And I work in the public sector because that’s my driving motive, to make 
the world a better place. 
Yourdon: Ahh. 
Miller: So why am I in technology? I would say by accident. And I would 
say the accident is that experience working in Essex when the Director 
said, “Go do the computer system.” So my experience, and just what 
happens in IT, is about using IT to make organizations work more 
efficiently. It’s about being able to control the information flows to help 
people be more efficient; to be able to automate the stuff to make the 
organization cheaper and more efficient. About the end of the 1990s, I 
think it was about ’98, the big word “e-government” came out. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Miller: And I was in that bandwagon of people who were saying,  
“E-government is an incredibly important force to change the way (local 
government is where I was working then) government works,” so rather 
than being an organization that thinks itself as silo departments, it becomes 
an organization that’s customer-focused, that says to the customer, “You 
are members of the public, residents of the local authority. You have a 
collection of things that you need from this authority. How would you like 
to interact with the authority?”  
And the principle then was to create customer service–focused, front-end 
services to the county council, to make them easier to approach and 
work with. To make it easier. If you had a problem that crossed social 
care and education and some of the other services of the county council, 
you didn’t have to go in five different doors to find the services you 
needed as an individual, but you could go into one door, and from that 
one door the person in the front-office service would connect you to the 
services you needed. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Miller: In fact, this is the New Brunswick model in Canada. I was very 
influenced by reading about those services, where they had done things 
about more efficient front-line services that allowed the resident, the 
citizen, to access those services in a more intuitive way. When I was in 
social services, if you looked at the kinds of services provided, the 

CIOs at Work 
 
283  
management team was focused on 10 percent of the customers who had 
high-level needs and had high-level costs. Ninety percent of the customers 
with low-level needs and low-level costs were in queues waiting to see the 
social workers. 
Yourdon: Aha. Interesting. 
Miller: And the way we were able to restructure the organization was to 
create front-office services to give them the information they needed or 
even to be able to say, “We can’t help you with this problem because it 
doesn’t meet our criteria, but you can try this service.” We were able to put 
in a service that gave a faster, quicker, more responsive service to that 
citizen than the 90 percent of people who just got stuck in long queues. Also, 
note that the 10 percent who needed intensive social worker input were 
able to get to the social worker because there wasn’t such a long queue. 
Yourdon: Ahh, interesting. 
Miller: And that’s about—it was not about saving money, although we did, 
but it was actually about making the organization more responsive to the 
person who wanted that service. That is how I see IT working, because IT 
was able to support the front-office service and connect the information 
back to knowledge and workflow and processes that allowed the 90 
percent, the people who were dealing with the 90 percent, who had fewer 
qualifications to effectively deal consistently with the members of the public 
and enable them to pass back to the social workers those who did need 
higher levels of care in a quicker, faster, and therefore cheaper way. 
Yourdon: Now you say this movement began in the late ’90s, so it’s now 
more than ten years old. Do you still think it has a long way to go, or is it 
fairly well established at this point? 
Miller: I think in many local government areas it’s well established. I think 
there are many services government provides, both from central 
government and local government and other quango-type organizations, 
which are still not connected. There are some very good developments in 
thinking, but it’s such a big problem in the public sector to connect 
everything up. So it’s a long time scale. 
Yourdon: Does it become progressively more difficult as you go from a 
local government focus to a national focus? 
Miller: Yeah. 
Yourdon: Is it a linear scale or an exponential scale? 

Chapter 14 | Joan Miller:  
Director of ICT, the UK Parliament 
 
284  
Miller: It’s an exponential scale. It’s easier to deal and partner with the 
people you can see. It is much more difficult to deal with people who are 
remote to you and to trust and partner, because working together—for 
instance, in the late ’90s, early 2000s to today, Health and Social Care, 
which is a national and a local organization, have been working much 
more closely together. That’s supported by electronic records. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Miller: That’s a national organization dealing with a local organization, so 
two different trust environments needing to work together. 
Yourdon: And exchange information. Appropriate information. 
Miller: Confidential information. 
Yourdon: I was going to say, “With all the privacy issues associated with 
that.” 
Miller: And that’s been quite fascinating to see. The developments probably 
took five years to get off the ground, because nobody knew how to do it. 
I’m not at all sure that there’s comprehensive coverage yet, but there are 
some very good areas of good practice. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Miller: There is the ability now to share information because people mostly 
work on electronic records. I suppose the working population have become 
more familiar with working on electronic records. When I was talking back 
in the mid-’90s, when I was implementing social care systems, this was 
anathema to social workers. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Miller: I think most are now used to it and indeed demand mobile 
electronic information, which was a big thing. But the ability to share 
information with Health has become an expectation rather than a threat. So 
the mind changes affect the use. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Miller: And I think the role of the CIO is to keep track with and push, 
when necessary, the agenda. And I think constructive input from the CIO 
can change the world, or at least a little bit of the world. You have an 
influence by helping organizations to share and therefore partner and work 
together, and therefore the citizen gets a better deal. 

CIOs at Work 
 
285  
Yourdon: Now you had mentioned that the buzzword that kind of 
launched all of this 10, 12 years ago was “e-government.” Another one that 
I wrote down here that we’re hearing a lot now about is “Government 2.0” 
as the counterpart of Web 2.0 or Enterprise 2.0. Is that something that has 
become significant here in the UK? 
Miller: I think that that was always significant. I think that right from the 
end of the 1990s we were saying, “So how—if we’re taking people through 
the door or on a telephone service, can we even prevent that by giving 
them Internet information and transactional services?” I think that Health is 
probably one of the organizations that has gone the farthest to help 
diagnostic information appear to the citizen on the Web. 
Yourdon: Hmm, interesting. 
Miller: And they’ve done that from early 2000 onwards. I think that’s 
developed in a very intensive way. I think the complexity of how we provide 
services makes it really difficult for citizens to interact on the Web in a 
comprehensive way, but there are some very good examples. Having said 
that, there are some very good examples of how government is now 
trading, doing transactions with citizens through web-based services. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Miller: So income tax forms you can do entirely on the Web. Things like 
driver vehicle licensing, you can do entirely on the Web, and it’s so much 
easier for citizens to sit at home and do this work rather than try and do 
everything on paper or go and visit an office. So, yes, I think it’s probably 
at the 25 percent success level at the minute. Rough figure, for 
government, but the direction of travel is to help people to get what they 
need quickly and therefore more cheaply for the government and for the 
individual. 
Yourdon: I was actually referring to something—I think of it differently 
philosophically—which is instead of having the information essentially go 
top-down, turning it around and having it go bottom-up. 
Miller: Ahh, yeah, so the social networking-type of environment. 
Yourdon: Yes. For example, in New York City we never did, as citizens, 
trust the official government information about whether the public 
transportation was running on time. If you went to the train station, could 
you catch a train on time? And now we rely on citizens, who contribute the 
information themselves into a social network. And there are more and 
more attempts to provide mechanisms for citizens to either input 

Chapter 14 | Joan Miller:  
Director of ICT, the UK Parliament 
 
286  
information or actually contribute services that would otherwise be 
provided in a top-down fashion. 
Miller: Well, I think there are two ways citizens can influence their services. 
One is through using them. The information they provide is then collected 
based on the way they use them and will modify the way governments react 
with them, but the bigger one, I think, is the citizen voice. 
Yourdon: Yes. 
Miller: I think in the UK we are still very unsure as to how to use this 
citizens’ voice. We have had some experiments in the UK. We have a 
representational democracy, which means that in the UK, if you elect 
somebody, you elect them to make the decisions for you. So they sit in 
Parliament to use their judgment to engage in the debate about what are 
the right laws, what is the right government and for the people. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Miller: There is this wave of opinion, people’s opinions, what in the UK we 
might call the “X-factor” type of opinion from people that comes through 
the electronic media. This is now providing information to those elected 
representatives in a fairly prolific way. And the problem that those elected 
representatives have is to first understand if that electronic voice is 
representative? How can it be made to be representative? And, secondly, 
how to hear all those individual comments? How do you possibly pay 
attention to the volume of electronic comments that are coming from the 
population, to help them to understand what the public view is. 
In Parliament, we have some experiments in some of our committees, which 
are about inviting comments on bills, on committees’ scrutiny of bills. And 
as the process goes through Parliament, those are difficult to manage 
because it’s difficult to understand if what you get is the true public voice or 
the lobby public voice or just the electronic-enabled public voice. 
Yourdon: Yes. 
Miller: So there is an experiment, but not yet a great deal of understanding 
of how that should and can influence the members when they make 
decisions. It’s the same in government where Number 10—that’s the prime 
minister’s office—has been very engaged in trying to connect to the public. 
They’ve had a petitions website to try to gauge what issues the public are 
focused on, what are their priorities? But, again, it’s very difficult to know 
from the petitions they’ve had, the experiences they’ve had, what is of value, 
what is representative, what is lobbying, what is irrelevant to government 

CIOs at Work 
 
287  
because they can’t do anything about it? It’s quite difficult to be able to 
receive the information and do something with it. 
And I think this “Government 2” thing is less about how you enable the 
comments, although there’s something about making that representational, 
it’s what do you do with what you get? How do you process it? How do 
you manage it? I don’t think there’s an answer to that yet. 
Yourdon: But does your office get involved in these ongoing experiments? 
Miller: In as much as members require there to be experiments, and 
therefore to be able to facilitate public comments into some of the scrutiny 
going on in Parliament, or some of the legislative activity going on in 
Parliament, yes. But this has to be a member-led activity because they are the 
elected representatives. They have to understand what the options are, but 
then they have to know what to do with the options. And we can’t tell them. 
Yourdon: Well, I think that’s the classic example you were talking about 
before, the relationship between the business community, in this case, 
members of Parliament, and the technology people. Now, that is interesting. 
Miller: We’re very much in a facilitative role in that. 
Yourdon: Yes. 
Miller: Parliament is 700 years old and it’s lived on petitions, paper 
petitions, and the public being able to access Parliament for 700 years, or 
perhaps it was probably for the higher class originally, but nowadays, 
Parliament’s main function is to be open to the public. “Electronically open” 
means something different. 
Yourdon: Yes. 
Miller: And we haven’t got our heads around yet what that means and how 
to deal with that. 
Yourdon: That’s a very good point. And I suspect we’re going to be seeing 
a lot more about that in every dimension in the years ahead, especially with 
all the current news that we’re seeing about activity. One of the questions I 
had was whether IT in your case is expected to enable entirely new things 
which the business, whether it’s Parliament or other parts of government, 
simply cannot do today. Are you expected to bring completely new 
possibilities up for their consideration? 
Miller: Yes. 
Yourdon: Or just improve on what they’re now doing? 

Chapter 14 | Joan Miller:  
Director of ICT, the UK Parliament 
288  
Miller: Well, I think it’s an interesting place to use technology, because we
have an interesting customer group, very diverse. It ranges from people who
don’t really like using computers or electronic mechanisms, to people who
are probably world leaders in using electronic information. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Miller: So one of the roles for IT in this organization, and our function in
this organization is to be able to describe the possible, but also to be able to
follow the impossible demands of those people right out at the front. So, for
instance, we have had in the last few months debates in either chamber as
to whether people can use iPads in the chamber. 
Yourdon: [laughter] Ahh, okay. 
Miller: Now in both chambers they have voted and said, “Yes, they can.”
That doesn’t sound like a great big thing, does it? Because initially what that
means is that Members in either house will have their papers electronically,
which is good because it saves printing, it’s environmentally efficient, it’s
timely—there are lots of very good things about it. The impact behind that,
the opportunity behind that is to be able to provide the Member in his
chamber with more information, instantly, than they’ve ever had in the past. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Miller: That changes the way the debate happens. It allows Members in the
chamber, if they wish, to be able to see what the public is saying about the
debate as it’s happening. 
Yourdon: That’s right. 
Miller: If they wish. In fact, there was an experiment in the House of Lords
where they did a parallel debate. So they did a debate in the chamber, and
there was a parallel debate that was open to the public to engage. 
Yourdon: Ahh. 
Miller: The public didn’t engage very much, but, you know, it was a one-off
first try. But how does that change democracy and the democratic process?
Obviously, if you take it to the extreme, it will change the way democracy
works. It will change the way the democratically elected Member is fed
information. It changes a tradition. If you just have it as a source of your
paper, it won’t change very much at all. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Miller: And our job is to display the opportunities for Members to decide
at what pace they want to move. 

CIOs at Work 
 
289  
Yourdon: Okay. That’s very interesting. Of course, iPads are a good 
example of another whole area that I wanted to ask about, which is the new 
trends that you see helping to shape the future. Almost everyone I’ve 
spoken to has focused on mobile technology in one form or another. Is that 
near the top of your list in terms of new technologies? 
Miller: Absolutely, totally. It’s mobile individual. 
Yourdon: Yes. 
Miller: It’s not just “mobile,” but it’s “individual.” “I want to use the 
technology I want to use; please IT organization, don’t lock me down.” 
Yourdon: Aha, okay. 
Miller: That’s specifically true because our customer group is not a 
homogeneous group of people. They are people of independence, who can 
and do make their own choices about what technology they use, what 
software they use, and how and when they use it. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Miller: So our preoccupation at the minute is with a new ICT strategy. 
Being as old as I am, I can see some trends appearing in IT, and I can go back 
to the days of the mainframe in the 1980s, when IT told everybody, “This is 
what you get, and you get it for five hours a day or one hour a day, and 
we’ll crunch numbers for you.” 
Yourdon: Yes. 
Miller: And then about the mid-, early ’90s, it was about e-mail and 
messages. Electronic communication replaced letters. I’m quite surprised 
when I get a letter these days. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Miller: That was sort of the 1990 to 1995 invention of IT. At the same 
time, we took IT out of the mainframe environment. It became the business 
owners’ product, and they had their own systems, and they set up IT 
departments, one of which I managed. And they created small, discrete, 
beautifully formed IT for very specific purpose.  
You get into the late 1990s, and people want to join up this small, discrete 
information, so you centralize IT again, and you become enterprise IT, and 
that brings back control. It brings back format; it brings back locked-down 
information that says, “You work this way because you have to because we 
can’t keep it all safe and we can’t predictably manage the information flows 

Chapter 14 | Joan Miller:  
Director of ICT, the UK Parliament 
 
290  
unless you do.” I think what we’re seeing in the late 2000s is a move away 
from that integrated, hard integration of IT into individual IT. 
Yourdon: Ahh. 
Miller: People at work want what they get at home. And what they get at 
home is massive. They can use any product they like to do e-mail by signing 
up for free. No controls that they are aware of stops them from accessing 
that from any device anywhere. There is software that they can download 
anywhere to do what they want to do. And if they can do that at home, why 
not at work? I think that our ICT strategy here is to try to preserve security 
around data and to open up the opportunity for people to individually use 
that data, in whatever software, whatever hardware they want to use. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Miller: And that’s our challenge: how do we make that happen and keep 
the data secure? Because the data is about confidence, trust, security, 
interoperability. So that’s our challenge and our strategy over the next five 
years. For instance, we currently provide a big e-mail service. It’s secure. It 
has network perimeters, security. We barbwire on it. And it means that if 
you travel out of the Estate, you have a heck of a problem dialing into the 
network because of all of the security we have. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Miller: So our question is, where can we put that e-mail service to allow 
people to get it easily on the move where individually it’s secured to them? 
Can we use Microsoft’s cloud service or Google’s cloud service? Would it 
be secure enough for our Members’ requirements? Can we do that for the 
administration? Those are our big questions. Those are the questions we 
have to ask, and when we look at “can we put it into the cloud?” we’re 
asking, “Is it secure? Can other people crack it? Is it safe? Has it got 
sovereignty if you put it into a U.S. company’s servers?” 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Miller: Would the U.S. government be able to demand they could see it? 
You can imagine, for a UK Parliament, that’s an absolute veto. 
Yourdon: Oh yes, yes. 
Miller: Can we transfer it? If we buy a Microsoft service, can we ever go 
out of it again? 

CIOs at Work 
 
291  
Yourdon: Actually, a more fundamental question is, do you know where it 
is? You know, before you ask whether the U.S. can get it, you have to know 
where it is, that the data is in the U.S. or on some island in the Pacific Ocean. 
Miller: Yes, that’s exactly the sovereignty issue. So we have big questions 
about this very attractive offering because it looks like a good cost break if 
we can move into these big-scale services, these utility services. Can we 
afford the risk of these other issues, which are security, sovereignty, and 
transferability? 
Yourdon: Is there a fundamental feeling in your world that these problems 
will eventually be solved? 
Miller: Yes. 
Yourdon: That it’s just a matter of time? 
Miller: We think they can be solved. We think they can be solved in the 
next 12 months. We are actively investigating how to solve them. Our role 
in IT is to look at our customer group and say, “Actually, what you want is 
that kind of flexibility. Do we provide it ourselves, or do we provide it 
cheaper from somewhere that already does it?” 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Miller: If we did that, how do we solve these other problems? So our active 
work is to solve these problems. If, after six months, we say, “We can’t 
solve these problems,” then we have to hold until they will be solved. But 
they will be solved. 
Yourdon: Yeah. I certainly find general agreement that this whole cloud 
model of having an infinitely scalable resource is one that is inevitable—it’s a 
tidal wave. 
Miller: Mm-hmm. 
Yourdon: It’s just a question of whether it’s this year or next year or the 
year after. You know, there’s another kind of new trend that a few people 
have mentioned, and I’m curious to see if it’s relevant for you. There’s an 
author in the United States by the name of Clay Shirky who refers to this as 
the “cognitive surplus.” He argues that ours is the first generation now, 
maybe the generation that’s coming out of college, that has the time and 
interest and computer resources to contribute some part of their surplus 
brainpower, so to speak, to free things like Wikipedia and thousands of 
things like that—and that things like this have never happened before in 
society. Is that sort of concept one that is relevant in your work? 

Chapter 14 | Joan Miller:  
Director of ICT, the UK Parliament 
 
292  
Miller: I think knowledge is a key issue. And I think people like to be 
engaged in knowledge. I think there are two problems for us and the work 
that we do. One is about authoritative knowledge. How can we be sure that 
the collective knowledge has authority? The Wikipedia issue. 
Yourdon: You’re aware of the comparisons with Encyclopedia Britannica? 
Miller: I was just going to mention it. There’s a one percent maybe 
variation in the authority and accuracy. 
Yourdon: Yeah, and the most amazing is the mean time to repair. 
Miller: And look at the administration behind Wikipedia that makes it work 
that way. Look at the increased controls on Wikipedia. 
Yourdon: That’s true, that’s true. 
Miller: Now why did that happen? And that’s my second point, information 
goes out-of-date very quickly. It also needs managing. 
Yourdon: Yes. 
Miller: And I think that the key for us is to understand whether unmanaged 
sources of data can sustain themselves over the long period. Or will it need 
increased management? Now Wikipedia has chosen to put in that increased 
management in order to keep up its authority level. 
Yourdon: Yes, that’s true. That’s true. 
Miller: So my question back is, is that a necessary step? 
Yourdon: Ahh. I certainly don’t know. [laughter] 
Miller: I don’t know either. And it’s the same question if you like which our 
Members face when they try to listen to the electorate voice. 
Yourdon: That’s a good point. 
Miller: How can you judge the validity of what you’re hearing? How can 
you deal with the volume of what you’re hearing? These are two important 
questions I think the world has to concentrate on, but there will be an 
answer. I just don’t know what it is yet. 
Yourdon: Meanwhile, there’s also the economic aspect to this. This whole 
concept of essentially free software, databases, open source, you know, all 
of that stuff, has completely transformed the economics of large parts of 
Africa and other countries. I certainly think that that may be significant—and 
the CIO of Google thinks that this is going to be transformative in our time. 

CIOs at Work 
 
293  
Miller: It absolutely is transformative, and it’s about making software a 
utility that people engage with and engage on. 
Yourdon: Yes. That’s true. 
Miller: I think it is, I can see the point. I just don’t know what the sustainable 
model is. If I seriously look at investing in a Google model for our users, 
what do I then do about sustainability and growth and future-proofing? What 
happens in the now if it’s free? 
Yourdon: Good question, yeah. 
Miller: I don’t know, you see? And I think the job of CIOs is to be able to 
read the market a little bit further forward, and be able to explain it to our 
customers, so they don’t fall off a cliff by trying something too brave. 
Yourdon: And too early. 
Miller: Or too early. Well, I’m not sure about too early. To me, the Google 
model is just so attractive. I don’t think that it will fail. But what if it did, and 
we’d invested all our knowledge in that? 
Yourdon: Good point. 
Miller: On the other hand—there is another hand. We could invest in the 
very well-known Microsoft and find that we’re locked in and have no 
options. And can’t take a future anywhere else. So our job is to make both 
possible for the future, because there is no answer yet. That’s why 
transferability is the key. 
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Miller: That we don’t get locked in. We own our own data, and we can 
move it to whatever service is best at the time. 
Yourdon: There’s another broad area that I want to make sure we have a 
few minutes to talk about, and that is the opposite side of what we’ve been 
discussing so far, the dark side of the force. What are the risks and 
problems and so forth that keep you awake at night? 
Miller: [laughing] Interesting place to work here. You see, I don’t get kept 
awake by the future of technology. I think if we proceed with ambitious 
caution, we’ll find a solution. I don’t think it’s a difficult impossibility to 
proceed at a pace that allows you to change track if necessary, as long as 
you understand that’s what you may need to do.  
I think the things that keep me awake at night are the more immediate, 
what’s happening now. And that’s about the instant services required here. 

Chapter 14 | Joan Miller:  
Director of ICT, the UK Parliament 
 
294  
So when we are working on the electronic services that support the work 
of the House, there is no time adjustment allowed for failure. They have to 
work the moment that it’s done. 
Yourdon: Ahh. 
Miller: So immediacy is the thing that is critical because IT is never fully, 
100 percent going to work 100 percent of the time. But it has to. So that’s a 
critical business imperative. You know, if you create an agenda for the 
House business, it has to be available at the time, to the minute, when it has 
to be available. It has to be available so many hours before it’s used in the 
chamber. Information has to be updated immediately and online within two 
hours of what they said each day. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Miller: So, you know, you have these time-critical issues. Big-scale text 
issues are a little bit worrying, I guess, because the technology’s so irritating. 
The thing that worked yesterday fails to work today. Why is that? 
[both laughing] 
Miller: So that’s the irritation factor. And the other things that probably 
keep me awake are very much more to do with the user. How to keep the 
communication, how to keep the information flows at the right level, in that 
right language, that people get it. They get the opportunity, they’re not 
afraid of it, because they trust the solution without it all being proved to 
them, and not being proved to them in technical language but in language 
that they understand. How to get that trust, that relationship between IT 
and the users and how to maintain it? 
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Miller: That’s the key issue. And that is really about hearing, living, breathing 
the experiences of the user, and showing that you’re doing it all the time. 
Yourdon: And that leads very naturally to my next question then, which is 
about the generational changes, because how you live it and breathe it and 
so forth with an older user may or may not be the same as how you would 
go about doing it with somebody fresh out of the university. Have you seen 
fundamental changes in the generation of people not even out of the 
university these days, they could be teenagers? 
Miller: No, it’s fascinating. When I joined Parliament in 2005, one Member 
would not have any computers in his constituency office.  
Yourdon: Is that right? My goodness. 

CIOs at Work 
 
295  
Miller: Would not have it. He unfortunately died soon after I joined here. 
Now every Member, whether enthusiastically or reluctantly, has IT and is 
dependent on IT. And when I look at the user surveys, Member surveys 
that we’ve just done, one of their top needs, across all the services they’re 
given, is IT. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
Miller: That’s the top key issue for them, so something has significantly 
changed. In 2010 we had an election, and a third of the House changed. So 
what I have noticed is, amongst the new Members, a much higher 
proportion of people who are self-sufficient in IT and ambitious to use IT. 
The other thing I’ve noticed, interestingly, is a move away from using the IT 
that they’re just given. A small number, but still a growing percentage, and 
they’re using their own products, mostly Apple. A big change for us. 
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Miller: From our products to Apple products. So whereas in the last 
Parliament we had maybe 20 members who were devoted Mac users, we 
now maybe have 80, maybe more. And with the growth of the iPad, first on 
the market as that device, without a real competitor yet, it may be twice 
that number. 
Yourdon: I just got my iPad 2 the day before I took the plane over here. 
Miller: Ahh, well done! And not very widely available in the UK yet. But we 
have a queue of people who are waiting for it. We’re in fact running a trial 
with two committees, one in the Commons, one in the Lords, where the 
members of those committees who have very wide-ranging experience with 
IT will use these iPads for their committee papers. 
Yourdon: Ahh, interesting. 
Miller: And they’ll take them away and use them however they use them 
privately, probably e-mail, Word documents, and so forth, but use them in 
their committee. And of the two committees, which are about 16 members 
each, one Member on each committee has said no, for different reasons. But 
only one has said no. The rest are all engaged and saying, “Yes, we see the 
point. We’ll give it a go. We’re not all confident, but we’ll give it a go.” 
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Miller: To find out what it’s like to use that kind of electronic device, to 
use their imaginations to tell us what’s next. And I think that would not have 
happened in the last Parliament. The change is very fast. 

Chapter 14 | Joan Miller:  
Director of ICT, the UK Parliament 
 
296  
Yourdon: That fast? 
Miller: Very significant, led by consumer products that people like. I mean, 
a little quote for you—this will delight Apple—I gave somebody their iPad, 
got a little message back a couple of days later: “I think I’m in love!” It’s 
what I call “forgiving technology.” It’s like the iPhone, you know, it’s 
forgiving technology. 
Yourdon: Yes. 
Miller: It may even be like the BlackBerry, which is awkward technology. 
But forgiving technology because people can get their signal. 
Yourdon: Yes. 
Miller: There are other products that we have provided that are technically 
superior, but unforgiving, because if they go wrong, they’re too complex. 
They go wrong because they’re too complex, a lot of user error. And then 
people do not forgive them. So I think forgiving technology and the adoption 
of it is a big change I’ve seen. 
Yourdon: Interesting. 
Miller: It makes people more interested in it, more able to experiment. 
The iPad is representing everything. We’ve had tablets. They didn’t do it. 
Yourdon: No? 
Miller: They didn’t do it because they’re too complex. They would take too 
much time. We’ve had Berry Lites and laptops. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm, netbooks. 
Miller: But it creates a barrier between me and the person I’m talking to, 
and in our debating chamber, it doesn’t work. So the flat divide that is 
forgiven when it goes wrong has made a huge user turnaround. 
Miller: So we have been issuing iPads for probably six months, which is 
quite advanced for organizations, but I watch users and how they use their 
IT. That’s what the CIO has to do. 
Yourdon: I agree. 
Miller: Watch, listen, learn, reflect. 
Yourdon: I think you’ve summed it up. Now, I have one minute left, so the 
final question, and I think it’s an appropriate final question, is, so where do 
you see your own future? Where do you go from here? 

CIOs at Work 
 
297  
Miller: [laughter] That’s such a difficult question for me, because I’ve never 
planned a career. 
Yourdon: I’m astounded at how often I’ve gotten that answer. Maybe 
there’s some deep truth to that. 
Miller: Well, I think, well, the deep truth as far as I’m concerned is I’m 
fascinated about what I can change. What can I do that has an impact that 
changes stuff and makes it better? So if I’m interested about what I can 
change; it’s what I can see that I can do that I do next, and mostly that’s just 
been accidental for me. So I haven’t ever planned it. So I’m not planning the 
next phase. 
Yourdon: Fair enough. All right, well, thank you.  

C H A P T E R 
15 
Vivek Kundra 
First CIO of the United States of America  
Vivek Kundra is the first Chief Information Officer of the United States, and was
appointed to the position by President Obama in February 2009. The Federal CIO
is responsible for directing the policy and strategic planning of federal information
technology investments, as well as oversight of federal spending on information
technology. Three months after his appointment, Mr. Kundra unveiled an IT
Dashboard that tracks over $80 billion in federal IT spending, and which is
designed to provide CIOs of individual government agencies, the public, and
agency leaders unprecedented visibility into the operations and performance of
Federal IT investments. 
Prior to his current position, Mr. Kundra was Chief Technology Officer for the
District of Columbia, after serving as Assistant Secretary of Commerce and
Technology for the state of Virginia. 
Mr. Kundra was born in New Delhi, India and moved to Tanzania with his family
at the age of one, before moving to Washington, DC at the age of eleven. 
Ed Yourdon: Given that we do have such a short time, I thought I would
focus on just three things. First, what exciting things do you see coming
along, somewhat like the cloud that I see you’ve really latched onto? 
And then the dark side of the force, you know, what are the things that
keep you awake at night? And the one thing I’m very curious about is your
opinion of the impact of the next generation, the kids coming out of school
right now and their assumptions and attitudes about social media and 

Vivek Kundra: First CIO of the United States of America 
 
300  
technology and the whole works. Do you see that as a significant thing? So 
in terms of futures, the cloud is a good example of something that’s already 
here but do you see other things coming down the pipeline in the next 
couple of years that could dramatically change? 
Kundra: There are three megatrends that are going to disrupt our current 
technology landscape. So, if you look at how we deploy technology, the 
word that I’ve coined is “digital oil.” 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Kundra: And the reason I think that technology is like digital oil today is 
because if you look at just the federal government, we went from 432 data 
centers to more than 2,000 in about a decade. 
Yourdon: I saw those figures. 
Kundra: Average utilization of servers in these datacenters is under 26 
percent. So you could just imagine the compute power we’re throwing out 
that’s not really being utilized. And storage utilization is under 40 percent. 
Yet, when you look at manufacturing, asset utilization in most industrialized 
countries, whether it’s the United States or Canada, Brazil, the entire 
European Union, it’s about 79 percent. 
Yourdon: Wow. 
Kundra: So the question before us is why do we accept a 50 percentile 
differential between how we deploy IT versus our manufacturing base? And 
the reason I’m calling it “digital oil” is because it is so vital to the prosperity 
of the country and the prosperity of our economy.  
Yourdon: Okay. 
Kundra: We are as dependent on IT as we are oil to drive the economy. 
And what we need to start doing is figuring out what is the equivalent of 
alternative fuels for technology—and that’s why I’ve been very passionate 
about the move to the cloud. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Kundra: The ability to massively scale and provide resources on demand 
and a consumption-based model, rather than just overbuilding, 
underutilizing, harmful for the environment assets is extremely inefficient 
and unsustainable. 
Yourdon: Okay. 

CIOs at Work 
 
301  
Kundra: There is a tectonic shift in technology driven by three megatrends: 
one is mobile, two is social, three is cloud. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Kundra: All driven by consumerization of IT and the fact that every person, 
every endpoint is becoming a sensor that’s not only consuming information, 
but it’s also generating digital-borne content. 
In the public sector scenario, consider this: The National Archives archives 
one billion pieces of paper a year, and that’s all historical content. Think 
about all the new content this is being generated: blogs, videos, information 
from sensors across the board—the demand for computing and for storage 
is beyond anyone’s comprehension today. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Kundra: Sensors are generating data from intelligent transportation 
systems to the electrical grid, which requires us to fundamentally rethink 
our computing models as a result of these megatrends. And underlying all of 
that is obviously going to be issues around security and privacy. 
Yourdon: Right, which is probably the first thing on your list on the dark 
side of the force. Security and privacy. 
Kundra: On some of the issues there, it’s not just that it’s simply looked at 
as security and privacy, but it’s also when you start making available 
geospatial data, when social becomes an integral part of human behavior, 
when it comes to leveraging a lot of the mobile devices, the privacy issues 
are very serious and they’re very real. And from a security perspective, 
when you look at nation-states building massive capabilities, and in the 
context of cyber-warfare, when you look at organized crime and you look 
at the number of phishing attacks and how they’re exponentially increasing, 
we put in charge a four-star general to build that cyber-command because 
we realize that this new landscape, when you look at it from a military 
perspective, our command and control systems, and we’ve gone through 
many revolutions since the days of the Pony Express. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Kundra: Our adversaries were constantly trying to disrupt the military 
command and control systems; the same was true during the telegraph era, 
and today it’s cyber. The other part is to think about how larger parts of 
our economy are moving to the digital world. Wireless transportation, 
banking, health care,  and energy require that we hardwire security up front. 

Vivek Kundra: First CIO of the United States of America 
 
302  
And we must make sure that we are not focused on the silly notion of 
“perimeter security,” because that’s dead. 
Yourdon: When you had mentioned the whole consumerization thing, one 
of the interesting things that I wasn’t anticipating—which I’ve heard from 
several people in my interviews—is a shift that has taken place from when I 
got into the field, where everything was top-down. If you go back 50 years, 
it was the government that first bought computers, to build bombs and 
things like that, ’cause they were expensive, and now, probably typified most 
by Google, but really, across the board, it’s bottom-up. 
Kundra: Mm-hmm. 
Yourdon: A lot of the vendors are building products for the consumer 
marketplace first, ’cause there are lots more of them, and everybody 
brings their gadget into the office, and then eventually everybody says, “I 
want an iPad,” and so now it’s going bottom-up, which is a pretty 
significant change, I think. 
Kundra: I actually think that’s a great change. That’s how it should have 
been. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Kundra: One of the first things I did when I came into office was to launch 
the IT dashboard. To drive transparency on how all of our IT assets were 
performing across the board. And what you realize very quickly is there’s a 
huge gap between the public and private sector when it comes to 
information technology. And a big part of that gap is because the villain is 
mostly the CIOs. They act like villains, they are still tied to the old IT model 
of command and control while all their customers hate the enterprise IT 
solutions they are forced to use. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Kundra: And they pretend, under the guise of security, that they are more 
secure. To give you a data point, I went up to the Silicon Valley and I spent a 
lot of time in the Bay Area. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Kundra: And I was talking to all these startups, and I was telling them, 
“Well, why don’t you compete for government business?” because part of 
what I’m trying to introduce is Darwinian pressure in the public sector 
because we spend $80 billion a year on IT. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 

CIOs at Work 
 
303  
Kundra: How great would it be if we could get some of the most innovative 
companies in this country to compete for some of these really large 
contracts? And a lot of the startups told me, “Well, some federal 
government employees are already using our solution.” 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Kundra: It’s a new world order, and I ask the CIOs a very simple question, 
which is, “Why is it that everybody hates enterprise software? Nobody’s 
ever said ‘I love my user experience.’” And people love some of these 
consumer solutions. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Kundra: And part of the reason is also because these guys have 
monopolies; it’s like an IT cartel. Once you win the contract, there aren’t 
really incentives to innovate. So if you have a five-year contract, your 
incentive is to increase margins. Compare that with the consumer space 
where every day you’re one click away from extinction. 
Yourdon: That’s right. 
Kundra: You’re constantly innovating and that isn’t happening in the 
enterprise space. And those companies are actually obsessed with the 
customer experience, and that’s part of what we’ve done in the federal 
government. That is why we have focused on going after some of these 
wasteful projects by killing them or turning them around. We’ve been able 
to save $3 billion. These are huge changes in federal IT. 
Yourdon: Another thing that I heard which I know you’ve been involved 
with for quite some time—I think the best phrase is from a futurist named 
Clay Shirky with his term the “cognitive surplus”—this idea that probably 
for the first time in history, society has an excess of brainpower that can be 
contributed using computers for the greater good, the classic example of 
which is, of course, Wikipedia. 
Kundra: Mm-hmm. 
Yourdon: But your Apps for Democracy1 I think is a wonderful example. 
Now you did that for the city of Washington, didn’t you? 
Kundra: When I was the chief technology officer in the District of 
Columbia, one of the problems I was trying to solve was in introducing 
disruption in government IT, and I realized the only way I could do it was to 
                                                
1 www.appsfordemocracy.org 

Vivek Kundra: First CIO of the United States of America 
 
304  
change the paradigm, because the way the government buys IT, it’s usually 
through these contracts or grants. And the model was broken, and I 
realized, “Well, wait a second. What if I put up a challenge and tapped into 
the ingenuity of our citizens?” 
Yourdon: Right. 
Kundra: And if by democratizing data and challenging developers to 
build useful applications? What was amazing about this initiative is we 
only spent $50,000. 
Yourdon: And $3.2 million in savings? 
Kundra: Right. I gave people 30 days, and I got 47 applications, which 
ended up saving about $3.2 million. What would normally have cost 
millions, I got for 50 grand. And that is why when I came into the 
Administration, one of the first things I did is launch data.gov. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Kundra: We started with 47 data sets, and now we’ve got over 400,000 
data sets. And we also worked with Congress on the America COMPETES 
Act that now gives every agency the same authorities that DARPA and 
NASA have to launch challenges and prizes up to $50 million. 
Yourdon: Really? 
Kundra: Agencies can say, “Here’s our problem. We want it solved and are 
willing to pay $50 million.” And crowd-source solutions. 
Yourdon: You know, it’s fascinating because I present seminars in Rome 
on Enterprise 2.0, and up until now, the pharmaceutical industry has been 
one of the best examples of, of this concept. 
Kundra: Eli Lilly? 
Yourdon: And Pfizer. There’s one other one. And the people that I meet in 
Rome are just astounded and can’t believe that anybody would be doing this. 
Kundra: Well, have you heard my other example that I use about Rome 
and the Agora? In the Agora people would convene in a public square to 
petition their government, to conduct commerce, to socialize. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Kundra: Now through technology, what you have is a digital public square 
that’s global. So the ability to convene and to harness, especially for this 
president, who really cares about tapping into the ingenuity of the American 
people, the power of technology can be used actually to tap into millions of 

CIOs at Work 
 
305  
people across the country to solve some of the toughest problems this 
country faces, rather than a few people behind closed doors, which has 
been the old, traditional model. 
Yourdon: Well, I’m delighted to hear it—it’s got this kind of central thrust 
behind it because the examples I’ve seen so far have been very few and far 
between. There’s one in New York called Clever Commute2. But, again, those 
have been isolated examples. I’ve had trouble tracking down some. I’d 
mentioned there was a third area I wanted to chat with you about since I’m 
watching the clock: your thoughts about the impact that the next 
generation, the digital natives, or whatever you want to call them, and their 
impact on how they’re going to use technology to impact government or 
society. Are you optimistic or pessimistic? 
Kundra: Well, I’m actually very, very optimistic. And I’ll tell you what one 
of the things that the President did when he came into office. He said he 
wanted to make sure that government service was cool. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Kundra: We’ve looked at what the next-generation workforce will look 
like. Not a year or 2 from now, 10, 15, 20 years from now. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Kundra: The leading trends, whether you’re in the Bay Area, you’re in 
Austin, Boston, New York, Silicon Valley. It’s nothing like a government 
office today. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Kundra: But there are two shining examples. The Patent and Trademark 
Office is one of the leaders in teleworking, and what they’ve done is 
rejected the old model of managing through sight. “If I can see you, I know 
you’re working. But if I don’t see you, you’re not working.” 
Yourdon: Right. 
Kundra: They’ve got 50 percent of their workforce teleworking, all over 
the country. And they’re able to attract some of the smartest people across 
the country, and they’ve been able to quantify work. It’s been an amazing 
success. The other one is the Government Accountability Office [(GAO)]. 
Yourdon: Hmm. 
                                                
2 www.clevercommute.com 

Vivek Kundra: First CIO of the United States of America 
 
306  
Kundra: Now that happened because after the anthrax attack the Senate 
had to evacuate. They took over the GAO building. And GAO employees 
had to look at innovative technologies to continue their work. But beyond 
that, I think, for us to be able to attract the best people in the country, 
we’ve got to be able to fundamentally rethink the nature of work and this 
notion that people are only productive 9-to-5 in a single location. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Kundra: But the most important thing for us is to make sure that what 
we’re doing is that we’re recognizing this trend of the rise of employee-
owned. 
Yourdon: I see. Aha, okay. Do you see any impact coming from the next 
generation outside of the so-called First World countries? You know, when 
you get devices that are cheap enough that anyone in the world can afford 
them, I think that also changes the balance of power in a lot of ways, pretty 
much illustrated by what’s going on in the Middle East right now. 
Kundra: Well, absolutely. For example, with what’s going on in Egypt and 
the use of social media, or frugal engineering in India, which is an area that 
we pay a lot of attention to. When you think of the scale of a country like 
India and the problems it has to solve with 1.1 billion people, or China, 
with 1.3 billion people, the approach and the underlying technical 
architecture is fundamentally different than when you’re designing solutions 
for 310 million people. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Kundra: We’re very interested in looking at some other leapfrog 
technologies, whether it’s in South Africa or in India or in China, in terms of 
how are they are leapfrogging; what does mobile commerce look like; and 
as I mentioned, the three megatrends in social, mobile, and cloud, and how 
they will fundamentally alter development and commerce. 
Yourdon: Some guy just found one of his spare PCs in the garage and used 
that and $500 from his credit card to get it started. And if you extend that, 
then I assume that the next obvious step is that entrepreneurial startup 
model is going to operate in China and India and Africa and all over the 
world. Umm, fascinating.  
Kundra: It’s exciting. 
Yourdon: Yeah, it is exciting. And I’m delighted to hear that there are 
initiatives underway that, you know, I was unaware of. 

CIOs at Work 
 
307  
Kundra: President Obama has said that we’re going to win the future by 
out-innovating, outcompeting on a global scale. And we’re in a very good 
position because the U.S. economy, and the innovation that’s happening, 
especially in all of these three megatrends is actually leading-edge, whether 
you look at cloud, you look at what we’re doing in the context of digital oil. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Kundra: How do we disrupt that? The key is going to be to make sure that 
as Clay Christensen says, that the “innovator’s dilemma” doesn’t kick in. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Kundra: Unfortunately, I’ve got to run. 
Yourdon: I very much appreciate your time. 

C H A P T E R 
16 
Paul 
Strassmann 
Former CIO for Kraft Foods Inc., Xerox Corp., 
U.S. Department of Defense, and NASA 
Paul Strassmann is currently a Distinguished Professor of Information Sciences 
at the George Mason School of Information Technology. Previously he was the 
acting Chief Information Officer of NASA, with direct responsibility and 
accountability for the NASA computing and telecommunication information 
infrastructure. Before that, he was the Director of Defense Information, where he 
was responsible for organizing and managing the corporate information 
management (CIM) program across the U.S. Department of Defense, and where 
he had policy oversight for the Defense Department’s information technology 
expenditures. 
Mr. Strassmann’s earlier career includes the Xerox Corporation, where he began 
as director of administration and information systems, with worldwide responsibility 
for all internal Xerox computer activities, and from which he retired as Vice 
President of Strategic Planning for the Information Products Group. He also held 
the job of Corporate Information Officer for General Foods, and Chief Information 
Officer for Kraft Foods Inc. He is also the author of more than 250 articles and 
nine books on various aspects of information technology. 
 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
310  
Ed Yourdon: One of the things I want to ask you about, because of your
position, is your opinions about some of the trends you have seen over the
years as [a] CIO. 
Paul Strassmann: Yeah, there are clearly trends. You must understand
that I’ve been a CIO since ’61. And it’s all I’ve done. In other words, there
are very few people that I know of who have been in the CIO position as
long as I have. Because even today I am basically a professor teaching CIOs. 
Yourdon: Fascinating. 
Strassmann: And there are very few people who made it over two
generations. In other words, they used to fall out and fall off at the end of a
generation. And maybe they fell off after the second generation, but the life
expectancy of a CIO has always been very short. 
Yourdon: Yes. That definitely is true.  
Strassmann: And I’ve been pulling this stunt now for a long time. 
Yourdon: [laughter] Ahh… that obviously will give you a better
perspective. 
Strassmann: If you’re looking for a catchphrase for the book, for whatever
it’s worth, you could say you talked to the oldest holder of the CIO title in,
perhaps in the world. Perhaps. You have to validate that. 
Yourdon: Well, why don’t I start on something that I gather is part of what
you’re lecturing on, about new trends that might influence the industry in
general, whether it’s the military or any other industry. Are you spending a
lot of time worrying and thinking about things like virtualization and cloud
computing and so forth? 
Strassmann: Oh absolutely. 
Yourdon: Or are there, if you’re looking further into the future, are there
other things? 
Strassmann: Yes. By the way, my course, that I’m starting … has 13
lectures. And they are three-hour lectures, and two of those lectures are on
virtualization and cloud computing. 
Yourdon: Okay, well, that obviously gives it some great significance. 
Strassmann: And the significance is really driven by the economics, the
shifting economics of how do you equip an enterprise with information
technology that’s long-lasting? And so you have to go towards cloud
computing. 

CIOs at Work 
 
311  
Yourdon: The less exotic sort of form or sister of that is the virtualization 
approach, which also seems like a clear-cut economic issue for any large 
organization. They would have thousands of servers on all over the place. 
Strassmann: You know, so-called cloud computing, which means lots of 
things, is really an extension, a progression from virtualization. The 
foundations of cloud computing were really laid by a Stanford professor by 
the name of Mendel—who created the idea of a universal virtualization with 
capability. That firm became VMware. 
Yourdon: Ah, okay. 
Strassmann: VMware has now about an 80 percent market share of 
virtualization. And the virtualization then became the [springboard] for 
going to the next generation—namely, if you can virtualize all these things, 
that means you can suddenly draw in huge complexes. 
You know, we’re talking about billion-dollar data centers. The economics 
will drive you. Economy of scale will drive you to a huge scale, namely, a 
cloud. But then you have to do something with software. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: So, I’ve been following VMware, I’m a shareholder and my 
son is one of the ringleaders. It’s looking at the whole issue of virtualization 
and cloud computing as a transformation, a whole shifting of the cost 
structure. And what is really happening with all of this environment is the 
shifting from a dominant part of the IT budget, which is hardware, to less 
than 10 percent. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Strassmann: And you achieve that through cloud computing and 
virtualization. And then all of the other stuff is then devoted to other 
objectives. But when I got started in computing, 90 percent of my budget 
was hardware. You know, IBM manpower didn’t matter. 
Yourdon: Right. [laughter]  
Strassmann: Manpower was cheap. Today manpower is extremely 
expensive. 
Yourdon: That’s right. 
Strassmann: I don’t know where you are leading with this, but I just want 
to comment that the whole underlying issue is one of economics. 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
 
312  
Yourdon: Well, certainly, I can appreciate that that’s the driver, although 
it’s interesting that I participated in a cloud computing conference in Rome a 
couple of months ago, where you could see there’s still enormous 
resistance—showing that the barrier, the obstacle, is not economics but 
rather the more familiar things like security and privacy. 
Strassmann: Oh, yeah, sure. Sure, that’s the usual stuff. That’s what’s 
called “friction.”  
Yourdon: Meaning what, you expect it to fade away? 
Strassmann: Oh yeah, it will all be swept away because the economics, the 
power of the economics will totally, totally dominate, see? 
Yourdon: Aha. Interesting. You know, the kind of separation that’s more 
readily apparent right now in the industry is the big, regulated companies 
versus the smaller companies that have no regulation—where there’s less 
concern about security and privacy and more of a willingness to really take 
advantage of the economics, versus the more established firms. 
Strassmann: Let me give it to you: those are not inconsistent. Security and 
economics are not inconsistent. Security, depending on how you do the 
architecture, can be very cheap. The question is, where are you going to put 
this security? 
Yourdon: Ah, okay. 
Strassmann: See, you’ve got lots of places where you can put your first 
line of defenses.  
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: Right now everybody’s loading their power with firewalls and 
antiviruses and so forth. You are really like the guy in the cottage 200 years 
ago—going to Kansas and building a house out of local wood, making his 
own latrine, and buying a can of kerosene. Now the thing has shifted. Now 
we are in an urban area now, you are a New Yorker, and the economics of 
you as contrasted with the farmer in Kansas is totally different. And in the 
old days, the farmer in Kansas had his own Winchester. That was the 
security. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Strassmann: Well, now we have a different security, but the economics of 
the police department in New York is totally different to the economics of 
the guy with the gun in Kansas. 
Yourdon: Okay. 

CIOs at Work 
 
313  
Strassmann: So security is a thing that is thrown out without any really 
thought given to the whole question of what the security issues are and 
where do you spend your money on security. The Department of Defense 
now spends over 50 percent of its budget on security. Most of it is wasted. 
Yourdon: Because they put it in the wrong place? 
Strassmann: Too many places. 
Yourdon: Too many places. Oh, okay. 
Strassmann: Many places. 
Yourdon: Ahh, interesting. And is your argument that because the 
economics are shifting so rapidly … the security friction will be taken care 
of because there’s so much more money available? 
Strassmann: Yeah, well, one of the ways of dealing with the problem of 
security is to look at the cost of protection, and what do you protect against? 
Are you protecting yourself against infiltration? And you know, there’s all 
kinds of infiltration. Or are you protecting yourself against exfiltration? 
Yourdon: Stuff leaking out? 
Strassmann: Yeah. You know, I’ve been involved with Citicorp, where 
money went out because of insiders. So every bank today and every financial 
institution has a problem with exfiltration. And certainly the Department of 
Defense has a big problem with exfiltration. 
Yourdon: Sure. 
Strassmann: So then the question is, if you are confronted with 
infiltration, exfiltration, what are you going to do about it? And how are you 
going to protect against it? 
Yourdon: Okay, interesting. So those technologies are big ones in terms of 
your vision of the future. What I see of virtualization is that it’s no longer a 
leading-edge or early adopter stuff. It’s becoming mainstream. 
Strassmann: Yes, it is. 
Yourdon: Cloud computing is a little further out. 
Strassmann: Well, it depends. You know, I have a list of cloud computing 
companies. I don’t know if you’ve looked at the list. They’re global now. I 
looked at companies that provide servers that have over 100,000 servers in 
one building. 
Yourdon: Wow. 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
 
314  
Strassmann: So a huge amount of business is now being channeled to 
cloud computing. One of the intriguing things is that many of the startups 
are experiments—in other words, if you are in a given corporation, and you 
want to experiment with something, and they don’t want to let it into the 
protected area, you just go out to Amazon and you buy yourself a server, 
for 25 cents a minute. And you buy the server, a big Dell server, for 25 
cents a minute. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Strassmann: So you can feed in an application, a complicated application, 
and for less than $14, get it done. Pay with a credit card, and you’re done. 
It’s thoroughly accepted today. 
Yourdon: Yeah, I agree. And then you can try out your idea, and if it fails, 
you’ve got no capital. 
Strassmann: Well, sure, no problem. And some of the stuff that is 
available as a service like Google Apps. There are hundreds of thousands of 
people using Google Apps now. 
Yourdon: You’re right. A lot of the articles that I’ve been seeing lately 
about government agencies switching to Google Apps and Google Mail1 is 
driven by the economics, so that if there are concerns about privacy or 
security, those are dwarfed by the savings. 
Strassmann: No, no, no, no. No, they are not dwarfed. They are being 
taken care of. 
Yourdon: Ah, okay. 
Strassmann: In other words, you cannot just go and do this without taking 
care of security. My point is that the security on Amazon EC2 is cheap. 
They give you very good security. They may actually give you, for the same 
bucks, 25 cents an hour, a security that’s better than anything that you have 
right now in your data center. 
Yourdon: That’s a very good point. I hadn’t really thought about that: that 
for a lot of companies, if they do make a comparison, they would have to 
acknowledge that their existing security is not very good to begin with. 
Strassmann: Yeah, the existing security, particularly because of legacy 
instances, implementation. There are too many damn servers. I’m looking at 
a population of approximately a quarter of a million servers. 
                                                
1 Gmail. 

CIOs at Work 
 
315  
Yourdon: Wow. [laughter] 
Strassmann: Doing 7,000 major applications and untold number of local 
homegrown fixes. You know, I’m looking at 750 data centers just in the 
Department of Defense. You try to tell me that they have security? I mean, 
you must be kidding. 
Yourdon: I remember you giving me similar numbers back in the early ’90s 
about the number of payroll systems you had seen in data centers all over 
the Defense Department. 
Strassmann: Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. 
Yourdon: Well, aside from virtualization and cloud computing, what other 
key technology trends do you see on the horizon that we should be thinking 
about or planning for? Particularly if you have a longer horizon than the rest 
of the CIOs that I’m talking to. 
Strassmann: Well, the heart of an enterprise is data. The heart of the 
enterprise is software. 
Yourdon: True. 
Strassmann: When you look at the budget of a typical installation, you’ll 
find that the bulk of the people are not in the computer room, but are 
running around fixing things, downloading things, improving things, and most 
importantly, doing bridges between system A and system B.  
Yourdon: Okay. 
Strassmann: Interoperability. So when you look at your budget, you will 
discover that you may tie up almost all of your available resources on 
maintenance. It’s a killer, absolute killer. And, and in addition to this, what 
you find is that there’s always somebody who needs something—an 
operator, a financial analyst, a venture capitalist. You know, “I want to do 
something different. You know, I want to have millisecond response.” So 
they just go and buy something, and they buy it, put it in, and use it. But then 
somebody either merges it, or combines it, or needs feeds, and that’s when 
they start hiring somebody to do feeds. Protecting the feeds and so forth. 
Yourdon: Aha. 
Strassmann: So you are really looking at an environment where the 
technology is largely misused because the integration isn’t there. So the big 
question of integration is, what kinds of applications and through what 
protocols are you going to be writing those applications? Are web pages to 
be interoperable? 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
 
316  
Yourdon: Okay. 
Strassmann: So to answer your question of what is the technology that I 
view in the next 20, 30 years, it really deals with the subject of integration 
and service-oriented architecture, where you have a billion-dollar network 
called the Internet and inside the network survive thousands, sometimes 
millions of applications that depend on each other. And you don’t have the 
human intervention labor to do all of that. You have to automate the 
interoperability between data and applications and then have a layer which 
then will allow a new application to come in, a new app—or 99 cents. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: A button. And that button will have the protocols, so it will 
go to discover where the pieces are. And from multiple databases it will do 
what’s called a mash-up and bring back an answer to you in the protocol 
that deals with a certain human interface. So the future is not virtualization, 
the future is not cloud. The future is really in how a CIO will create an 
environment which will provide his customers with the ability to operate in 
an extremely information-rich environment that is extremely complex and 
that must be secure. 
Yourdon: Are you essentially talking about the buzzword that for years 
and years has been known as enterprise architecture integration? 
Strassmann: Sure. Well, this idea has been around for a long time. 
Yourdon: And I guess that’s my concern. It’s been around and it hasn’t 
happened yet. 
Strassmann: Well, it hasn’t happened for a number of reasons. First, the 
technology has not been mature. The emphasis on people building their 
own shanties in Kansas, digging their own latrine, and having a can of 
kerosene has been very strong. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: There is a whole cohort of contractors who live like that. I 
mean, the place is full of people who do maintenance programming. That’s 
their business. They would be all blown away. 
Yourdon: You’ve mentioned another aspect of this that I wanted to touch 
on, and that is the transition from a CIO environment where the enterprise 
owns and controls the technology versus the world that we’re beginning to 
see more and more of now, of employee-owned technology. 

CIOs at Work 
 
317  
Strassmann: No, no, no, no, no, no. No, the employee owns the buttons, 
the apps. The infrastructure —which may be either local for a number of 
reasons or part of a cloud environment—it’s somebody else’s. 
Yourdon: Oh, okay. 
Strassmann: So the employee still owns … you know, when you sit down 
at a Mac, you don’t own its code. You don’t even know what the code is. So 
if you think you control technology, don’t kid yourself. 
Yourdon: Well, you control it in terms of whether you buy a Mac or a 
Windows machine. 
Strassmann: Well, fine, but technology is not the issue anymore. See, for 
people to go in the way I did it 20, 30 years ago. When I wanted an 
application, I went in, got a bunch of programmers, we designed it, got a 
computer and debugged it and did all of the other stuff. But that was 
home-cooked, that was home-improvised; it was all put together by a 
bunch of amateurs. 
Yourdon: Sure. 
Strassmann: Now you have a bunch of people like my son who are really 
deeply embedded in real fancy software. I mean, really fancy software. And 
they’re doing all of that. And it’s all available for you by pushing a button. 
Yourdon: Okay. One of the battles that I see going on in companies all 
over the place is the CIO who says, “You can’t have one of these. You’ve 
got to have a BlackBerry. And I don’t like the fact that there are 300,000 
apps and you can choose. I want to choose for you.” 
Strassmann: Well, yes and no. It’s an issue because behind all of that thing 
is the interoperability. Because if I give you an iPod, I have cut a link with my 
interoperability and my security. I cannot allow that. 
Yourdon: Okay. So that’s where the real control comes in; it’s the 
interoperability. 
Strassmann: It’s a question of whether the CIO of the future will really be 
a sort of master orchestrator, like a conductor—although it’s a poor 
analogy. But it’s more in that direction than the CIO of the past. 
Yourdon: Okay, interesting. Well, the related question I had is: What was 
the most significant change or development that you’ve seen now that your 
career is, as you say, much longer than anyone else’s? Two generations of a 
career, looking back over 40 or 50 years, what would you say have been the 
most significant changes? 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
 
318  
Strassmann: Maybe a few things. Now you buy everything. And the entire 
progression since ’53 or ’54. In other words, in ’54 I actually plug-wired the 
plugboards. Nobody does that anymore. So now you are in a much higher 
level. The technology is in the wall, and now the issues are much bigger. 
They have to do with the issue of how the computing environment is going 
to be harnessed to support your business. And so you’ve gone away from 
technology. You still have to understand how to orchestrate the technology. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Strassmann: But then you are moving to a much higher level. And one of 
the most interesting things that happened in the U.S. Navy, which I consider 
one of the leading organizations. Last March they decided to abolish the 
function of information technology as a separate function. 
Yourdon: Really?  
Strassmann: They created information technology and intelligence into 
one unit. Because they basically decided information technology is really an 
arm of intelligence. Totally brought in, totally new character of people, 
including some technologists. But when you look at the staffing in the 
organization, it’s an intelligence organization. 
Yourdon: Interesting.  
Strassmann: Because with all these Predators running around doing 
color video data and stuff like that. The issue is what do you do with this 
massive, gigabytes-per-second downloads in Afghanistan? That is not an IT 
problem anymore. 
Yourdon: [laughter] Of course not. I could go off on that tangent, but let 
me go back to this question of what has been significant over the last 40 or 
50 years. You had mentioned earlier an obvious transition from the era 
where hardware was expensive and people were cheap, compared to where 
we are now. What about kind of an even broader version of that? Certainly 
I remember when I started, because hardware was so expensive, it was a 
controlled commodity. We were not allowed into the computer room or 
even the Xerox room. 
Strassmann: Look, I built the Xerox video center that ran the United 
States. I built it in 1971. It was a block building with a deep cellar for tapes 
and what-have-you with a nuclear resistor. 
Yourdon: [laughter] So that the tapes would survive. 
Strassmann: And it had a wire fence, and it was called “Strassmann’s 
concentration camp.” And it had guards at the beginning. In other words, 

CIOs at Work 
 
319  
the whole thing, I built a data center. And its own uninterrupted power 
supply, and nobody could come in without permission and clearance and 
God knows what. 
Yourdon: So now 40 years later, we’re in a world where the hardware is 
cheap and is a commodity and available to everybody in some form. 
Strassmann: No, not cheap. It’s in block houses. You must understand. 
You can go to Secaucus and see buildings that look like block houses. Those 
are data centers, and you can’t get in. No way. 
Yourdon: That’s true.  
Strassmann: And those block houses, you go in, and there’s a row of 
cages, and in those cages are either dedicated servers or utility servers. And 
you may have forty, fifty thousand servers in that room. And, by the way, 
the cost of electricity and air conditioning costs more than the servers. It’s 
just totally different. 
Yourdon: Yeah. Certainly, that’s an interesting transition when you see the 
effort that Amazon or Google are making in terms of supporting 
conservation and, finding sources of energy. 
Strassmann: What choice do they have? 
Yourdon: Yeah. That’s amazing. Well, on some level, though, wouldn’t you 
agree that there are many forms of technology that are almost free for the 
individual in terms of being able to go down to the local store and buy it and 
use it? 
Strassmann: Oh yeah. 
Yourdon: Versus a generation ago. 
Strassmann: You know, anybody can go to Radio Shack and buy some 
fantastic technology. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: The question is, if you have an organization, how do you 
bring the technology? I have no problem with people going to Radio Shack 
and buying some widget. My problem arises when they come with 
technology and want to draw on data that I own. Under what conditions 
will they be allowed to do that? 
Yourdon: What if they create their own data and communicate it with 
their friends, sort of outside your borders entirely? 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
320  
Strassmann: Oh, if they want to do social computing—and by the way, we
have that problem. In the Navy, 60 percent of transmission today,
particularly on ships, you know, the ships go out for 8 months. The guys get
bored silly. They do social computing. 
Yourdon: [laughter] So it would seem!  
Strassmann: And so the real issue is, how do you make sure—because
they are using the same transmission circuits, which [are] satellites—how
do you make sure that they are not used for infiltration and exfiltration? 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: That becomes a very dicey issue. And it’s a very detailed issue.
It has to do with the design of the software. It’s the design of the client or
how much do you permit an edition of a browser to be in that machine? 
Yourdon: It’s obviously a very serious issue within the military. Do you see
that elsewhere? 
Strassmann: No, it’s also in every financial organization. 
Yourdon: Well, that’s where I was going. Do you see it gravitating, that
financial organizations will be the next one? 
Strassmann: All commercial. You know, right now, you have this big thing
in France because in Peugeot, much of the drawings of their electrical car
leaked out to the Chinese. 
Yourdon: Ahh, I didn’t know that. 
Strassmann: Oh yeah. Everybody’s got the same problem. Some people
talk about it; some don’t, but there’s a disgruntled employee sitting in a
cubicle, with access and password access. And then, then you have things
like intelligence like [Aldrich] Ames. Ames who was in counterintelligence.
And he rode through CIA and accessed files, which he had no business
accessing, but nobody knew. 
Yourdon: Is he the one that provided it to the WikiLeaks guy, to [Julian]
Assange? Or is that someone else? 
Strassmann: No, Ames provided to the Russians. 
Yourdon: Yeah. I thought he was the more traditional one. Who is the guy
who gave all of the Wiki stuff? 
Strassmann: Oh, you know, a low-level sergeant. 
Yourdon: But the same problem? 

CIOs at Work 
 
321  
Strassmann: Same problem, exfiltration. And by the way, the stuff that is 
being reported is defective. The stuff that is reported that he downloaded, 
he cut a CD, and sent out by mail for WikiLeaks. 
Yourdon: Really? 
Strassmann: So now you are dealing with a problem. I have several trays 
in there [pointing to his desktop computer] with CDs. Now, are you going 
to permit people to burn their own CDs? And, you know, today on a 
DVD, you can put a big database. Right now, WikiLeaks has a list of all the 
people who had accounts in the Cayman Islands. You know, that’s a three-
million download. 
Yourdon: Right. [laughter] Amazing. Any other significant changes and 
developments that you think have really been worth mentioning over 
your career? 
Strassmann: Yeah, the awareness of money. You see, it used to be that 
everybody was budgeting the cost of money. Much of the cost used to be 
capital purchase. So everybody, the controllers, were watching capital 
purchases and head count, and that was it. And it was head count in the 
data shop. Well, I beat this thing very quickly by deciding to move my 
output out to the user. 
Yourdon: Ahh. 
Strassmann: And the clerks loved to be computer operators, so I put the 
printer out with the users. I reduced head count in my bursting decollection 
room, which was enormous. Where I showed that it was someone else’s 
payroll. I’m just giving you little tricks you can play, you see? It’s a CIO 
against a moving . . . it’s a shell game. So, the real issue is that when you 
start looking at these big trading rules and you say, “What are these people 
doing?” Much of what they are doing is actually data processing. 
Yourdon: Okay. So that has been a shift. 
Strassmann: So you are suddenly seeing a shift which is externalization of 
IT from an enclave, which was identified as a capital cost enclave to 
something which is now part of overhead. It’s part of the overhead cost. 
It’s a totally different way of looking at it. In other words, the people who 
are sitting in the room are actually information processors. They do very 
little trading. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: So, you know, I’ve been tracking the costs of overhead in the 
United States, and one of the most interesting cases comes from General 
Motors. General Motors bought EDS. 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
 
322  
Yourdon: I remember that. 
Strassmann: I was very much involved in that. What really basically 
happened is that it showed up as an acquisition capital cost, but the 
operating cost moved into the overhead of General Motors. So as General 
Motors started outsourcing … by the way, General Motors, at the worst 
time, 87 percent of their cost were purchases of parts. 
Yourdon: Wow. Really? 
Strassmann: The rest of it was overhead. Information processing. So the 
ratio of the truth-to-tell ratio went the wrong way. So, coming back to your 
question, what I do see is recognition that today the bulk of the population 
of America [are] information processors. Hardly anybody makes anything. 
Yourdon: That certainly is true. 
Strassmann: So one of perhaps the major insights for your book is that 
when I look at America and where we are going, I’m seeing the dominant 
occupation is information processing jobs. Which is not just people in jobs 
labeled as IT, but people who do information processing. 
Yourdon: Across the board. 
Strassmann: And, basically we don’t have secretaries anymore. So 
everybody got upgraded. The women became administrators. The women 
love computers because it allows them to upgrade themselves from a 
secretary position to an administrator. 
Yourdon: Aha. Interesting. If there was a list of really significant 
developments over the last 40 or 50 years, would you include the Internet 
or the Web or Google or those things? 
Strassmann: Oh yeah, yeah. Sure, the Internet is very important. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Strassmann: Sure. Very important and growing in importance. There are 
going to be billions of nodes on the Internet, and it’s growing in complexity 
and there are issues of cost. There are some deep issues of cost—who is 
actually paying for Internet? 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: Who is making a profit out of the Internet? There is 
increased demand for high bandwidth, so you’re talking about 10- to 30-
gigabyte circuits. There’s also the question of computing at the edge rather 
than computing in the center in order to reduce latency because if you are 

CIOs at Work 
 
323  
in a certain situation, particularly in Wall Street. Some of the trading is now, 
people are fighting nanosecond delay in differences. 
All I’m saying is there’s some deep, deep issues here of latency, availability, 
up time. In other words, is 99.999 percent an acceptable level of reliability? 
Very difficult to do. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Strassmann: And also that with technical issues, where do you put your 
redundancies? Because there is no way of improving reliability on a single 
server. No way, can’t be done. I mean, it goes only so far and then you’re 
dealing against the inexorable problem of electrical or mechanical failure. 
So then you have to start working on the redundancies. So the issues are 
enormous. 
Yourdon: I certainly agree. Let me jump on to an area we’ve not talked 
about and I’m certain you have some strong opinions. The whole 
generational issue. Do you see significant differences in the behavior or 
attitude of the generation of workers, IT workers, in particular, coming out 
of college today as opposed to a generation or two generations ago? 
Strassmann: Well, it varies. The funny thing is, at the elite end—I have a 
grandson at Carnegie-Mellon. He’s taking a degree in software engineering. 
You know, this guy is going to be a hotshot. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: And I have another one at Virginia Tech, also doing electrical 
engineering. So, you know, I’m keeping everybody on the narrow. Those 
guys are going to be hotshots and they’re going to do very well, unless they 
do something crazy. My son has a PhD from MIT. He’s doing extremely 
well. He’s a programmer. Nothing wrong about that, my friend. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: He doesn’t want to be a big boss, because that is not where 
the fun is and where the money is. They pay him extremely well. 
Yourdon: But as you say, those are all examples of the elite. 
Strassmann: It’s the elite. And by the way, that’s what the Chinese are 
going into. You see, the big problem we have is when you look at the Silicon 
Valley software factories, half of them are not Americans. The class I’m 
going to be teaching, half of my class will not be Americans. 
Yourdon: I think that’s only a problem if we make them so miserable that 
they want to go back or we make it so difficult to get in that they can’t get 
in. I think it’s wonderful if we attract them in and they stay here. 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
 
324  
Strassmann: Well, it varies, and we cannot get into this. The big problem I 
have is with the young generation. They’re no good, they’re really no good. 
They are superficial. You know, I’m also an educator, so I have them at my 
class. They don’t bore down; they are not engineers. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. 
Strassmann: Their mental state is behavioral, PowerPoint slides, the gloss. 
And I’m talking about fairly high-level people. I’m talking about rear admirals 
and up. They’re an outgrowth of an education that is not rigorous, that is 
not science-oriented. I really despair of the current generation. The bulk of 
it is not good, not suitable. 
Yourdon: And you think this has been going on for a generation?  
Strassmann: Oh, this has been creeping up since the ’60s. 
Yourdon: Certainly you hear a lot of people complaining about the level of 
superficiality of the younger generation, that they don’t bore down. 
Strassmann: They don’t bore down. In other words, you cannot have an 
in-depth conversation; they will just glide away. They don’t have the mental 
mechanics of an engineer, a scientist to start going into the details and 
starting to examine how the thing works. 
Yourdon: Do you know why that is true? Or how that has happened? 
Strassmann: I absolutely blame grade schools, and from grade schools up. 
It’s all this grade school, high school stuff. You know, I have seven 
grandchildren who have gone through the public school system, so I watch 
these kids. And some of them are doing very well, and I have one grandchild 
who is a marvelous kid. He’s in California, he’s in Davis, the University of 
California in Davis. He’s a nice kid, a very nice personal kid, but he’s a fluff. 
By the way, he’s a better personality than my geeks. 
Yourdon: [laughter] Well, all of these kids, obviously, are coming out of 
high school or college with an exposure to technology and information.  
Strassmann: Oh they think they know technology. They think they know 
computers.  
Yourdon: Okay. 
Strassmann: I mean, please, give me a break. They have learned how to 
operate toys. 
Yourdon: True. And I’m not just talking about the ones that are going to 
go into a formal career of IT but, generally speaking, the white-collar 

CIOs at Work 
 
325  
workers who come into the workforce with their toys. And, as you say, 
they don’t have the ability to bore down into any problem. Do you see 
them making bad use of their toys or superficial use of their toys? 
Strassmann: Well, it varies. They just can’t cope with it, so you hire more 
people to do less and less. And then you always find a contractor. And then 
you hire a contractor to do the contract. And then the contractor provides 
the brains, the analysis, but the contractor will make sure that whatever the 
contractor does for you is not fungible, which means that the contractor 
will stay there for a long time. 
Yourdon: Or come back periodically to tweak it? 
Strassmann: Yeah, yeah. And, so, I’m very unhappy with the modern 
generation. They are just not . . . this is not an information society. 
Yourdon: Could it also possibly be, at least partly, that they have a whole 
different focus instead of the priorities their parents’ generation did? Let me 
give you an example. I went out to California in the fairly early days of the 
whole Web 2.0 movement and talked to one guy in a start-up company who 
said, “Today’s colleges have never seen Microsoft Outlook. And if they did, 
they would be horrified, not just by the ugly user interface, but by its task 
orientation.” Which appeals to me, because I get up in the morning and my 
first question is, “What tasks do I have today?” which is often a function of 
the e-mail messages I’ve gotten overnight, with people demanding this or 
that and everything. 
Strassmann: Yeah. 
Yourdon: Well, this fellow in California said the average college kid gets up 
and his first question is, “Where are my friends and what are they doing? 
And how can I find them?” 
Strassmann: It’s social. It’s social. 
Yourdon: So they need tools, calendars, and things of that sort that cater 
to that orientation. And they find the older generation of tools completely 
alien from that perspective. 
Strassmann: Let me just say, everything was fine until three years ago, 
when things went to hell. 
Yourdon: What happened then? 
Strassmann: We have now $15 trillion’s worth of debt and going up. 
Yourdon: [laughter] Okay. 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
 
326  
Strassmann: So everybody was fiddling and singing while it looked like 
everything was just great. Suddenly, the young people have 20 percent or 
more unemployment. Can’t get jobs. There are no jobs there, because the 
manufacturing jobs are gone. The information jobs are not available because 
I need now less and less information people, and I will only hire the 
Carnegie-Mellon guys who can really do the job for me. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Strassmann: So we’ve got a problem. We’ve got a social problem. Now in 
Tunisia, you know, there was 30 percent unemployment for people under 
25. Well, they’re going to have a revolution. You are going to have a social 
problem in the United States with a large mass of unemployed, young, 
college-educated people who think they’re entitled to a job of consequence. 
Yourdon: Aha.  
Strassmann: So the growth in America among the intellectuals has been in 
government-supported activities. Enormous growth. 
Yourdon: Interesting. Well, does all of this provide any guidance or 
recommendations for the CIO? What should you do with this wave of 
graduates coming in now? 
Strassmann: Do exactly what I’ve always done. 
Yourdon: Which is what? 
Strassmann: I’ve done this consistently. What I’ve done starting at General 
Foods, I made sure that I gave summer jobs to people that I could handpick. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Strassmann: So you handpick them. Now, half of them will be gone. But 
you watch them, you give them a summer job, which is better than any 
other summer job they can get. 
Yourdon: Absolutely. I’m one of those people. [laughter] 
Strassmann: Yeah, and, and some of these guys actually went to grad 
school and were still working and then they got full jobs. And then when I 
moved to Xerox, they moved with me. 
Yourdon: Oh, that’s right. You started that way, too, when you were at 
the Sloan School. 
Strassmann: So, my advice to the CIOs today is what the baseball people 
do. Have a training farm somewhere. You just train them and then you get 
the good guys. 

CIOs at Work 
 
327  
Yourdon: So that’s how he or she can groom their own IT staff. What do 
they do with the hundreds or thousands of people they see being hired into 
the marketing department or finance department, all of these other people? 
Strassmann: You can’t do that. You’re a CIO. You have a given power 
position. You have a budget. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Strassmann: Everybody has a budget, okay? So the question is what are 
you going to do? You’re asking me what practical recommendation do I 
have for CIOs, and my answer is, grow the young guys and nurture them. 
And bring them along. 
Yourdon: But, as for all those other people? Because part of the problem 
is that they’re bringing their own toys with them and their own 
expectations about the technology they’ll use. 
Strassmann: Yeah, but up to a point. They can bring their own toys, but 
you cannot allow those toys to come into the database. You must 
understand, when all is said and done, the CIO is a guy with a big stick. He 
has a budget, he has a big stick, and he has power. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: Now, if you don’t have power and you don’t have budget, 
you are nothing. So, let’s talk about practical politics, the Machiavellian view 
of the situation. As a CIO, you must maintain a position of power. 
Otherwise, you’re gonna find yourself out of a job. 
Yourdon: And how do you do that? How do you maintain this position 
of power? 
Strassmann: Well, it varies. At General Foods I created an alliance with 
the CFO, who really then was willing . . . that was the first time ever. You 
must understand, the battle between the CFO and the CIO is as old as … 
this is classic. 
Yourdon: Sure. 
Strassmann: The CFO always used to own this thing. And also sucked off 
most of the output out of the IT. And this lasted for a long time, for some 
organizations. 
Yourdon: Probably a generation or more. 
Strassmann: Oh, almost a generation. It varies from place to place. What 
happened was that at General Foods, the controller—a guy by the name of 
McDade—used to be MacArthur’s intelligence officer. 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
 
328  
Yourdon: Really? 
Strassmann: Yes. And so McDade and I go out for lunch, and McDade is 
just trying to size me up. I’m the new guy on the block. And I said, “You 
know, the problem is that you control it all now, and you think you have 
control, but these marketing guys are really on their way out, doing their 
own thing.” And the big issue in those days was advertising. And the money 
that Finance would spend and control and the stuff they were controlling at 
the factory was this much [gesturing with thumb and index finger close 
together]. The big money at General Foods was for advertising. And I said, 
“Well, Tom, you now, these guys go out to BBDO2 . . .” 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: “And renting 7090s and really playing the big game, and this is 
getting away from you.” So McDade looks at me. He said, “I understand 
now.” Now, I was just a low guy when a week later I become the director 
of information for General Foods. 
Yourdon: [laughter] Aha. 
Strassmann: And so that’s when the game played, and I had an alliance 
with McDade; then McDade decided to retire and I was his retirement play. 
I mean, he was an elderly gentleman, a very fine, educated, Harvard kind of 
person that used to gravitate toward CIA. Yale and Harvard people used to 
go to the CIA. 
Yourdon: That’s right. 
Strassmann: See, that’s the way it used to be done. The moment McDade 
retired, of course, all the knives were out. The positions of all the 
controllers was, “We’re going to cut his throat.” Well, as they were ready 
to cut my throat, I get a phone call from the controller of Kraft: “You know, 
we hear good things about you. Would you like to come over as director of 
information for all Kraft worldwide?” And I said, “Kraft? You know, I’m not 
sure, you know, as compared with General Foods.” He said, “Well, you 
know what? Why don’t you have a look at our financial statement?” It turns 
out Kraft was much bigger than General Foods. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Strassmann: And there was a raise. So I just inherited one controller and 
went to work for another controller. So you create alliances. When I got 
                                                
2 A global advertising agency. 

CIOs at Work 
 
329  
into the Department of Defense, the issue was one of alliances. I came to 
the Department of Defense when the Soviet Union gave up.  
Yourdon: That’s right. 
Strassmann: Congress decided to declare a peace dividend: $74 billion. 
And Congress can just take the money, yank the money out, and it’s gone. 
So as they yank it out, they say, “Oh, by the way, we’re going to leave you 
three billion to do efficiency. You’re going to make it up with efficiency.” 
Cheney turns around and brings in the vice chairman of General Motors as 
his deputy secretary. Now if you understand politics, the secretary is Mr. 
Outside, the deputy secretary is Mr. Inside. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: Okay. The deputy secretary, an outstanding MIT engineer, 
a spectacular engineer, had enough of General Motors and Mr. Perot, so 
he was ready to roll over. He comes into the Pentagon, looks around, 
and well, months later, he says, “I’m going to start a corporate 
information management initiative. And I know just the bastard who 
knows how to do it.” 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Strassmann: Because I did a hatchet man’s job at General Motors. I took 
about $300 million out of Mr. Perot. So he brought me in. So I was 
Atwood’s man, and everyone knew in the building that I saw Atwood once a 
week. You know, the rest of it is just details. 
Yourdon: Yeah. 
Strassmann: So from a political standpoint, if you want to be a CIO, you 
must have an alliance with a source of power. Otherwise you can’t play. 
Yourdon: Interesting. Well, that plays into my next question, and, in fact, 
you may have given the answer. Obviously if you’re a CIO and you’ve got 
lots of people below you, you can usually spot one or two aspiring CIOs—
the person who says, “Some day I want his job.” 
Strassmann: Oh sure. 
Yourdon: What’s the key advice that you would give that person? 
Strassmann: Give them hell. Just give them as much work as they can 
carry, just overload them, just break them. 
Yourdon: Break who? This aspiring CIO? 
Strassmann: Break them with work. 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
330  
Yourdon: Oh, I see. 
Strassmann: Just see how much they can do. A good man can do an
infinite amount of work. 
Yourdon: So your advice to aspiring CIOs would be: show your ability to
take on an enormous amount of work and succeed with it? 
Strassmann: Oh yeah. And they may stay with you, they may go
somewhere else, who knows? But you’re going to get a couple of years of
good work out of them. 
Yourdon: Oh, okay. 
Strassmann: But some of these are loyalties, which then persist. So when
you move from Kraft to Xerox, there’s a whole bunch of people who come
over to Xerox. 
Yourdon: Interesting. That actually is part of a related question, which I
hadn’t really thought of when I started this whole thing— and that is, CIOs
generally have a whole team of immediate subordinates that help them get
their job done, and the question here is: as a CIO, what key qualities or
characteristics do you look for among the people that form that team that
you depend on? 
Strassmann: Hard work. Long hours. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Strassmann: When there is a crisis, they’re always available. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. Something I’ve heard that I didn’t expect is CIOs
telling me, “I want people on my team that I can get along with, because if
you’re going to be working hard, 12 hours a day, you want to have people
you like.” 
Strassmann: Oh, you have to get along, but you don’t have to be buddies,
everybody’s buddies. I don’t believe in that. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Strassmann: Everybody knew I was fair, but I was a bastard. I really was. I
was driving to consolidate data centers at Xerox in order to come into a
company that only 67 percent of its bills got out on time. Inheriting a data
center run by local controllers and mash it all together in two years. You
know, that took some muscle. 
Yourdon: And in terms of looking for the people who were going to help
you do that, then, you were mostly looking for people who would work
really hard, be equally tough? 

CIOs at Work 
 
331  
Strassmann: Yeah, you needed people who really go and work. 
Yourdon: And who would be there if there was a crisis? 
Strassmann: Yeah, you know, this is the military view. You must 
understand that if you were a commanding officer. You must understand 
that I am a military man. You know my military service? My father was a 
military man, one of the few Jews who had a command of a regiment in 
World War I. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay.  
Strassmann: So, I go back. And in the military, when you go out there and 
there’s a bunch of bad guys out there, you know the team spirit and the 
dedication and the commitment and the loyalties are very important. 
Yourdon: That certainly does make sense. But let’s go further with that. 
If you consider that sort of thing a priority, have you seen situations 
where some of the other business executives might misunderstand or 
feel differently? 
Strassmann: Oh, absolutely. You know, there is an absolute classic thing 
against a controller and that never goes away. As a matter of fact, Harvard 
Business School has a case study of a division controller at Xerox versus 
Strassmann. There is such a case study.  
Yourdon: Aha. 
Strassmann: And this guy, who hoped to be the president at Xerox, his 
name was Engelman. He decides he’s going to attack the IT establishment 
when I was ready to take computers away from these little places where 
they were accumulating their own enclaves of power. And I had none of 
that. Well, you know, it’s nasty stuff, nasty stuff.  
Yourdon: And so that just gets to be a power struggle? 
Strassmann: Well, it has to be done. First, it has to be done in a very 
gentlemanly way. Never personalities. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Strassmann: You never use personalities. You have to make sure you tow 
the line on HR-related issues in tough situations so that you are bulletproof 
if things get ugly. And there have been issues, including legal cases. 
Yourdon: Mm-hmm. 
Strassmann: And then you have to spend time with lawyers, because you 
have to spend time finding out what is feasible and what can be done and 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
 
332  
what accommodations can be made. This is a tough business. To be a CIO is 
a tough, tough business. 
Yourdon: Yes. Certainly, I am coming to appreciate that more and more as 
I talk to people. Actually, that leads us to the next question, which is: it’s a 
tough business, but if you succeed, then what? You know, you say you’re 
still a CIO in a sense, and you’ve gone on obviously to kind of an advisory, 
mentoring, professorship role. 
Strassmann: Well, what happened was I did my bit, 18 years at Xerox. 
And Xerox is going down the hill also. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: Okay? So there’s always a time to bail out. And then when 
you bail out, do you look for another CIO job or do you become a 
consultant? You know, the usual stuff? To become a consultant is death, I 
mean, that’s death. A CIO who becomes a consultant, it hardly ever 
works. And I know lots of CIOs who have tried this thing and who just 
couldn’t engage. 
Yourdon: Well, but it sounds in your case that there were a couple of 
situations where you weren’t a consultant in the traditional definition, but 
you contracted in to spend a certain amount of time doing consulting work. 
Strassmann: Yeah, I spent a year with AT&T. The vice president of IT for 
AT&T hired me to do a specific job, and I spent a year there. 
Yourdon: In a sense, General Motors did a similar thing. 
Strassmann: I have never done what’s called “spot consulting.” Here and 
there I give a speech, or what-have-you, but I’ve never done what’s called 
“taking consulting jobs.” I look at the things. And this Defense Department 
thing just came over the transit. Now, I’ve done lots of things for the 
Department of Defense before. In other words, my approach is usually 
suitable for lots of things for lots of people. 
Sometimes for no compensation. And sometimes it pays off and sometimes 
it doesn’t. So, I did a number of things for General Motors and then I end up 
in the Department of Defense, and I stay in the Department of Defense. My 
biggest confrontation in the Department of Defense was with the controller 
of the Department of Defense because the moment I walked into the 
Department of Defense, I said, “We cannot leave IT under the controller.”  
[joint laughter] 

CIOs at Work 
 
333  
Strassmann: I’ve done the same thing over and over again. There’s a 
procedure for doing this thing, and there were a number of reasons to 
yank it out from the controller, because the controller didn’t really control 
anything. The controller just controlled capital budget, which was not the 
issue. So, the thing is yanked out and put into a separate organization. It 
gets a very high position, by the way. You know, I don’t even want to brag 
about the kind of position I had. So I do my Department of Defense job. 
And then, of course, we were going to do it for eight years, but time runs 
out because of the election. So Clinton comes in—I will not work for 
Clinton or any of his appointees, which by the way turned out to be a 
disaster anyway. So, I go off and then look around, and then some people 
say, “You know what? We would like you to do some teaching for us.” So I 
start liking the academic thing. The academic thing gives you a tremendous 
amount of freedom. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: You go somewhere with a card, “I’m a consultant.” You 
know, that’s terrible. If you come in as a distinguished professor, it’s, “Okay, 
well.” It’s the same person, but it’s different. So I do this, and then one day I 
get a phone call from NASA. “Umm, we have a problem with NASA. We 
have a new administrator.” “Who is the new administrator?” Well, the 
controller from the Department of Defense now becomes the 
administrator of NASA because NASA has deep financial problems, so they 
yanked out the financial guy and put him in charge of NASA. Stupid thing. 
“And [laughter] he thinks very highly of you. Would you come down and 
just review the situation?” 
So I go down to NASA, arrive early in the morning. . . I know that these 
people always work early in the morning, so I arrive early in the morning. 
Very important thing, by the way. The key levels in the government, people 
start working at 7:00 or 6:45. 
Yourdon: Ahh. 
Strassmann: Oh yeah. They show up early. They show me the whole 
thing. Then I have lunch. After lunch, they say, “The administrator would 
like to see you.” So I go in and there is my friend, Sean O’Keefe, the 
administrator: “Oh, so nice to see you. I’m so glad you came. Please tell me 
what you have seen.” And I just dump it on him. I said, “You guys are so 
screwed up. You guys don’t know what you’re doing. You are wasting 
money. You are spending money with Peat, Marwick, [Mitchell & Co.], a 
billion dollars on something that could be done on a small computer.” They 
had a big SAP program, which can suck in an enormous amount of money 
without ever showing any results. 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
 
334  
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Strassmann: So, Sean O’Keefe sits there and all of his guys, they’re all lots 
and lots of smiling. And I just say, “Look guys. I don’t know what I can do 
for you guys because you have made a commitment, you have a contract, 
you are going to be spending a billion dollars on something totally useless. 
The various centers are totally independent computers. I don’t know what 
to do for you.” So after I finish this thing, O’Keefe turns around and says, 
“Well, Strassmann, you come here and you straighten it out.”  
I said, “Well, you know, guys, I just finished six years in Washington. You 
don’t want me to come to Washington.” 
“Well, we’re going to make it attractive for you.” 
I said, “Well, you know, I will have to talk to my wife. Let me go home and 
think about it.” 
So O’Keefe, who is a really sharp diplomat says, “Well, if you go home, 
you’ll never come back. You know what? I’m going to make a bet with you. 
I’m going to offer you the job of CIO of NASA, and if you accept, I’m going 
to have a badge from NASA for you by five o’clock this afternoon.” 
And this is like three o’clock in the afternoon. Now, I know enough about 
Washington to know that that can’t be done. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: You know, you have civil servants and on and on. It’s what’s 
called a “senior executive position.” 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: And I’m stupid. I’m really stupid. This is a smart Irish man. 
And he says, “I’m going to put you on my payroll.” And so I said, “Okay, 
sure. If you can do it by five o’clock, I’ll take the job,” sort of laughing, like, 
“No way.” Sean O’Keefe picks up the phone. Lawyers, personnel people 
start walking into the room. They all said they were just waiting. The whole 
thing was a setup! At five o’clock, I had a badge as the CIO of NASA! 
Yourdon: That’s amazing.  
Strassmann: Now, you know, and this is my clear adversary, who I’ve 
been fighting tooth and nail. He lost the battle, because we took IT out of 
the controller’s department in the Department of Defense. You know, 
that’s a 30-billion-dollar piece of money. 
Yourdon: Yes. 

CIOs at Work 
 
335  
Strassmann: So then I’m stuck for a year. I say, “Okay, Sean, I’m going to 
give you a year.” I’m just giving you vignettes of what … it’s a game. 
Yourdon: Is it a game you would recommend to other successful CIOs 
when they feel that they’ve reached the end of their journey? 
Strassmann: Of course. Absolutely. 
Yourdon: So never become a consultant, but look for interesting 
assignments. 
Strassmann: Look for assignments that you can leverage. And there are 
several assignments that can be leveraged. And never work for Peat, 
Marwick & Mitchell,3 or Deloitte. They burn you up. 
Yourdon: Have you seen CIOs trying to move up to the next level, 
[to] CEOs? 
Strassmann: Oh yes, oh yeah. 
Yourdon: Are there many success stories? 
Strassmann: Oh yes, there are many, quite a few. And the reason is that 
these guys are inside the power structure, and they create alliances and they 
are acceptable. And they have become politically acceptable. They also 
know a great deal about the company, because as a CIO you really learn the 
company, particularly if you do it the right way—namely, you bore down 
and you see who connects, who talks to who. 
Yourdon: And, obviously, more and more companies are beginning to 
realize that they live or die with their information. 
Strassmann: Oh yeah. And so the CIO who is doing the right political 
moves and is doing the right homework, understanding the infrastructure 
and the way the blood vessels function, the nervous system … this guy, 
after three or four years, knows a great deal of how the place operates 
because all the other guys are functional. They are marketing or they are 
lawyers or somebody else. 
Yourdon: It was probably 20 years ago, I think, that John Reed became the 
CEO of Citibank and he came out of its IT department. I don’t know if he 
had been CIO. 
Strassmann: Yes, he was. I know John Reed. Oh, John Reed came to 
see me. 
                                                
3 Peat Marwick International merged with Klynveld Main Goerdeler to become KPMG in 1987. 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
 
336  
Yourdon: He came out of the Sloan School.  
Strassmann: Oh yeah. John Reed hired me. 
Yourdon: Ahh, okay. I was just saying that he was the only example that I 
remember off-hand of somebody rising up through IT. There are probably 
lots more. 
Strassmann: There are others, yeah, there are others. 
Yourdon: There are probably an equal number of situations where the 
CIO feels just completely burned out because he’s been fighting all those 
battles and maybe wasn’t prepared for. 
Strassmann: Oh, you don’t fight battles. The answer is, you always pick 
your battles, and pick very few. And you always pick the battles that you 
know you cannot lose. 
Yourdon: Oh, okay. 
Strassmann: Because if you lose, you have to leave. The worst thing is for 
a CIO to lose a battle and stay around. He’s a living dead guy. 
Yourdon: Aha, okay. Well, for a long time, as you know, the life 
expectancy of a CIO has been about two years or even a little bit less. 
Strassmann: Oh yes. 
Yourdon: Now is that because they’ve lost battles? 
Strassmann: No, no, no. There are lots of reasons, but let me tell you 
basically what the flaw is. The people who are hiring the CIO don’t know 
what they want the guy to do. They haven’t cleaned up the power structure. 
So they hire somebody with a totally mistaken idea of what this guy’s 
supposed to do. 
Yourdon: From the outside, usually? 
Strassmann: Oh, from the outside. This is the two-year CIO. So they 
come in, the guy sits down, gets an office, and then he has to decide what 
to do. And then he has to scramble for everything. He does not know 
what his budget is; he doesn’t know who’s his rabbi. You know, you 
always need a rabbi.  
Yourdon: Yes, yes. 
Strassmann: So, after a year, the top executives look and say, “Well, we 
really didn’t make the right choice. He’s the wrong guy.” He’s not the 
wrong guy. The guys who picked him were the wrong guys because they’ve 

CIOs at Work 
 
337  
never done the work. They’ve never done . . . one of the things that your 
book can do is to bring into a CFO/CEO position a thinking of what it takes 
to make a CIO a success. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Strassmann: You see, the CIO cannot be a success unless somebody 
wants him to be a success. 
Yourdon: But that requires a fairly clear understanding of what the role 
needs to be and what that role needs to be. 
Strassmann: Yeah. And then you hire the right person for that role. 
Yourdon: Do you see many situations where the CIO rises up through the 
ranks, as opposed to being chosen and brought in from the outside? 
Strassmann: Very rarely. It does happen. There are some exceptions. I 
had people working for me at Xerox because I had a real mean training 
school in the data center, and some of them worked their way up from shift 
supervisor to CIO. 
Yourdon: Wow. 
Strassmann: But they were exceptional. I mean, there are such cases. 
Yourdon: Actually, there’s a variation on that that I have now begun to see, 
and interesting that you should mention Citibank. Citibank is one of many 
large companies that has multiple CIOs. I have been trying to contact one 
particular CIO. Well, it turns out that he’s not the CIO. He’s one of ten. 
Strassmann: Always, there are lots of CIOs around. 
Yourdon: And especially with the big multinational companies these days. 
So maybe they’re at the sub-CIO level and there’s more of this rising up 
through the ranks. But if not, the question becomes, where do CIOs come 
from? They’re not born into that role, so they have to make a jump. Maybe 
you jump from position X in one company to CIO in another company? Is 
that the more common way of doing things? 
Strassmann: You know, it’s very hard to generalize. I’ve jumped. You 
know, I’ve been with General Foods, Kraft, and Xerox. The Department of 
Defense and NASA. Five. Okay? So I’ve been in this business since, 
depending on how you count it, I’ve been in this business for 60 years. So I 
had 5 jobs in 60 years. On the average, you know, that’s … 
Yourdon: That’s a lot longer than average. 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
 
338  
Strassmann: The question is, are these jobs additive? Or just musical 
chairs? One advice I would like to give to everybody, very important: When 
you are a CIO, you are also a programmer. 
Yourdon: Aha. 
Strassmann: You never let go of the craft. You never let go of it . . . I’ve 
published now 300 papers. I usually write papers because there’s something 
I don’t know about. And the best way to learn something is write a paper 
about it, as you undoubtedly know. The only person who ever learns 
anything is the professor, by the way. 
Yourdon: [laughter] 
Strassmann: The professor learns much more than the student. Guess 
why I’m teaching a course on cyber-operations? 
Yourdon: So you can learn about it. 
Strassmann: I am learning this stuff! I’ve spent the last two and a half 
months learning this stuff. So, so the craft . . . you must understand there’s a 
fundamental craft that you have to nurture. You cannot let go of that. 
Yourdon: Now, once you got into the business world, were there business 
mentors or role models that kind of gave you a sense of how to behave or, 
what was important versus not important? 
Strassmann: I would say one of the great experiences was when I arrived 
at Xerox. I arrived on a Monday, reported to work at 8:30, and at 10:30 a 
gray-haired gentleman walked into my room and says, “I’m Joe Wilson [the 
CEO of Xerox].” 
Yourdon: “Just call me Joe.” I read that part of your book. 
Strassmann: Yes, “just call me Joe.” And it is that humility. See, there is a 
certain sense of decency and ethics which is very important. You know, 
it’s power struggles, but it has been always decent, it always has to be 
ethical, it always has to be done with recognition of people. Now, I 
violated that maybe once or twice, and I’m really sorry about it—when I 
sort of acted harshly, retaliated against certain individuals. But that’s not 
the way to operate. 
Yourdon: Do you think that kind of behavior has largely disappeared in 
American business today? 
Strassmann: Oh, American business, so far as I know, is extremely 
confrontational now. Too confrontational. 

CIOs at Work 
 
339  
Yourdon: And certainly the kind of behavior you read about and hear 
about in Silicon Valley is kind of, you know, the epitome of the IT world. It 
seems like a lot of backstabbing and confrontational behavior. 
Strassmann: Well, you know, Citicorp was just infested with that. I mean, 
it was a sick, sick situation. 
John Reed hired three outsiders to come in and have a look at his place. 
We went around, visited lots of Citi locations. And we came back with a 
remark that the issue was not technology, because the technology was 
good, but it was the confrontation and the continual conflict which was 
tearing the place apart. 
Yourdon: How long ago was this? 
Strassmann: [1995], ’96. 
Yourdon: Interesting, interesting. One of the other things, of course, that 
is often true in the Silicon Valley kind of IT world is companies being run by 
very young and often somewhat inexperienced and somewhat immature 
people, who may not have learned proper behavior, by being part of an 
organization where they could watch others. 
Strassmann: Oh, you learn your behavior from your parents, my friend. I 
mean, don’t wait for corporations to straighten out your behavior. 
Yourdon: Well, parents first and foremost, of course, but also your entire 
upbringing and schools and so on. You’re right; it’s not just in the business 
world. Although I think that people will often see a lot of bad examples in 
the business world. If you were brought up in a certain way and suddenly 
find yourself in a backstabbing culture, that’s got to be a culture shock. 
Strassmann: Yeah. My years with Kraft, by the way, were very nice. These 
were hard-working people. They were all milkmen starting local routes. 
Hard-working, hard-drinking, very nice people. It wasn’t much money, but it 
was pleasant. It was very genteel. 
Yourdon: Hmm, interesting. How is it by contrast in the military? I mean, 
the people who end up doing the computer stuff . . . some of them may 
have come into it right from university, but don’t some of them come from 
a more traditional, West Point kind of culture? 
Strassmann: Yeah, but let me tell you something. I find a larger collection 
of gentlemen of substance in the military than in corporate America. 
Particularly in the Navy. 
Yourdon: Really? 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
340  
Strassmann: Oh, yes. I mean, the rough kind of in-your-face approach is
very much scoffed at. These guys will never make a promotion, because
you‘ve got to go through lots of steps before you get up to admiral. These
are all gentlemen, every one of them. They may have different opinions, they
may be backwards, they are obsolete, but they are gentlemen. 
Yourdon: Now does this start at Annapolis and carry them all the way
through? 
Strassmann: They don’t even get into Annapolis. 
Yourdon: Unless they have that foundation. Oh, okay. 
Strassmann: By the way, my grandson got a congressional nomination
for Annapolis. 
Yourdon: Congratulations! 
Strassmann: But they decided he’s a geek and he would only make ship
captain, so they sent him to Carnegie-Mellon, and they are paying for him. 
Yourdon: One last technical question and then I will leave you alone.
One of the popular IT things these days is the agile development approach,
which seems to also have some impact on project management. It’s not
just a technical way of developing systems. But have you seen any
advantages or disadvantages of agile systems development from a
management perspective? 
Strassmann: [laughter] Let me say that the word “agile”—lots of things
get peddled under that thing. 
Yourdon: True. 
Strassmann: The more I look at things, particularly in the last 20 years,
the more I’m concerned not about the development, but the architecture,
the design, you know, how are the relationships set today? Who’s really
deciding what kind of databases, what kind of metadata to put into place? 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Strassmann: You can do lots of agile development extremely inefficiently if
the thing is not put together with any kind of a sense. Lots of little ants are
moving all kinds of twigs all over the place. 
Yourdon: [laughter] That’s a nice metaphor. Okay. 
Strassmann: I think that’s great. But I have not spent time on that. I really
have not spent time on that. I’m more concerned about the things which
are not being done to make it even possible for people to do development. 

CIOs at Work 
 
341  
Yourdon: Well, you’re looking at things, as you said earlier, in terms of a 
40-year or 50-year lifecycle. So it’s one thing to move twigs around, but the 
twigs will get blown away in a windstorm. 
Strassmann: See, one of the most important issues is, what will be the 
life of the code and how maintainable the code will be. Has this code 
been agilely developed for a one-year lifetime and then be junked and 
thrown away?  
Yourdon: Some things are, but, of course, you and I are old enough to 
know that some things we thought would be thrown away in a year have 
lived 25 or 30 years, so that’s the big surprise. 
Strassmann: And the difference between what gets thrown away and what 
doesn’t get thrown away: Has it been embedded into a framework? See, I’m 
very much concerned about data. 
Yourdon: Okay. 
Strassmann: And have these people really answered the question of how 
well this particular application gets the data securely? Now, the code itself—
particularly if I have an infrastructure in place—infrastructure is a service, in 
other words, a cloud service which provides an infrastructure. The 
infrastructure, I don’t have to do. If the front end you throw away every 
three months, I don’t care. 
Yourdon: Okay.  
Strassmann: The problem is to stack. And the stack is data, communication 
infrastructure, the coding infrastructure, the interoperability, metadata, 
connectivity, the protocol. I mean, there’s layers in a stack. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: I don’t mind if you throw away the top 5 percent every time 
you want. It doesn’t matter. It’s a button, just throw it away. Ninety-nine 
cents. That’s all it was worth. The problem if you go with an application that 
will build an entire stack, or you go in with a big project that’ll take a year 
and it will cost $10 to $50 million. That’s not the way to do things. 
Yourdon: So for things of that sort, do you feel we shouldn’t be using the 
popular forms of agile at all? 
Strassmann: Oh, you can use agile. And decide on what layer you’re going 
to put it in. 
Strassmann: You don’t want to do agile on the infrastructure, for 
instance. You don’t want to do agile on data. You just don’t touch it. 

Chapter 16 | Paul Strassmann:  
Former CIO for Kraft Foods, Xerox, U.S. Dept. of Defense, and NASA 
 
342  
Yourdon: Okay. 
Strassmann: In fact, you have a totally different environment set up for 
control of data. And infrastructure in particular. You know, in the 
infrastructure you may have things starting on the Internet. And then 
because of latency, you may decide to put the data center capability, what’s 
called “on the edge,” to get you down to milliseconds. 
Yourdon: Right. 
Strassmann: You should be able to slide out of the stack the 
infrastructure, slide it on a different . . . without the upper layer or lower 
layer being affected. That’s where the costs come in. 
Yourdon: Right. Interesting. Well, that’s, as you know, an area where there 
are huge battles being fought today, as was the case 20 years ago when my 
friends and I were introducing the structured methodologies.  
Okay, well, I think I have covered just about all of the questions I had on my 
list, which I very much appreciate your taking the time to talk to me about. 
 
 

        
I 
Index 
A 
AdKnowledge, Inc., 87 
Agile development methodology, 62 
Amazon, 314, 319 
America COMPETES Act, 304 
American Airlines, 47, 72 
American Defense Department, 84 
American Marketing Society, 113 
American Production Inventory 
Control Society, 211 
Ames, 320 
AMR Corp, 47 
Android, 43 
Annapolis, 340 
Apple, 97, 101, 217, 242, 295 
Computer, 35 
Genius Bar, 8 
Archipelago Holdings Inc., 87 
Arizona Public Service (APS) 
Company, 66, 211, 223 
Arizona State University, 227 
ARPANET, 19, 117, 135 
Art of Computer Programming, 2 
Atlanta-based Southern Company, 191 
AT&T, 191, 249 
B 
Ballmer, Steve, 39 
Bank of Boston, 47 
Baylor-Grapevine Board of 
Trustees, 47 
Bedrock foundation, 249 
Bell Atlantic Mobile, 231 
Bell Labs, 2, 249 
BlackBerry, 60, 96, 116, 121, 171, 184, 
246, 261, 296, 317 
Blalock, Becky, 182, 191, 215 
adaptability, 192 
Air Force brat, 191, 192 
Atlanta-based Southern 
Company, 191 
banking industry, 203 
Boucher, Marie, 196 
brainstorm, 202 
24/7 business, 199 
business intelligence, 204 
cloud computing, 205 
cognitive surplus, 206 
cognitive time, 206 
Coker, Dave, 196 
communication and education, 200 
Community and Economic 
Development, 194 
consumer market, 202 

Index 
 
344 
Blalock, Becky (continued) 
cybersecurity, 207, 209 
data analytics, 204, 205 
disaster recovery, 209 
distributed generation, 204 
distribution organization, 201 
Egypt revolution, 198 
farming technology, 206 
finance backgrounds/marketing, 
200, 209 
Franklin, Alan, 193 
Georgia Power, 191 
Georgia Power Management 
Council, 193 
global society, 206 
Google, 198 
incredible technology, 195 
Industrial Age, 206 
Information Age, 206 
InformationWeek’s, 196 
infrastructure, 202 
intellectual property, 196 
intelligence and redundancy, 207 
Internet, 198, 206 
leapfrog innovations, 205 
mainframe system, 207 
marketing and customer service, 
193, 200 
MBA, finance, 192 
microfiche, 207 
microwave tower, 207 
mobile devices, 203 
mobility and business analytics, 205 
Moore’s Law, 205 
new generation 
digital natives, 197 
flexible and adaptable, 199 
innovation and creativity, 199 
superficial fashion, 198 
Olympic sponsor, 193 
out pushing technology, 202 
reinforcement, 201 
sense of integrity, 200 
Southern Company, 194, 198, 
201, 207 
teamwork survey, 201 
technology lab, 202 
undergraduate degree, 
marketing, 192 
virtualization, 205 
VRU, 203 
Ward, Eileen, 196 
wire business, 201 
world-class customer service, 203 
Bohlen, Ken, 211 
American Production Inventory 
Control Society, 211 
Apple, 217 
APS, 211, 223 
ASU, 227 
benchmarking company, 216 
chief innovation officer, 229 
Citrix, 217 
cloud computing, 218, 219 
cognitive surplus, 220 
DECnet, 212 
Department of Defense, 222 
distributed computing, 217 
energy industry, 214 
gizmo/whiz-bang show, 216 
GoodLink, 217 
hard-line manufacturing, 218 
home computing, 219 
home entertainment, 219 
Honeywell, 219 
HR generalists, 215 
information technology 
department, 211 
Intel machines, 217 
John Deere, 213 
just say yes program, 223 
Lean Six Sigma improvement 
process, 211 
Linux, 220 
MBA program, 214 
mentors, 213 
national alerts, 224 
North American universities, 228 
paradigm shifts, 218, 220 
PDP minicomputers, 212 
Peopleware, 226 

Index 
 
345 
prefigurative culture, 221 
R&D companies, 218 
Rhode Island, 226 
role models, 213 
San Diego Fire Department, 224 
security/privacy issues, 217 
skip levels, 223 
smart home concepts, 219 
smartphone, 217 
social media, 225 
Stead, Jerry, 214 
Stevie Award, 211 
Storefront engineering, 212 
traditional management, 219, 226 
Twitter, 224 
vocabulary, 221 
Waterloo operations, 213 
Web 2.0 companies, 227 
Web infrastructure, 215 
wikipedia, 220 
Y2K, 222 
Botnets, 23 
Brian’s and Rob Pike’s, 2 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, 33 
Broadband networks, 241 
Brown, 227 
Bryant, 227 
BT Global Services, 253 
BT Innovate & Design (BTI&D), 253 
Bumblebee tuna, 130 
C 
Career writing technology, 67 
CASE tools, 232 
Cash, Jim, 50 
Christensen, Clyde, 212 
Chrome, 14, 18 
Chrysler Corporation, 175 
Citibank, 337 
Citicorp, 313 
Citrix, 217 
Client-server-type applications, 59 
Cloud computing, 218, 219, 239, 240, 
261, 262, 310, 311, 313 
Cloud technology, 62 
CNN, 54 
COBOL, 250 
Cognitive surplus, 20, 79, 206, 291 
College of Engineering, University of 
Miami, 113 
Columbia University, 1 
Community and Economic 
Development, 194 
Computer Sciences Corporation, 35 
Computerworld magazine, 196 
Consumer-oriented technology, 22 
Content management system, 133 
Corporate information management 
(CIM) program, 309 
Corporate Management Information 
Systems, 87 
Corvus disk drive, 36 
Customer Advisory Boards of 
Oracle, 191 
Customer-relationship management 
(CRM), 56 
Cutter Business Technology 
Council, 173 
D 
Dallas Children’s Medical Center 
Development Board, 48 
DARPA, 19 
DDoS attacks and security, 81 
DECnet, 212 
Dell Platinum Council, 113 
DeMarco, Tom, 16, 226 
Department of Defense, 222, 329, 332 

Index 
 
346 
Detroit Energy, 252 
Digital books, 30 
Digital Equipment, 48 
Distributed computing, 217 
Dodge, 189 
Dogfooding, 11, 37, 38, 236 
DTE Energy, 173 
DuPont Dow Elastomers, 151 
E 
Educational Testing Service (ETS), 151 
E-government, 282, 285 
Electrical distribution grid, 182 
Elementary and Secondary Education 
Strategic Business Unit, 151 
Elements of Programming Style, 2 
Ellyn, Lynne, 173 
advanced technology software 
planning, 175 
Amazon, 184 
artificial intelligence group, 175 
Association for Women in 
Computing, 173 
benchmark, 180, 181 
BlackBerries, 184 
Burns, Ursula, 175 
Chrysler, 176 
Cisco, 186 
cloud computing, 183, 184 
component-based architecture, 186 
corporate communications 
customer service, 185 
Crain’s Detroit Business, 173 
cyber security threats, 177 
degree of competence, 187 
diversity and sophistication, 182 
DTE Energy, 173 
energy trading, 176 
engineering and science 
programs, 188 
enterprise business systems 
policy, 186 
executive MBA program, 176 
Facebook, 185 
fresh-out-of-the-university, 187 
General Electric, 174 
Google, 184 
Grace Hopper, 174 
grid re-automation, 182 
Henry Ford Hospital, 174 
internal social media, 185 
International Coaching 
Federation, 178 
iPads, 184 
IP electrical grids, 182 
iPod applications, 182 
IT budgets, 186 
IT responsibilities, 176 
Java, 186 
level of sophistication, 179 
lobbying efforts, 181 
medical computing, 175 
Miller, Joan, 174 
Mulcahey, Anne, 175 
Netscape, 175 
neuroscience leadership, 189 
object-oriented programming, 186 
Oracle, 186 
peer-level people, 179 
people system, 177 
policies and strategies, 180 
Radio Shack, 180 
remote access capacity, 189 
security tool and patch, 183 
sense of community, 180 
Shipley, Jim, 174 
smart grid, 177, 182 
smart meters, 182 
smart phone applications, 183 
swarming, 179 
technical competence, 178, 179 
Thomas, Marlo, 174 
Twitter, 185 
UNITE, 181 
vendor community, 186 
virtualization, 183, 184 
Xerox, 175 

Index 
 
347 
E-mail, 9 
Employee-relationship management 
(ERM), 56 
Encyclopedia, 115 
Encyclopedia Britannica, 292 
ERP, 123 
F 
Facebook, 244 
Ellyn, Lynne, 185 
Sridhara, Mittu, 73, 84 
Temares, Lewis, 116, 121, 131 
Wakeman, Dan, 169 
Federal information technology 
investments, 299 
Flex, 236 
Ford, 102 
Ford, Monte, 47 
agile computing, 59 
agile development, 62, 66 
airplanes, 51 
American Airlines, 47 
Arizona Public Services, 66 
Bank of Boston, 47 
Baylor-Grapevine Board of 
Trustees, 47 
BlackBerry, 60 
board of Chubb, 51 
board of Tandy, 51 
business organizations, 63 
business school, dean, 50 
career writing technology, 67 
client-server-type applications, 59 
cloud technology, 62 
CNN, 54 
common-sense functionality, 49 
consumer-based technology, 60 
CRM, 56 
Dallas Children’s Medical Center 
Development Board, 48 
Digital Equipment, 48 
ERM, 56 
financial expert, 69 
frequent-flier program, 57 
frontal lobotomy, 57 
Harvard Business Review, 50 
HR policies, 65 
IBM, 48 
information technology, 47, 52 
Internet, 54 
Internet-based protocol, 59 
iPhone, 52 
IT stuff, 58 
Knight Ridder, 51 
legacy apps, 59 
mainframe-like applications, 59 
management training 
program, 64 
marketing and technical 
jobs, 48 
Maynard, Massachusetts mill, 48 
MBA program, 50 
mentors, 49 
Microsoft, 50 
mobile computing, 62 
New York Times, 53 
operations center, 54 
PDP-5, 49 
PDP-6, 49 
Radio Shack, 51 
revenue management, 57 
role models, 49 
security paradigms, 62 
self-service machine, 57 
Silicon Valley companies, 68 
smartphones, 54 
social networking, 51, 53, 56, 58 
stateful applications, 59 
techie department, 48 
The Associates First Capital 
Corporation, 47 
transmission and distribution 
companies, 47 
wireless network, 59 
YouTube, 65 
Fort Worth, 226 
Free software foundation, 19 

Index 
 
348 
Fried, Benjamin, 1, 241 
agile development, 25 
agile methodologies, 26 
Apple Genius Bar, 8 
ARPANET, 19 
Art of Computer Programming, 2 
Bell Labs, 2 
books and records, accuracy, 25 
botnets, 23 
Brian’s and Rob Pike’s, 2 
cash-like principles, 29 
CFO, 4 
check writers, 18 
chrome, 14, 18 
classic computer science text, 1 
cognitive surplus, 20 
Columbia University, 1 
compensation management, 7 
competitive advantage, 9, 18 
computer science degree, 1 
computer scientists, 6 
consumer-driven computing, 12 
consumer-driven software-as-a-
service offerings, 12 
consumer-driven technology, 12 
consumer-oriented technology, 
14, 22 
corporate leadership, 25 
cost centers, 4 
DARPA, 19 
decision makers, 17 
decision making, 13 
360-degree performance 
management, 7 
detroit energy, 30 
digital books, 30 
document workbench, 2 
dogfooding, 11 
e-books, 29 
Elements of Programming Style, 2 
e-mail, 9 
end-user support, 7 
engineering executive group, 4 
European vendors, 6 
file servers and print servers, 17 
Folger Library editions, 30 
free software foundation, 19 
German company, 13 
German engineering, 13 
Gmail, 15 
Godot, 26 
Google, 1 
books, 29 
products, 5, 10 
software engineers, 6 
hiring managers, 6 
HR processes and technologies, 6 
IBM model, 13 
instant messaging, 9 
Internet age, 6 
interviewers, training, 6 
iPad, 29 
iPhone, 29 
IPO, 3 
IT, engineering and computer 
science parts, 4 
Knuth’s books, 2 
Linux machine, 8 
Linux software, 19 
machine running Windows, 8 
Macintosh, 8 
Mac OS, 9 
macro factors, 11 
Managing Director, 1 
mentors, 1 
microcomputers, 18 
Microsoft, 5 
Minds for Sale, 20 
Morgan Stanley, 1–3, 5, 16 
nonacademic UNIX license, 2 
nontechnical skills, 5 
oil exploration office, 17 
open-source phone operating 
system, 20 
outlook, 15 
PARC, 19 
performance review cycles, 7 
personal computer equipment, 15 
post-Sarbanes-Oxley world, 25 
project manager, 13 

Index 
 
349 
quants, 24 
rapid-release cycle, 26 
R&D cycle, 24 
regression testing, 27 
role models, 1 
shrink-wrapped software, 14 
signature-based anti-virus, 22 
smartphone, 20, 27 
social contract, 8 
society trails technology, 21 
software engineering tool, 13 
software installation, 14 
supply chain and inventory and 
asset management, 10 
SVP, 4 
telephony, 17 
ten things, 13 
TMRC, 19 
TROFF, 2 
typesetter workbench, 2 
UI designer, 14 
university computing center, 28 
videoconferencing, 12 
Visicalc, 24 
Wall Street, 23 
Walmart, 6 
waterfall approach, 25 
XYZ widget company, 5 
YouTube video, 20 
G 
Gates, Bill, 39, 50 
General Electric, 134 
General Foods, 309, 326–328 
General Motors, 33, 321, 329, 332 
George Mason School of Information 
Technology, 309 
Georgia Power Company, 191–193, 196 
Georgia Power Management 
Council, 193 
German company, 13 
German engineering, 13 
German manufacturing company, 232 
Gizmo/whiz-bang show, 216 
Gmail, 15 
GoodLink, 217 
Google, 1, 84, 85, 117, 217, 219, 220, 
222, 235, 241, 263, 302, 319 
apps, 314 
books, 29 
commercial products, 10 
model, 293 
Government Accountability Office 
(GAO), 305 
4G program, 250 
4G smartphone, 235 
GTE, 231 
Gupta, Ashish 
aspiration, organization, 256 
bandwidth and network 
infrastructure, 267 
BlackBerry, 261 
business and customer 
outcomes, 274 
capital investment forums, 269 
career progression, 255 
cloud-based shared infrastructure 
model, 263 
cloud computing, 261, 262 
collaboration, 272 
communications 
infrastructure, 258 
compute-utility-based model, 262 
control and integrity, 268 
core competency, 255 
core network infrastructure, 267 
core strengths, 256 
cost per unit of bandwidth, 267 
customer demands, 268 
data protection, 261, 262 
decision-making bodies, 269 
demographics, 272, 273 
device convergence, 263 
dogfooding, 259 
employee flexibility, 260, 264 

Index 
350 
Gupta, Ashish (continued)
engagement and governance, 269
enterprise market segment, 261
equipment management, 260
executive MBA, 256
fourth-generation LTE 
networks, 267 
functional service departments, 270
Global Services, distributed 
organization, 257
Google, 263, 275 
Google Apps, 266 
handheld devices, 265
hastily formed networks, 258
IMF, 266 
innovation and application 
development, 265 
iPad, 257, 260, 261, 266,267
iPhone, 266 
Japan, 257, 258 
London Business School, 253
management functions, 257
management sales functions, 257
market segments, 259 
MBA, General Management, 253
measurements, 271 
messaging with voice capability, 264
mini-microcomputer model, 261
mobile communications 
network, 258
mobile-enabling voice, 259
mobile phone network, 260
mobile traffic explosion, 265
network infrastructures, 265
network IT services, 254
network quality, 257 
new generation 
digital natives, 271
disadvantages, 273
Google, 273
opportunities, 273 
Olympics, 263
opportunities, 275
organizational construct, 272
outsourced network IT 
services, 259 
outsourcing, 271
per-use-based model, 262
portfolio and business 
alignment, 274
Portfolio & Service Design 
(P&SD), 253 
primary marketing thrust, 264
product development thrust, 264
product management team, 259
project and program 
management, 255 
resource balance, 270 
scalability, 262 
security, 262 
Selley, Clive, 254, 255 
service delivery organization, 254
single-device model, 264 
smart devices, 267 
smart phones, 266
telecommunications capability, 259
upward-based apps, 264
virtualization, 261 
voice-over-IP connections, 258
Windows platform, 261 
Gurnani, Roger, 231
accounting/finance department, 233
analog cellular networks, 250
AT&T, 249 
bedrock foundation, 249 
Bell Atlantic Mobile, 231 
Bell Labs, 249 
blogs, 244 
broadband networks, 241
business benefits, 237 
business device, 240 
business executives, 238 
business leaders, 248, 249
business relationship 
management, 248
buzzword, 239 
CASE tools, 232 
cloud computing, 239, 240
COBOL, 250 
consumer and business 
products, 231 

Index 
 
351 
consumer electronics devices, 241 
consumer telecom business, 233 
customer-engagement channel, 244 
customer forums, 244 
customer support operations, 251 
customer-touching channels, 236 
degree of control, 246 
distribution channel, 250 
dogfooding, 236 
ecosystem, 243, 249 
enterprise business, 233 
ERP systems, 236 
face-to-face communications, 244 
FiOS product, 235 
flex, 236 
"follow the sun" model, 239 
German manufacturing 
company, 232 
4G program, 250 
4G smartphone, 235 
hardware/software vendors, 247 
information assets, 245 
information technology 
strategy, 231 
intellectual property rights, 244 
Internet, 235, 239 
iPhone, 243 
Ivan, 232 
Lowell, 232 
LTE technology-based  
smartphone, 235 
marketing, 251 
MIT, 246 
mobile technology, 234 
Moore’s law, 242 
MP3 file, 235 
network-based services, 240 
Nynex Mobile, 233 
P&L responsibility, 251 
PDA, 238 
personal computing, 235 
product development, 234, 251 
role models, 232 
sales channels, 251 
smartphones, 238 
state-level regulatory issues, 251 
state-of-the-art networks, 243 
telecom career, 232 
telephone company, Phoenix, 234 
Verizon Communication, 231, 232 
virtual corporations, 241 
Web 2.0, 244 
Williams Companies, 232, 233 
WillTell, 233 
wireless business, 233 
H 
Hackers, 19 
Harmon, Jay, 213 
Harvard Business Review, 50 
Harvard Business School, 331 
Heller, Martha, 171 
Henry Ford Hospital, 174 
Hewlett-Packard piece, 129 
Home computing, 219 
Honda, 102 
Honeywell, 219 
Houghton Mifflin, 134, 136 
I 
IBM, 48, 250 
manpower, 311 
model, 13 
Indian IT outsourcing company, 255 
Information technology, 52 
Intel machines, 217 
International Coaching Federation, 178 
Internet, 9, 44, 54, 117, 235, 239, 
316, 322 
Internet-based protocol, 59 
Interoperability, 341 
iPads, 2, 94, 97, 184, 257, 260, 264, 
267, 288, 289, 295, 296 

Index 
 
352 
IP electrical grids, 182 
iPhones, 43, 52, 96, 101, 170, 181, 
260, 264,296 
iPod, 101 
IT lifecycle management process, 37 
Ivan, 232 
J 
John Deere, 213 
K 
Kansas, 226 
Kernigan, Brian, 2 
Knight Ridder, 51 
Knuth, Donald, 2, 29 
Kraft Foods Inc, 309 
Krist, Nicholas, 28 
Kundra, Vivek 
Clever Commute, 305 
cognitive surplus, 303 
command and control systems, 301 
consumerization, 302 
consumption-based model, 300 
cyber-warfare, 301 
Darwinian pressure, 302 
desktop core configuration, 306 
digital-borne content, 301 
digital oil, 300, 307 
digital public square, 304 
enterprise software, 303 
entrepreneurial startup model, 306 
frugal engineering, 306 
Google, 302 
government business, 302 
innovator’s dilemma, 307 
iPad, 302 
IT dashboard, 302 
leapfrog technology, 306 
massive consumerization, 301 
megatrends, 301 
parameter security, 302 
Patent Office, 305 
pharmaceutical industry, 304 
phishing attacks, 301 
policy and strategic planning, 299 
security and privacy, 301 
server utilization, 300 
social media and technology, 
300, 306 
storage utilization, 300 
Trademark Office, 305 
Wikipedia, 303 
L 
LAN, 259 
Lean Six Sigma improvement 
process, 211 
Levy, Steven (Hackers), 19 
Linux, 220 
machine, 8 
open-source software, 19 
Lister, Tim, 226 
London Business School, 73, 253, 256 
Long-term evolution (LTE), 235 
Lowell, 232 
M 
MacArthur’s intelligence officer, 327 
Macintosh, 8 
Mainframe computers, 118 
Mainframe-like applications, 59 
Marriott’s Great America, 35 
McDade, 327 
McGraw-Hill Education, 133, 147, 150 
Mead, Margaret, 221 
Mendel, 311 
Microcomputers, 18 
Microsoft Corporation, 5, 11, 33, 36, 
38, 41, 44, 46, 50, 156, 217, 223, 
236, 250, 293 

Index 
 
353 
Microsoft Higher Education Advisory 
Group, 113 
Microsoft's operational enterprise risk 
management, 33 
Middlesex University, 189 
Miller, Joan 
Apple products, 295 
authority and accuracy, 292 
award-winning ICT programs and 
services, 277 
back locked-down information, 289 
big-scale text issues, 294 
big-time computing, 279 
BlackBerry, 296 
business management training, 281 
business skills, 281 
central government, 283 
cognitive surplus, 291 
community care project, 278 
community development 
programs, 277, 278 
computers, constituency office, 294 
confidential information, 284 
data management, 281 
decision making, 286 
democratic process, 288 
economics degree, 278 
e-government, 282, 285 
electronic communication, 289 
electronic-enabled public voice, 286 
electronic information, 288 
electronic media, 286 
electronic records, 280, 284 
electronic services, 294 
e-mail, 289, 290, 295 
forgiving technology, 296 
front-office service, 282, 283 
Google, 292 
Google’s cloud service, 290 
Government 2, 287 
Health and Social Care, 284 
House business, 294 
House of Lords, 288 
ICT strategy, 289, 290 
information management, 278 
insurance company, 278 
Internet information, 285 
iPad, 288, 289, 296 
IT  
data management, 279 
management principle, 280 
local government, 283 
mainframe environment, 289 
member-led activity, 287 
messages, 289 
Microsoft, 293 
Microsoft’s cloud service, 290 
mobile electronic information, 284 
mobile technology, 289 
national organization, 284 
network perimeters, 290 
official government 
information, 285 
on-the-job training, 281 
organizational planning, 278 
Parliamentary ICT, 277 
project management, 279 
public sector, 282 
public transportation, 285 
quango-type organizations, 283 
representational democracy, 286 
security, 290, 291 
social care organization, 279 
social care services, Essex, 278 
social care systems, 284 
social networking, 285 
sovereignty, 291 
sustainability and growth, 293 
technical language, 294 
technology skills, 281 
transactional services, 285 
transferability, 291 
Web-based services, 285 
Wikipedia, 291, 292 
X-factor, 286 
Minds for Sale, 20 
Mitchell & Co, 333 
MIT Media Labs, 149 
Mobile computing, 62 

Index 
 
354 
Mobile technology, 234 
Mooney, Mark, 133 
artificial intelligence, 134 
back-office legacy, 136 
balancing standpoint, 145 
BBC, 140 
Bermuda Triangle, 135 
BlackBerry shop, 142 
Bureau of National Standards, 136 
business model, 140 
career spectrum, 144 
cloud computing, 148 
competitive intelligence and 
knowledge, 143 
Connect, 141 
customer-facing and product 
development, 135 
customer-facing product space, 137 
customer space and product 
development, 136 
digital products development, 144 
digital space and product, 146 
educational and reference 
content, 139 
educational products, 141 
entrepreneur, 150 
General Electric, 134 
GradeGuru, 140 
handheld devices, 142 
hard-core technical standpoint, 146 
hardware servers, 142 
Houghton Mifflin, 134, 136 
HTML, 138 
industrial-strength product, 141 
intellectual content, 148 
Internet, 148 
iPad, 138, 139, 142 
iPhone, 142, 143 
iTunes, 138 
Klein, Joel, 147 
learning management systems, 137 
long-term production system, 141 
Marine Corps, 134 
McGraw-Hill Education, 133, 147 
media development, 144 
media space, 138, 142 
mobile computing, 139 
MOUSE, 150 
online technology, 138 
open-source capabilities, 142 
Oracle quota-management 
system, 143 
people’s roles and 
responsibilities, 137 
Phoenix, 149 
product development, 149 
publishing companies, 142 
publishing systems, 137 
Reed Elsevier, 133, 136 
Salesforce.com, 144, 149 
scalability testing, 145 
senior business leaders, 146 
social network, 148 
soft discipline guidelines, 141 
solar energy, 149 
Strassmann, Paul, 135 
technical skill set, 143, 144 
testing systems integration, 145 
The Shallows, 139 
transactional systems, 142 
trust and integrity, 145 
TTS, QuickPro, and ACL, 144 
Vivendi Universal, 134 
War and Peace today, 139 
Moore’s law, 242 
Morgan Stanley, 2, 3, 16 
N 
NASA, 309, 333, 334 
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST), 173 
Naval Postgraduate School, 134 
Netscape, 175 
New Brunswick model, 282 
News Corp., 147 
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), 
87, 116, 223, 278 

Index 
 
355 
New York Times, 53 
North American universities, 228 
NSA/CIA software, 134 
Nynex Mobile, 233 
O 
Oil exploration office, 17 
Open-source phone operating 
system, 20 
Outlook, 15 
P 
Pacer Software, 135 
Paradigm shifts, 218, 220 
Parks and Recreation Department, 126 
PDP minicomputers, 212 
Peopleware, 226 
Personal computing, 235 
Personal digital assistant  (PDA), 238 
Petri dish, 44 
Phoenix, 211 
Plauger, Bill, 2 
Q 
Quants, 24 
R 
Radio Shack, 51 
Reed Elsevier, 133, 136 
Reed, John, 335 
Rubinow, Steve, 87 
AdKnowledge, Inc., 87 
agile development, 110 
Agile Manifesto, 110 
Archipelago Holdings Inc., 87 
attributes, 108 
capital market community, 91 
cash/actual trading business, 88 
channel marketing departments, 92 
cloud computing, 97 
CNBC, 89 
collaborative technology, 95 
collective intelligence, 95 
communication skills, 102, 106 
conference organizations, 99 
consumer marketplace, 94 
data center, 90 
decision making, 105, 108 
economy standpoint, 100 
e-mail, 100 
Fidelity Investments, 105 
financial services, 92 
IEEE, 101 
innovative impression, 94 
Internet, 98 
iPad, 97 
iPod device, 91 
labor laws, 110 
listening skills, 106 
logical progression, 104 
Mac, 96 
mainframe, 104 
management and leadership, 
104, 105 
market data system, 89 
micro-second response time, 89 
mobile applications, 94 
multidisciplinary approach, 103 
multimedia, 97 
multi-national projects, 110 
multiprocessing options, 99 
network operating system, 103 
NYSE Euronext, 87 
open outside system, 88 
parallel programming models, 99 
personal satisfaction, 109 
PR function, 106 
proclaimed workaholic, 109 
real estate business, 88 
regulatory and security 
standpoint, 96 
Rolodex, 94 

Index 
 
356 
Rubinow, Steve (continued) 
Rubin, Howard, 99 
server department, 97 
software development, 89 
sophisticated technology, 101 
technology business, 88 
technology integration, 91 
trading engines, 90 
typewriter ribbon, 94 
virtualization, 98 
Windows 7, 96 
younger generation 
video games, 93 
visual interfaces, 93 
Rumsfeld, Donald, 222 
S 
San Diego Fire Department, 224 
Santa Clara University, 36 
SAS programs, 131 
Scott, Tony, 10, 33, 236 
Android, 43 
Apple Computer, 35 
architectural flaw, 44 
BASIC and Pascal, 35 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, 33 
Bunch, Rick (role model), 34 
business groups, 42 
COO, 39 
Corporate Vice President, 33 
Corvus disk drive, 36 
CSC, 35 
Defense department, 45 
dogfooding, 37, 38 
games and arcades, 35 
General Motors, 33 
IBM’s role, 37 
information systems 
management, 36 
integrity factor, 40 
Internet, 44 
iPhone, 43 
IT lifecycle management 
process, 37 
leadership capability, 40 
leisure studies, 34 
macro-architectural threats, 44 
Marriott’s Great America, 35 
math models, 36 
Microsoft Corporation, 33, 36, 
38, 41, 44, 46 
Microsoft's operational enterprise 
risk management, 33 
parks and recreation, 34 
Petri dish, 44 
playground leader, 42 
product groups, 42 
quality and business excellence 
team, 33 
Santa Clara University, 36 
Senior Vice President, 33 
smartphone, 43 
social computing, 38 
Sun Microsystems, 36 
theme park industry, 35 
University of Illinois, 34 
University of San Francisco, 36 
value-added business, 33 
Walt Disney Company, 33 
Senior Leadership Technology and 
Product Marketing, 71 
Shakespeare, 30 
Shirky, Clay, 220 
Sierra Ventures, 191 
Silicon Valley companies, 68 
Silicon Valley software factories, 323 
Skype, 118 
Smart Grid Advisory Committee, 177 
Smartphones, 20, 27, 43, 54, 217, 238 
Social care computer electronic 
record system, 279 
Social computing, 38, 320 
Social networking, 51, 53, 56, 58 
Society trails technology, 21 
SPSS programs, 131 

Index 
 
357 
Sridhara, Mittu, 71 
Amazon, 76 
American Airlines, 72 
back-end computation and 
presentation, 80 
banking, 77 
B2B and B2C, 85 
business/product departments, 82 
business work context, 74 
buzzword, 77 
career aspiration, 73 
career spans, 73 
coders, 72 
cognitive surplus, 79 
competitive differentiation, 74 
computing power, 78 
contribution and energy, 85 
convergence, 75 
CPU cycles, 78 
cross-channel digital business, 71 
cultural and geographic 
implementation, 72 
customer experience, 84, 85 
customer profile, 76 
data visualization, 79, 80 
DDoS protection, 81 
economies of scale, 77 
elements of technology, 72 
encryption, 82 
end customer, 83 
entertainment, 75 
ERP system, 72 
Facebook, 84 
finance and accounting, 73 
foster innovation and open 
culture, 81 
friends/mentors/role models, 74 
FSA, 76 
gambling acts, 81 
games, 79 
gaming machines, 80 
GDS, 72 
global organization, 71 
Google, 75, 84, 85 
Group CIO, Ladbrokes PLC, 71 
industry-standard technologies, 77 
integrity and competence, 83 
IT, 74, 82 
KickOff app, 71 
land-based casinos, 79 
live streaming, 78 
London Business School, 73 
mobile computing, 78 
multimedia, 84 
new generation, 84 
on-the-job training, 73 
open-source computing, 79 
opportunity, 80, 83 
PCA-compliant, 81 
personalization, 76 
real-time systems, 74 
re-evaluation, 81 
reliability and availability, 77 
security threats, 80 
smart mobile device, 75 
technology-intense customer, 85 
top-line revenue, 74 
trader apps, 82 
true context, 73 
underpinning business process, 76 
virtualization, 78 
Visa/MasterCard transactions, 78 
Web 3.0 business, 76 
web-emerging web channel, 76 
Wikipedia, 79, 85 
Word documents and e-mail, 82 
work-life balance, 84 
young body with high miles, 72 
Zuckerberg, Mark, 73 
Stead, Jerry, 214 
Storefront engineering, 212 
Strassmann, Paul, 228, 309 
agile development, 340 
Amazon EC2, 314 
America information 
processors, 322 
Annapolis, 340 
AT&T, 332 
backstabbing culture, 339 
BlackBerry, 317 

Index 
 
358 
Strassmann, Paul (continued) 
block houses, 319 
CFO/CEO position, 337 
CIM program, 309 
Citibank, 337 
Citicorp, 313, 339 
cloud computing, 310, 311, 313 
coding infrastructure, 341 
communication infrastructure, 341 
corporate information 
management, 329 
Corporate Information Officer, 309 
counterintelligence, 320 
cyber-operations, 338 
Dell server, 314 
Department of Defense, 329, 332 
Director of Defense 
Information, 309 
employee-owned technology, 316 
enterprise architecture, 316 
exfiltration, 313 
financial organizations, 320 
firewalls and antiviruses, 312 
General Foods, 309, 326–328 
General Motors, 321, 329, 332 
George Mason School of 
Information Technology, 309 
Google apps, 314 
government-supported 
activities, 326 
Harvard Business School, 331 
HR-related issues, 331 
IBM manpower, 311 
infiltration, 313 
Internet, 316, 322 
interoperability, 315, 317, 341 
Kraft Foods Inc, 309 
MacArthur’s intelligence 
officer, 327 
Machiavellian view, 327 
mash-up, 316 
military service, 331 
NASA, 309, 333, 334 
police department, economics, 312 
powerpoint slides, 324 
Radio Shack, 319 
senior executive position, 334 
service-oriented architecture, 316 
Silicon Valley software 
factories, 323 
social computing, 320 
Strassmann’s concentration 
camp, 318 
structured methodologies, 342 
U.S. Navy, 318 
Virginia Tech, 323 
virtualization, 310, 311 
VMware, 311 
Web 2.0, 325 
WikiLeaks, 320 
Windows machine, 317 
Xerox Corporation, 309, 326, 
330, 338 
Xerox video center, 318 
Sun Microsystems, 36 
Supply-demand organization, 157 
T 
Tech Mahindra, 253, 255 
Tech Model Railroad Club (TMRC), 19 
Telephony, 17 
Temares, Lewis, 113 
adaptability, 128 
American Marketing Society, 113 
Apple device, 116 
ARPANET and Internet, 117 
BBA, 126 
camera, 124 
CIO responsibilities and duties, 127 
classroom information, 119 
client and terminal, 124 
College of Engineering, University 
of Miami, 113 
combination of degrees, 125 
communication and business 
skills, 126 
computer conference, 116 
customer service, 130 

Index 
 
359 
cyber security, 121 
day-to-day administration, 128 
digital device, 125 
document management, 129 
electronic hospital record, 115 
encyclopedia and Wikipedia, 115 
entrepreneurial characteristics, 114 
ERP, 123 
Facebook, 116, 121 
faculty members, 121 
financial industry, 123 
Fortune 500 commercial land, 114 
Google, 117 
GPS technology, 117 
grocery store, 130 
Hewlett-Packard piece, 129 
higher education, 114, 122 
high-performance computing, 119 
IBM data center, 124 
independent entrepreneurs, 114 
Information Technology (IT), 
113, 118 
Jones, Sam, 131 
leading-edge technology, 119 
mainframe computers, 118 
marketing, 122 
matchmaker.com, 131 
matchmakerexecs.com, 131 
MBA, 126 
MIT and Berkeley, 120 
mobile technology, 115 
New-Age, technology-savvy 
kids, 115 
online degree, 121 
passion, 128 
personal computer, 117 
philanthropism, 123 
presentation skills, 128 
project management, 126 
rainmaker.com, 131 
retail industry, 123 
revenue producer, 123 
RIM device, 116, 121, 124 
Skype, 118 
social media, 115, 116 
SPSS and SAS programs, 131 
telecommunications, 120 
telemedicine, 118 
TRS-80s, 129 
Twitter, 116 
up-to-date technology, 119 
video entertainment, 116 
voice/data integration, 117 
Web 2.0 industry, 132 
wireless computers, 115 
yellow notepaper, 115 
YouTube, 120 
Texas, 226 
The Associates First Capital 
Corporation, 47 
Toyota, 102 
Tracy, Michael, 212 
Transmission and distribution 
companies, 47 
Turner, Kevin, 39 
Twitter, 244 
Ellyn, Lynne, 185 
Temares, Lewis, 116 
U 
University computing center, 28 
University of Chicago, 104 
University of Florida, 139 
University of Illinois, 34 
University of San Francisco, 36 
Utilities Telecom Council, 177 
V 
Verizon Communications, 231, 232 
Videoconferencing, 12 
Virtual corporations, 241 
Virtualization, 310, 311 
Visicalc, 24 
Vivendi Universal, 134 

Index 
360 
VMware, 311 
Vodafone AirTouch, 231 
voice capability, 259 
Voice-response unit (VRU), 203 
W 
Wakeman, Dan, 151 
advanced placement program, 168
back-end systems, 154, 155
business maxims, 159 
business peers, 160, 161 
cloud computing, 168
collaborative environment, 160
Computer Choice, 170, 171
consumerization, 166, 170
credibility, 160 
decision making, 152 
defect-free code, 164
demand-supply model, 157 
digital nation, 169 
disaster recovery, 154 
education business, 160
ElastomerSolutions.com, 151
ETS, 151 
mission, 162, 163
packaging and selling 
information, 163
EXP program, 159
Facebook, 169 
fair value and reliable 
assessments, 159
for-profit business, 152
Gartner CIO Academy, 157
Gen-Xer stuff, 169
Google, 170, 172 
Heller, Martha, 171
intellectual property, 171
iPad, 169 
IT 
core competency, 172
engine, 163 
industry, 156 
skills, 154 
ITIL version 3, 158 
judgment, 162
leadership and personal 
integrity, 161
McGenesis, Steve, 155
mentor, 155, 156
metrics and quantitative 
benchmarking, 166
on-demand services, 168
operational excellence, 163
operations and maintenance, 166
Salesforce, 154 
scorecard, 164, 165 
security budget, 167 
security organization, 167
services and packaging, 171 
Six Sigma, 164 
smart phones, 170
standardization, 164 
Taylor, John, 154–156
virtualization and cloud 
computing, 167, 168 
Wallington, Pat, 175 
Wall Street, 23 
Wall Street Journal, 168 
Walmart, 6, 50 
Walt Disney Company, 33 
WAN, 259 
Web 2.0, 244, 325 
Web 3.0 business, 76 
Web 2.0 companies, 227 
Web infrastructure, 215 
Wichita, 226 
WikiLeaks, 320 
Wikipedia, 79, 85, 115, 185, 220, 291, 
292, 303 
Williams Companies, 232, 233 
WillTell, 233 
Wilson, Carl, 225, 228, 229 
Wilson, Joe, 338 
Wireless network, 59 
World Wide Web, 266 

Index 
 
361 
X 
Xerox Corporation, 175, 326, 330, 338 
Xerox video center, 318 
Y 
Y2K, 222 
YouTube, 20, 65

 
 
CIOs at Work 
 
 
 
Ed Yourdon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CIOs at Work 
Copyright © 2011 by Ed Yourdon 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, record-
ing, or by any information storage or retrieval system, without the prior written 
permission of the copyright owner and the publisher. 
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4302-3554-5 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4302-3555-2 
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a 
trademark symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we 
use the names, logos, and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of 
the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. 
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar 
terms, even if they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of 
opinion as to whether or not they are subject to proprietary rights. 
President and Publisher: Paul Manning 
Lead Editor: Jeffrey Pepper 
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cornell, 
Jonathan Gennick, Jonathan Hassell, Michelle Lowman, James Markham, 
Matthew Moodie, Jeff Olson, Jeffrey Pepper, Frank Pohlmann, Douglas 
Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, Dominic Shakeshaft, Matt Wade, Tom Welsh 
Coordinating Editor: Jessica Belanger 
Copy Editor: Kim Burton-Weisman 
Proofreader: Nancy Sixsmith 
Compositor: Mary Sudul 
Indexer: BIM Indexing & Proofreading Services 
Cover Designer: Anna Ishschenko 
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media, LLC., 
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER,  
fax 201-348-4505, e-mail orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit 
http://www.springeronline.com.  
For information on translations, please contact us by e-mail at info@apress.com, or 
visit www.apress.com.  
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, 
or promotional use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. 
For more information, reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page 
at www.apress.com/bulk-sales. 
The information in this book is distributed on an “as is” basis, without warranty. Al-
though every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither the 
author(s) nor Apress shall have any liability to any person or entity with respect to 
any loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the infor-
mation contained in this work.

 
 
 
 
 
To Teddy  
 

 
vii
About the Author 
Ed Yourdon is a computer software consultant and IT expert witness in 
his own firm, NODRUOY Inc., as well as co-founder of the Cutter Consor-
tium and Editor Emeritus of the Cutter IT Journal. Working in the software 
field for more than 45 years, he has published 27 computer-related books 
and more than 550 technical articles. 
Yourdon has programmed, designed, and tested numerous software applica-
tions and programmer-productivity products. He has managed numerous 
projects as a first-level project leader and also as a senior IT executive. He 
has also reviewed numerous software development projects for clients dur-
ing his consulting career. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
viii 
Acknowledgments 
It’s hard to imagine anyone writing a book entirely on his or her own—even 
a novelist would be hard-pressed to deny the inspiration, support, encour-
agement, and feedback from friends, neighbors, a spouse, or a “significant 
other.” The same is true for textbooks and works of non-fiction; and it’s 
definitely true of this book, CIOs at Work. 
The most obvious people for me to acknowledge, of course, are the six-
teen individuals whom I had the pleasure and honor of interviewing. Not 
only did they graciously carve a significant chunk of time out of their sched-
ule in order to share their experience, their insights, and their advice, but 
they also shared their passion and excitement about the IT industry in which 
they work and to which they have dedicated a significant part of their pro-
fessional lives. 
Behind each of these CIOs there was at least one—and often two or 
three—additional people that I need to acknowledge. First, the administra-
tive assistants who help their bosses organize their schedules and coordi-
nate their interactions with a wide range of people inside and outside their 
organization.  For every e-mail interaction I had with a CIO, I probably had 
ten with his or her administrative assistant; and without their help, I would 
never have even reached the point of having a conversation with the CIO. 
They tend to stay in the background, but play a fairly invisible role; hence, I 
hope they’ll forgive me if I don’t mention their names. 
There were also several people who helped me identify, locate, and 
contact the CIOs that I eventually interviewed. The most important of these 
was my editor, Jessica Belanger, who enthusiastically suggested industries 
that I had overlooked, companies whose CIOs were likely to be particularly 
interesting to interview, and clever strategies for tracking down CIOs who 
often seemed to be doing their level best to remain hidden from sight. Sev-
eral people at Computer Aid, Inc. were quite helpful in my search for CIOs, 
including Mike Milutis, Joe Hessmiller, and James Nicol. I also got some 
much-needed help from Leon Kappelman, Toni Nash, and John Baker, as 
well as several quasi-anonymous people on Twitter—and I am especially 
grateful for the assistance of @redmamba, who put me in touch with the 

 
ix 
CIO of Parliament in the United Kingdom. Indeed, the CIOs themselves 
were of great assistance, often introducing me to their fellow CIO col-
leagues, or at least telling me how to track them down and get in touch. 
When it came to the actual writing of the book, there were three key 
people who kept me on track and helped keep me from going insane. Kristen 
Ng did an unbelievably professional (and fast!) job of transcribing the audio 
recording of each interview into an eminently readable and coherent word-
processing document. My editor, Jessica Belanger, worked with me tirelessly 
to edit several audio “conversations” into readable English without losing the 
style, personality, and “voice” of the CIOs who spoke to me. And Apress’ 
Assistant Publisher, Jeff Pepper, carefully reviewed each chapter and sug-
gested additional questions that would help round out each conversation. 
The only hesitation that an author has when it comes to acknowledg-
ments is that he might have unconsciously overlooked someone when com-
piling the list. There is no doubt that I am guilty of such a sin, as I had nu-
merous conversations and e-mail exchanges with friends, colleagues, and 
family members throughout the several months that I worked on CIOs at 
Work. Some of those whom I’ve inadvertently failed to mention won’t even 
notice the oversight. Some will shrug and I suspect a few will mutter to 
themselves that I’ve deliberately slighted them. I apologize in advance to all 
those individuals and promise that I’ll do a better job next time. 
 
Ed Yourdon 
 

