
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
       This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,
some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed 
content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right 
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate 
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for 
materials in your areas of interest.

A u s t r a l i a  •  B r a z i l  •  J a p a n  •  Ko r e a  •  M e x i c o  •  S i n g a p o r e  •  S p a i n  •  Un i t e d  Ki n g d o m  •  Un i t e d  S t a t e s
Allan H. Robbins
Wilhelm C. Miller
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Circuit Analysis: Theory and Practice, 
Fifth Edition
Allan H. Robbins and Wilhelm C. Miller 
Vice President, Editorial: Dave Garza
Director of Learning Solutions: Sandy Clark
Acquisitions Editor: Stacy Masucci
Managing Editor: Larry Main
Product Manager: Mary Clyne
Editorial Assistant: Kaitlin Murphy
Vice President, Marketing: Jennifer Baker
Marketing Director: Deborah Yarnell
Associate Marketing Manager: Erica Glisson
Senior Production Director: Wendy Troeger
Production Manager: Mark Bernard
Content Project Manager: Barbara LeFleur
Senior Art Director: David Arsenault
Endsheets © Cengage Learning 2013
Cover image:
Digital illustration of an electric circuit board
© Creations/www.Shutterstock.com
© 2013, 2007 Delmar, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein
may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means
graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying,
recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks,
or information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under
Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior
written permission of the publisher.
Multisim is a trademark of National Instruments. This publication is independent
of National Instruments, which is not affiliated with the publisher or the author,
and does not authorize, sponsor, endorse or otherwise approve this publication.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2011939565
ISBN-13: 978-1-1332-8100-9
ISBN-10: 1-1332-8100-1
Delmar
5 Maxwell Drive
Clifton Park, NY 12065-2919
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with
office locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United Kingdom,
Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local office at: 
international.cengage.com/region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Delmar, visit www.cengage.com/delmar
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred
online store www.cengagebrain.com
Printed in the United States of America
1   2   3   4   5   6   7   14   13   12
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at 
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product, 
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Notice to the Reader
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein or perform any independent analysis in connection
with any of the product information contained herein. Publisher does not assume, and expressly disclaims, any obligation to obtain and
include information other than that provided to it by the manufacturer. The reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all
safety precautions that might be indicated by the activities described herein and to avoid all potential hazards. By following the
instructions contained herein, the reader willingly assumes all risks in connection with such instructions. The publisher makes no
representations or warranties of any kind, including but not limited to, the warranties of fitness for particular purpose or merchantabil-
ity, nor are any such representations implied with respect to the material set forth herein, and the publisher takes no responsibility
with respect to such material. The publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in
whole or part, from the readers’ use of, or reliance upon, this material.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface
x
To the Student
xviii
I Foundation dc Concepts
01
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Introduction
4
1.2
The SI System of Units
6
1.3
Converting Units
8
1.4
Power of Ten Notation
10
1.5
Prefixes, Engineering Notation, 
and Numerical Results
12
1.6
Circuit Diagrams
15
1.7
Circuit Analysis Using Computers 
and Calculators
17
Problems
19
2
Voltage and Current
27
2.1
Atomic Theory Review
29
2.2
The Unit of Electrical Charge: The Coulomb
33
2.3
Voltage
34
2.4
Current
37
2.5
Practical dc Voltage Sources
39
2.6
Measuring Voltage and Current
44
2.7
Switches, Fuses, and Circuit Breakers
47
Problems
49
3
Resistance
55
3.1
Resistance of Conductors
56
3.2
Electrical Wire Tables
59
3.3
Resistance of Wires—Circular Mils
62
3.4
Temperature Effects
66
3.5
Types of Resistors
69
3.6
Color Coding of Resistors
73
3.7
Measuring Resistance—The Ohmmeter
75
3.8
Thermistors
77
3.9
Photoconductive Cells
78
3.10
Nonlinear Resistance
79
3.11
Conductance
82
3.12
Superconductors
83
Problems
85
4
Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
91
4.1
Ohm’s Law
92
4.2
Voltage Polarity and Current Direction
98
4.3
Power
100
4.4
Power Direction Convention
104
4.5
Energy
105
4.6
Efficiency
107
4.7
Nonlinear and Dynamic Resistances
110
4.8
Computer-Aided Circuit Analysis
111
Problems
118
II Basic dc Analysis
125
5
Series Circuits
127
5.1
Series Circuits
128
5.2
Kirchhoff’s Voltage Law
131
5.3
Resistors in Series
132
5.4
Voltage Sources in Series
136
v
Contents
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.5
Interchanging Series Components
137
5.6
The Voltage Divider Rule
138
5.7
Circuit Ground
141
5.8
Voltage Subscripts
142
5.9
Internal Resistance of Voltage Sources
147
5.10
Ammeter Loading Effects
148
5.11
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
150
Problems
153
6
Parallel Circuits
165
6.1
Parallel Circuits
166
6.2
Kirchhoff’s Current Law
167
6.3
Resistors in Parallel
171
6.4
Voltage Sources in Parallel
176
6.5
Current Divider Rule
177
6.6
Analysis of Parallel Circuits
182
6.7
Voltmeter Loading Effects
184
6.8
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
186
Problems
190
7
Series-Parallel Circuits
203
7.1
The Series-Parallel Network
204
7.2
Analysis of Series-Parallel Circuits
205
7.3
Applications of Series-Parallel Circuits
211
7.4
Potentiometers
217
7.5
Loading Effects of Instruments
219
7.6
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
223
Problems
229
8
Methods of Analysis
239
8.1
Constant-Current Sources
240
8.2
Source Conversions
242
8.3
Current Sources in Parallel and Series
245
8.4
Branch-Current Analysis
247
8.5
Mesh (Loop) Analysis
251
8.6
Nodal Analysis
258
8.7
Delta-Wye (Pi-Tee) Conversion
264
8.8
Bridge Networks
270
8.9
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
277
Problems
280
9
Network Theorems
289
9.1
Superposition Theorem
290
9.2
Thévenin’s Theorem
293
9.3
Norton’s Theorem
300
9.4
Maximum Power Transfer Theorem
308
9.5
Substitution Theorem
313
9.6
Millman’s Theorem
314
9.7
Reciprocity Theorem
316
9.8
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
318
Problems
324
III Capacitance and Inductance 333
10
Capacitors and Capacitance
335
10.1
Capacitance
336
10.2
Factors Affecting Capacitance
338
10.3
Electric Fields
341
10.4
Dielectrics
344
10.5
Nonideal Effects
345
10.6
Types of Capacitors
346
10.7
Capacitors in Parallel and Series
350
10.8
Capacitor Current and Voltage During 
Charging
354
10.9
Energy Stored by a Capacitor
357
10.10 Capacitor Failures and Troubleshooting
357
Problems
359
11
Capacitor Charging, Discharging,
and Simple Waveshaping 
Circuits
365
11.1
Introduction
366
11.2
Capacitor Charging Equations
370
11.3
Capacitor with an Initial Voltage
375
11.4
Capacitor Discharging Equations
376
11.5
More Complex Circuits
378
11.6
An RC Timing Application
385
11.7
Pulse Response of RC Circuits
386
11.8
Transient Analysis Using Computers
390
Problems
396
vi
Contents
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12
Magnetism and Magnetic 
Circuits
405
12.1
The Nature of a Magnetic Field
406
12.2
Electromagnetism
408
12.3
Magnetic Flux and Flux Density
410
12.4
Magnetic Circuits and Their Applications
411
12.5
Air Gaps, Fringing, and Laminated Cores
413
12.6
Series Elements and Parallel Elements
414
12.7
Magnetic Circuits with dc Excitation
415
12.8
Magnetic Field Intensity and Magnetization
Curves
416
12.9
Ampere’s Circuital Law
418
12.10 Series Magnetic Circuits: Given , Find NI
420
12.11 Series-Parallel Magnetic Circuits
424
12.12 Series Magnetic Circuits: Given NI, Find 
425
12.13 Force Due to an Electromagnet
427
12.14 Properties of Magnetic Materials
428
12.15 Sensing and Measuring Magnetic Fields
430
Problems
430
13
Inductance and Inductors
435
13.1
Electromagnetic Induction
437
13.2
Induced Voltage and Inductance
438
13.3
Self-Inductance
440
13.4
Computing Induced Voltage
442
13.5
Inductances in Series and Parallel
444
13.6
Practical Considerations
445
13.7
Inductance and Steady State dc
447
13.8
Energy Stored by an Inductance
449
13.9
Inductor Troubleshooting Hints
450
Problems
450
14
Inductive Transients
457
14.1
Introduction
458
14.2
Current Buildup Transients
461
14.3
Interrupting Current in an Inductive 
Circuit
465
14.4
De-Energizing Transients
467
14.5
More Complex Circuits
469
14.6
RL Transients Using Computers
474
Problems
478
IV Foundation ac Concepts
483
15
ac Fundamentals
485
15.1
Introduction
486
15.2
Generating ac Voltages
487
15.3
Voltage and Current Conventions for ac
490
15.4
Frequency, Period, Amplitude, and 
Peak Value
492
15.5
Angular and Graphic Relationships for Sine
Waves
496
15.6
Voltages and Currents as Functions of Time
500
15.7
Introduction to Phasors
504
15.8
ac Waveforms and Average Value
512
15.9
Effective (RMS) Values
517
15.10 Rate of Change of a Sine Wave (Derivative)
522
15.11 ac Voltage and Current Measurement
522
15.12 Circuit Analysis Using Computers
524
Problems
526
16
R, L, and C Elements and the
Impedance Concept
535
16.1
Complex Number Review
536
16.2
Complex Numbers in ac Analysis
542
16.3
R, L, and C Circuits with Sinusoidal 
Excitation
548
16.4
Resistance and Sinusoidal ac
548
16.5
Inductance and Sinusoidal ac
550
16.6
Capacitance and Sinusoidal ac
553
16.7
The Impedance Concept
557
16.8
Computer Analysis of ac Circuits
559
Problems
563
17
Power in ac Circuits
571
17.1
Introduction
572
17.2
Power to a Resistive Load
573
17.3
Power to an Inductive Load
574
17.4
Power to a Capacitive Load
576
17.5
Power in More Complex Circuits
577
17.6
Apparent Power
580
17.7
The Relationship between P, Q, and S
581
Contents
vii
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

17.8
Power Factor
584
17.9
ac Power Measurement
588
17.10 Effective Resistance
590
17.11 Energy Relationships for ac
591
17.12 Circuit Analysis Using Computers
592
Problems
595
V Impedance Networks
601
18
ac Series-Parallel Circuits
603
18.1
Ohm’s Law for ac Circuits
604
18.2
ac Series Circuits
610
18.3
Kirchhoff’s Voltage Law and the Voltage 
Divider Rule
616
18.4
ac Parallel Circuits
619
18.5
Kirchhoff’s Current Law and the Current 
Divider Rule
624
18.6
Series-Parallel Circuits
626
18.7
Frequency Effects
630
18.8
Applications
635
18.9
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
639
Problems
644
19
Methods of ac Analysis
657
19.1
Dependent Sources
658
19.2
Source Conversion
660
19.3
Mesh (Loop) Analysis
663
19.4
Nodal Analysis
668
19.5
Delta-to-Wye and Wye-to-Delta 
Conversions
674
19.6
Bridge Networks
677
19.7
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
682
Problems
686
20
ac Network Theorems
695
20.1
Superposition Theorem—Independent 
Sources
696
20.2
Superposition Theorem—Dependent 
Sources
700
20.3
Thévenin’s Theorem—Independent 
Sources
702
20.4
Norton’s Theorem—Independent Sources
706
20.5
Thévenin’s and Norton’s Theorems for 
Dependent Sources
711
20.6
Maximum Power Transfer Theorem
719
20.7
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
723
Problems
729
21
Resonance
737
21.1
Series Resonance
739
21.2
Quality Factor, Q
741
21.3
Impedance of a Series Resonant Circuit
744
21.4
Power, Bandwidth, and Selectivity of a Series
Resonant Circuit
745
21.5
Series-to-Parallel RL and RC Conversion
753
21.6
Parallel Resonance
758
21.7
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
767
Problems
770
22
Filters and the Bode Plot
781
22.1
The Decibel
782
22.2
Multistage Systems
789
22.3
Simple RC and RL Transfer Functions
791
22.4
The Low-Pass Filter
800
22.5
The High-Pass Filter
806
22.6
The Band-Pass Filter
811
22.7
The Band-Reject Filter
814
22.8
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
815
Problems
819
23
Transformers and Coupled 
Circuits
829
23.1
Introduction
830
23.2
Iron-Core Transformers: The Ideal Model
834
23.3
Reflected Impedance
840
23.4
Power Transformer Ratings
842
23.5
Transformer Applications
842
23.6
Practical Iron-Core Transformers
848
23.7
Transformer Tests
852
23.8
Voltage and Frequency Effects
854
23.9
Loosely Coupled Circuits
855
23.10 Magnetically Coupled Circuits with Sinusoidal
Excitation
860
viii
Contents
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23.11 Coupled Impedance
862
23.12 Circuit Analysis Using Computers
864
Problems
867
24
Three-Phase Systems
875
24.1
Three-Phase Voltage Generation
876
24.2
Basic Three-Phase Circuit Connections
877
24.3
Basic Three-Phase Relationships
880
24.4
Examples
888
24.5
Power in a Balanced System
893
24.6
Measuring Power in Three-Phase Circuits
897
24.7
Unbalanced Loads
901
24.8
Power System Loads
904
24.9
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
904
Problems
908
25
Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
917
25.1
Composite Waveforms
919
25.2
Fourier Series
921
25.3
Fourier Series of Common Waveforms
926
25.4
Frequency Spectrum
931
25.5
Circuit Response to a Nonsinusoidal 
Waveform
936
25.6
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
940
Problems
943
Appendix A
Multisim and PSpice
949
Appendix B
Mathematics in Circuit Analysis: A Brief Tutorial
956
Appendix C
Maximum Power Transfer Theorem
964
Appendix D
Answers to Odd-Numbered Problems
967
Glossary
979
Index
991
Contents
ix
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

x
Preface
The Book and Who It Is For
This textbook is written primarily for students in electronics technology and
electrical technology programs, engineering programs, and industrial training
programs at colleges, universities, and career schools and in industry. Its goal
continues to be to meet the training needs of today’s students, their professors,
and their instructors as it has throughout its four previous editions. An introduc-
tory circuit analysis textbook, it covers fundamentals of dc and ac circuits, meth-
ods of analysis, capacitance, inductance, magnetic circuits, basic transients,
Fourier analysis, and other topics. When students successfully complete a course
using this book, they will have a good working knowledge of basic circuit prin-
ciples and a demonstrated ability to solve a variety of circuit-related problems.
Text Organization
The book contains 25 chapters and is divided into 5 main parts: Foundation
dc Concepts, Basic dc Analysis, Capacitance and Inductance, Foundation ac
Concepts, and Impedance Networks. Chapters 1 through 4 are introductory.
They cover the foundation concepts of voltage, current, resistance, Ohm’s law,
and power. Chapters 5 through 9 focus on dc analysis methods. Included are
Kirchhoff’s laws, series and parallel circuits, mesh and nodal analysis, Y and 
transformations, source transformations, Thévenin’s and Norton’s theorems,
the maximum power transfer theorem, and so on. Chapters 10 through 14 cover
capacitance, magnetism, and inductance, plus magnetic circuits and simple dc
transients. Chapters 15 through 17 cover foundation ac concepts; ac voltage
generation; and the basic ideas of frequency, period, phase, and so on. Phasors
and the impedance concept are introduced and used to solve simple problems.
Power in ac circuits is investigated and the concept of power factor and the
power triangle are introduced. Chapters 18 through 25 then apply these ideas.
Topics include ac versions of earlier dc techniques such as mesh and nodal
analysis, Thévenin’s theorem, and so on, as well as new ideas such as resonance,
filters, Bode techniques, three-phase systems, transformers, and nonsinusoidal
waveform analysis.
Several appendices round out the book. Appendix A provides operational
instructions, reference material, and tips for PSpice and Multisim users;
Appendix B is a math-and-calculator tutorial that describes typical mathemat-
ical and calculator usage in circuit analysis—including methods for solving
simultaneous equations; Appendix C shows how to apply calculus to derive the
maximum power transfer theorem for both dc circuits and ac circuits, while
Appendix D contains answers to odd-numbered end-of-chapter problems.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface
xi
Required Background
Students need a working knowledge of basic algebra and trigonometry and the
ability to solve second-order linear equations such as those found in mesh analysis.
They should be familiar with the SI metric system and the atomic nature of mat-
ter. Calculus is introduced gradually into later chapters for those who need it.
However, calculus is not an essential prerequisite or corequisite, as all topics can
be readily understood without it. Thus, students who know (or are studying) cal-
culus can use this knowledge to enrich their understanding of circuit theory,
whereas, because the calculus parts of the book can be omitted without any loss
of continuity, students unfamiliar with calculus can comfortably navigate around
it as they work through the chapters. (Calculus-based material is flagged by an
icon to identify it as optional material for advanced learners.)
Features of the Book
• A clearly written, easy-to-understand style emphasizes principles and
concepts.
• More than 1,200 diagrams and photos. Color and 3D visual effects are
used to illustrate and clarify ideas and to aid visual learners.
• Examples. Over 380 examples, worked out in step-by-step detail, help pro-
mote understanding and guide the student in problem solving.
• Practice Problems. These follow the presentation of key ideas, encouraging
the student to practice the skills just learned.
Each chapter opens with Key Terms, Outline, Objectives,
Chapter Preview, and Putting It in Perspective.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xii
Preface
• Key Terms at the beginning of each chapter identify new terms to be introduced.
• Competency-Based Objectives define the knowledge or skill that the stu-
dent is expected to gain from each chapter.
• Chapter Previews provide a context and a brief overview for the upcoming
chapter and answer the question “Why am I learning this?”
• Putting It in Perspective. These are short vignettes that provide interesting
background on people, events, and ideas that led to major advances or con-
tributions in electrical science.
• In-Process Learning Checks. These are short, self-test quizzes that provide
a quick check of the material just learned and help identify learning gaps.
• Putting It into Practice. These are end-of-chapter mini-projects—such as
assignments that require students to do some research or to reason their way
through realistic situations similar to what they might encounter in practice.
• Margin Notes. These include Practical Notes (which provide practical infor-
mation, e.g., tips on how to use meters) plus general notes that provide addi-
tional information or add a perspective to the material being studied.
• Audio Clips. These clips (found on our Web site) present a more in-depth
discussion of the most difficult topic for each chapter.
• Computer Simulations. Each chapter (beginning with Chapter 4) contains 
a section on computer-aided circuit analysis using Multisim and PSpice.
New to this edition—now you are able to study the
circuits of the textbook “live” and fully functional
on your computer screen—see details elsewhere
in Appendix A. Over 180 simulations, each desig-
nated by an icon as indicated, are provided.
Practice Problems build problem-solving
skills and test student understanding.
In-Process Learning Checks provide a
quick review of material just studied.
Over 380 examples, worked out in step-by-step detail,
help promote understanding and guide the students in
problem solving. (This example is from Chapter 5.)
Pictorials help intro-
duce the idea of
schematic diagrams
in early chapters.
MultiSim
PSPICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface
xiii
These sections provide step-by-step instructions on how to build circuits on
your screen, plus actual screen captures to show you what you should see
when you run the simulations.
• More than 1,600 end-of-chapter problems, Practice Problems, and
In-Process Learning Check problems are provided.
• Calculators. The use of calculators in circuit analysis has been integrated
throughout the text. (Calculator techniques are also discussed in Appendix B,
Mathematics in Circuit Analysis.)
• Answers to Odd-Numbered Problems. These are contained in Appendix D.
New and Improved Features of the Fifth Edition
Current users of a textbook generally expect that a new edition will retain the
features that attracted them to the book in the first place. For such users, we
have maintained the same basic structure that we used in the fourth edition,
with improvements made in presentation, examples, problems, photographs,
and the glossary. Additionally, the Multisim and PSpice material has been
updated to the latest revisions and some new examples have been added. For
users who would like to see us take advantage of new technologies such as the
Internet, electronic publishing, and circuit simulation software to provide an
Each chapter (as applicable) includes a section showing
how to use modern computer methods to solve circuits by
simulation. The first example below (from Chapter 14)
shows how to use Multisim to solve a transient problem,
while the second example (from Chapter 23) shows how to
use PSpice to solve a coupled circuit problem.
Putting It into Practice problems are provided at the end
of chapters and describe a work-related problem.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xiv
Preface
improved learning experience, we have done that, too. Prime examples of the
latter are the introduction of circuit simulation courseware (to permit interac-
tive, hands-on learning on a personal computer), the addition of CourseMate
(a multifaceted learning tool), and modernized and expanded Web sites for
students and instructors. These are all features that we hope will appeal to new
adopters as well. Let us look at each in turn.
Learning Circuit Theory Interactively on Your Computer (New) 
While many students find it challenging to learn circuit theory simply by “read-
ing the book,” few have the resources necessary to establish their own personal
laboratories where they can work their way through the learning process using
real test and measurement equipment. However, the widespread use of comput-
ers and the availability of circuit simulation software now make it possible to
create a hands-on learning environment on a desktop (or laptop)—in essence, a
“virtual laboratory” (complete with multimeters, oscilloscopes, signal genera-
tors, and so on) where, along with our newly developed courseware, you can
study the circuits of the textbook “live” and interactively on your screen. You
can, for instance, open and close virtual switches to activate and deactivate sim-
ulated textbook circuits, measure voltage and current using virtual meters,
change and add circuit components to test new ideas, add new instrumentation,
initiate transients, view waveforms on virtual oscilloscopes, and in general,
interact with the textbook material in a manner that you simply cannot do by
reading from a printed page.
To implement this new feature, we have created approximately 180 pre-
built circuit simulation files in Multisim software. Available by printed access
code to purchasers of this book, these files address the most important circuit
analysis topics in the text. Simulations files are structured like mini-tutorials—
they begin with a short overview of the topic, walk you through its main ideas,
then guide you step-by-step through the simulation process. If you are a hands-
on learner or have difficulty visualizing theoretical concepts or would simply
like to gain a better understanding of circuit basics through practice, you
should find these simulations invaluable. (You need to have Multisim loaded on
your computer to run these simulations, but you need not be a Multisim expert
to use them.)
These files are intended for use by both students and instructional staff—
for example, students may use them as learning aids and instructional staff as
teaching aids. (Our Web site provides suggestions.) Note that the use of these
simulations is optional and that you can use or not use them as you wish. 
Student Premium Website 
Various icons appear throughout this text to indicate that additional learning
tools are available at our expanded and updated Student Premium Website for
Circuit Analysis. The printed access code at the back of this book will give stu-
dents online access to the following suite of learning tools:
• Learning Circuit Analysis Interactively on Your Computer: This is
the hands-on circuit simulation courseware described above. 
• Multisim Beginner’s Tutorial: This tutorial guides you step by step
through the creation of Multisim circuit simulations. It supplements
the presentation of Section 4.8 of the textbook and serves as an aid to
creating your own simulations.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

• PSpice Beginner’s Tutorial: This tutorial guides you step by step
through the creation of PSpice circuit simulations. It supplements the
presentation of Section 4.8 of the textbook.
• For Further Investigation (Mini-Tutorials): This is a collection of tuto-
rial articles that provide additional and/or advanced information to com-
plement that found in the textbook. Included are Advanced Studies in
Transients; Matrix Representation in Circuit Analysis; Significant Digits
and Numerical Accuracy; The Importance of Selectivity in Broadcast
Radio; Bode Plots—More Examples; Fourier Series; Using Analog
Multimeters; Appliance Grounding, Solving Simultaneous Equations with
Complex Coefficients and How to Use Excel to Sketch Graphs. 
• Lab Pre-Study Simulations: The Oscilloscope: This is a group of five
hands-on, Multisim-based simulations that teach basic oscilloscope
usage and measurement techniques. It supplements our Lab Manual
(described later).
• Lab Pre-Study Simulation: Three-Phase Circuits: This is a hands-on,
Multisim-based simulation intended as preparation for three-phase labo-
ratory work. (If you have no three-phase lab facilities at your institution,
this simulation may serve as a useful substitute.)
• Multisim and PSpice Solutions: These are worked-out solutions to the
PSpice and Multisim examples studied in the computer-aided circuit
analysis sections of the various chapters.
• Technical Notes Concerning Simulations: Describes some of the prac-
tical issues involved with circuit simulations. 
• Sample Quizzes: These sample questions give you a preview of the inter-
active quizzing feature available through CourseMate for Circuit Analysis.
To access the Student Premium Website, please visit www.cengagebrain.com.
At the cengagebrain.com home page, enter the printed access code found inside
the back cover of this book and click on the “Register” button. The Student
Premium Website will be added to your CengageBrain bookshelf.
CourseMate for Circuit Analysis (New)
CourseMate for Circuit Analysis is an integrated, Web-based learning solution
for building circuit analysis knowledge and skills. The CourseMate Web site
includes all of the Student Premium Website assets just listed, plus the follow-
ing suite of resources and study tools:
• An interactive eBook with highlighting, note taking, and search capabilities
• Interactive quizzes
• A set of student-focused PowerPoint slides
• Flashcards, crosswords, and other skill-building games
Instructors can use CourseMate for Circuit Analysis to access Instructor
Resources and other classroom management tools.
How to Access the CourseMate for Circuit Analysis Site
To access these supplemental materials or see a CourseMate demo, please visit
www.cengagebrain.com. At the cengagebrain.com home page, enter the ISBN
of your title (from the back cover of your book) using the search box at the top
of the page. This will take you to the product page where these resources can
be found.
Preface
xv
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The following table lists the full array of supplemental resources available with
this text and where they can be found:
• Learning Circuit Analysis  
Interactively on Your Computer
• Multisim Beginner’s Tutorial
• Capture PSpice Beginner’s 
Tutorial
• Audio Clips
• For Further Investigation  
Mini-Tutorials
• Lab Pre-Study Simulations:
The Oscilloscope
• Lab Pre-Study Simulation:
Three-Phase Circuits
• Multisim and PSpice Solutions
• Technical Notes Concerning 
Simulations
• Sample Quizzes
• Student-Focused  
PowerPoint Slides
• Interactive Quizzing
• Electronic Glossary
• Flashcards
• Games
• eBook
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
CircuitSim
✓
✓
xvi
Preface
© Cengage Learning 2013
Student Premium 
Reference
Website
CourseMate
Icon in Textbook
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Teaching Resources
Laboratory Manual
The lab manual contains 28 hands-on labs (many with integrated computer
simulation exercises), plus a comprehensive guide to equipment and laboratory
measurements. Solutions to the lab manual may be found in the Instructor’s
Companion Website.
Instructor’s Companion Website
The Instructor’s Companion Website includes tools and instructional resources
to enrich your classroom and make your preparation time shorter. Instructors
may log in at www.cengagebrain.com and search on this textbook’s ISBN to
access the following resources:
• Instructor’s Guide. Contains step-by-step solutions to all end-of-chapter
(even and odd) problems and lab manual solutions, including waveforms,
circuit diagrams, and more.
• In-Process Quizzes. These are in-depth, ready-for-the-classroom tests.
Analytic in nature, patterned after—and similar in depth to—our end-of-
chapter problems, these tests can be likened to chapter-based mini-exams.
• PowerPoint® Presentation. Slides for each chapter help you present
concepts and material featuring key graphics and illustrations from the
text. By importing graphics from the Image Library, you can create indi-
vidualized presentations.
• Image Library. Contains full-color images from the book that you can
use for slide shows, transparencies, and custom PowerPoint slides—or
that you can simply print to use as needed.
• Computerized Testbank. Questions of varying levels of difficulty are
provided in true/false and multiple-choice formats. These can be used to
supplement the more in-depth In-Process Quizzes described earlier. 
PSpice and Multisim Versions Used in This Book
The versions of PSpice and Multisim used throughout this text are the ver-
sions current at the time of writing—see Appendix A. Also shown in
Appendix A are operational details for these products, as well as details about
downloads, Web sites, helpful tutorials, and so on. [Explanatory notes or
Multisim 9 versions of the Multisim material permit legacy software users to
fully participate in the computer-aided circuit analysis activities of this book,
as well as to use the CircuitSim circuit simulations (in sofar as the more lim-
ited features of Multisim 9 permit)—see our Web site for details.]
Preface
xvii
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To the Student
L
earning circuit theory should be challenging, interesting, and (we hope) fun.
However, it is also hard work, because the knowledge and skills that you
seek can only be gained through practice. We offer a few guidelines.
1. As you go through the material, try to gain an appreciation of where the
theory comes from—that is, the basic experimental laws on which it is
based. This will help you better understand the foundation ideas on which
the theory is built.
2. Learn the terminology and definitions. Important new terms are introduced
frequently. Learn what they mean and where they are used.
3. Study each new section carefully and be sure that you understand the
basic ideas and how they are put together. Work your way through the
examples with your calculator. Try the practice problems, then the end-
of-chapter problems. Not every concept will be clear immediately, and
most likely many will require several readings before you gain an ade-
quate understanding.
4. When you are ready, test your understanding using the In-Process
Learning Checks (self-quizzes) located in each chapter.
5. When you have mastered the material, move on to the next block. For
those concepts that you are having difficulty with, consult your instructor
or some other authoritative source.
To aid in this process, you may want to take advantage of the new learning
support tools that we have provided, including the CircuitSim interactive, hands-
on computer simulations, and the CourseMate for Circuit Analysis tools.
Calculators for Circuit Analysis and Electronics
You will need a good scientific calculator. A good calculator will permit you to
more easily master the numerical aspects of problem solving, thereby leaving
you more time to concentrate on the theory itself. This is especially true for ac,
where complex number work dominates. There are some powerful calculators
on the market that handle complex-number arithmetic almost as easily as real-
number arithmetic—and there are some less expensive calculator models that
also do a credible job. You should acquire an appropriate calculator (after con-
sulting with your instructor), and learn to use it proficiently.
xviii
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xix
Acknowledgments 
M
any people have contributed to the development of this text. We begin by
expressing our thanks to our students for providing much-needed feedback.
Next, the reviewers and accuracy checkers: no textbook can be successful with-
out the dedication and commitment of such people. We thank the following:
Reviewers
Sami Antoun, DeVry University, Columbus, OH
G. Thomas Bellarmine, Florida A & M University
Harold Broberg, Purdue University
William Conrad, IUPUI—Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis
Franklin David Cooper, Tarrant County College, Fort Worth, TX 
Lance Crimm, Southern Polytechnic State University, Marietta, GA
David Delker, Kansas State University
Fred Dreyfuss, Pace University, White Plains, NY
Timothy Haynes, Haywood Community College
Bruce Johnson, University of Nevada, Reno, NV
Jim Pannell, DeVry University, Irving, TX
Alan Price, DeVry University, Pomona, CA
Philip Regalbuto, Trident Technical College
William Routt, Wake Tech Community College, Raleigh, NC
Carlo Sapijaszko, DeVry University, Orlando, FL
Jeffrey Schwartz, DeVry University, Long Island City, NY
John Sebeson, DeVry University, Addison, IL
Hesham Shaalan, Texas A&M University, Corpus Christi, TX
Parker Sproul, DeVry University, Phoenix, AZ
Lloyd E. Stallkamp, Montana State University
Roman Stemprok, University of Texas
Richard Sturtevant, Springfield Tech Community College, Springfield, MA
Technical Accuracy Reviewers
Chia-chi Tsui, DeVry University, Long Island City, NY
Rudy Hofer, Conestoga College, Kitchener, Ontario
Marie Sichler, Red River College, Winnipeg, Manitoba
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Reviewers of the 5th Edition
Karl Huehne, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
George Peters, St. Clair College, Windsor, Ontario
Ken Swayne, Pellissippi State Community College, Knoxville, TN
Technical Assistance for the 5th Edition
George Foster, Red River College, Winnipeg, Manitoba 
Dan Moroz, Red River College, Winnipeg, Manitoba 
The following firms and individuals supplied photographs, diagrams, and other
useful information:
xx
Acknowledgments
Advance Devices Inc.
AT&T 
AVX Corporation 
B&K Precision Corporation
Bourns Inc. 
Cadence Design Systems Inc.
Coilcraft Inc.
Fluke Corporation
Illinois Capacitor Inc.
IMRIS Inc.
JBL Professional
Kepco Inc.
National Instruments Corporation
Tektronix Inc.
United States Air Force, Nellis 
Air Force Base
Vansco Electronics Ltd.
We express our deep appreciation to the staff at Delmar Cengage Learning
for their tireless efforts in putting this book together: To Stacy Masucci,
Acquisitions Editor, for helping to define the project and smooth the way;
Mary Clyne, Product Manager, for direction, encouragement, advice, and gen-
erally pulling the project together; David Arsenault, Senior Art Director, for
ensuring that the new text design was done right; Barbara LeFleur, Content
Project Manager, for helping to make the project work on the usual short dead-
line; Erica Glisson, Associate Marketing Manager, for helping get the book to
its intended clientele; and Andrea Timpano, former Editorial Assistant, for pro-
viding answers and timely assistance. We also wish to thank Tania Andrabi,
Associate Project Manager, CENVEO Publisher Services, and her colleagues
(in particular Kevin Campbell, copyeditor) along with Joan Conlon, Freelance
Developer, for guiding the book through the copyediting, page layout, and all
such related tasks required for the production of this edition of the text book.
To all these people and their staffs, a special thank you.
Lastly, we thank our wives and families for their support and perseverance
during the preparation of this edition.
Allan H. Robbins
Wilhelm C. Miller
January 2012
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A
llan H. Robbins graduated in Electrical Engineering, earning both a
Bachelor’s degree and a Master’s degree. After gaining industrial experi-
ence, he joined Red River College, where he served as an instructor and as head
of the Department of Electrical and Computer Technology. In addition to his
academic career, Allan has been a consultant and a small-business partner in
the electronics/microcomputer field. He began writing as a contributing author
for Osborne-McGraw-Hill in the early stages of the newly emerging micro-
computer field and, in addition to this title, is joint author of several other text-
books. He has served as Section Chairman for the Institute of Electrical and
Electronic Engineers and as a board member of several other organizations.
Wilhelm (Will) C. Miller obtained a diploma in Electronic Engineering
Technology from Red River Community College (now Red River College)
and later graduated from the University of Winnipeg with a degree in Physics
and Mathematics. He worked in the communications field for ten years,
including a one-year assignment with Saudi PTT in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
Will has served as both an instructor and chair in the Electrical/Electronic
Engineering Technology Department at Red River College. He currently
serves as the chair of the Canadian Technology Accreditation Board, which
ensures that accredited programs meet the Canadian National Technology
Benchmarks. Additionally, Will provides academic consulting services, most
recently in Korea and Mozambique. 
About the Authors
xxi
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
1 Introduction
2 Voltage and Current
3 Resistance
4 Ohm’s Law, Power, 
and Energy
I
FOUNDATION dc CONCEPTS
I
C
ircuit theory provides the tools and concepts needed to understand and analyze
electrical and electronic circuits. The foundations of this theory were laid down
over the past several hundred years by a number of pioneer researchers, including
Count Alessandro Volta of Italy, Georg Simon Ohm of Germany, André Marie
Ampère of France, James Watt of Scotland, and others. In 1800, for example, Volta
developed an electric cell (battery) that provided the ﬁrst source of what we now
call dc voltage. Around the same time, the concept of current was evolved (even
though nothing was known about the atomic structure of matter until much later).
In 1826, Ohm brought the two ideas together and experimentally determined the
relationship between voltage and current in a resistive circuit. This result, known
as Ohm’s law, set the stage for the development of modern-day circuit theory.
In Part I, we examine the foundation of this theory. We look at voltage, current,
power, energy, and the relationships between them. The ideas developed here are
profoundly important and constitute the fundamental ideas upon which all electri-
cal and electronic circuit theory is built. I
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Application Software
Base
Block Diagram
Circuit Theory
Conversion Factor
Engineering Notation
Exponent
Horsepower (hp)
Joule
Multisim
Newton
Pictorial Diagram
Power of Ten Notation
Preﬁxes
PSpice
Resistance
Schematic Diagram
SI System
Watt
I OUTLINE
Introduction
The SI System of Units
Converting Units
Power of Ten Notation
Preﬁxes, Engineering
Notation, and
Numerical Results
Circuit Diagrams
Circuit Analysis Using
Computers and
Calculators
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• describe the SI system of measurement,
• convert between various sets of units,
• use power of ten notation to simplify
handling of large and small numbers,
• express electrical units using standard preﬁx
notation such as A, kV, mW, etc.,
• use a sensible number of signiﬁcant digits 
in calculations,
• describe what block diagrams are and why
they are used,
• convert a simple pictorial circuit to its
schematic representation,
• describe generally how computers and
calculators ﬁt in the electrical and electronic
circuit analysis picture.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
INTRODUCTION
A
n electrical circuit is a system of interconnected components such as resistors, capacitors,
inductors, voltage sources, and so on. The electrical behavior of these components is
described by a few basic experimental laws. These laws and the principles, concepts, mathe-
matical relationships, and methods of analysis that have evolved from them are known as 
circuit theory.
Much of circuit theory deals with problem solving and numerical analysis. When you ana-
lyze a problem or design a circuit, for example, you are typically required to compute values for
voltage, current, and power. In addition to a numerical value, your answer must include a unit.
The system of units used for this purpose is the SI system (Systéme International). The SI system
is a uniﬁed system of metric measurement; it encompasses not only the familiar MKS (meters,
kilograms, seconds) units for length, mass, and time, but also units for electrical and magnetic
quantities as well.
Quite frequently, however, the SI units yield numbers that are either too large or too small for
convenient use. To handle these, engineering notation and a set of standard preﬁxes have been
developed. Their use in representation and computation is described and illustrated. 
Since circuit theory is somewhat abstract, diagrams are used to help present ideas. We
look at several types—schematic, pictorial, and block diagrams—and show how to use them to
represent circuits and systems.
We conclude the chapter with a brief look at computer and calculator usage in circuit
analysis. Two popular software simulation packages are described, Multisim® (from National
Instruments Corporation) and Orcad PSpice® (from Cadence Design Systems Inc.). These two
packages are used throughout the book to illustrate ideas, to show how computers may be used
to solve problems, and to help you understand the principles of circuit theory. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Technology has dramatically changed the way we do things; we now have
Internet-connected computers and sophisticated electronic entertainment sys-
tems in our homes, electronic control systems in our cars, cell phones that can
be used just about anywhere, robots that assemble products on production
lines, and so on.
A first step to understanding these technologies is electric circuit theory.
Circuit theory provides you with the knowledge of basic principles that you
need to understand the behavior of electric and electronic devices, circuits, and
systems. In this book, we develop and explore its basic ideas.
Examples of the Technology at Work
Before we begin, let us look at a few more examples of the technology at work
(see Notes 1 and 2).
First, consider Figure 1–1, which shows a home theater system. This system
relies on electrical and electronic circuits, magnetic circuits, and laser technology
for its operation. For example, resistors, capacitors, and integrated circuits are
used to control the voltages and currents that operate its motors and to amplify
its audio and video signals, while laser circuitry is used to read data from the
disks. The speaker system relies on magnetic circuits for its operation, while
other magnetic circuits (the power transformers) drop the ac voltage from the
120-volt wall outlet voltage to the lower levels required to power the system.
Putting It in Perspective
Hints on Problem Solving
During the analysis of electrical and electronic circuits, you will ﬁnd yourself solving quite a few
problems. An organized approach helps. Listed below are some useful guidelines:
1. Make a sketch (e.g., a circuit diagram), mark on it what you know, then identify what it is that
you are trying to determine. Watch for “implied data” such as the phrase “the capacitor is ini-
tially uncharged.” (As you will ﬁnd out later, this means that the initial voltage on the capacitor
is zero.) Be sure to convert all implied data to explicit data, for example, Vo  0V.
2. Think through the problem to identify the principles involved, then look for relationships that
tie together the unknown and known quantities.
3. Substitute the known information into the selected equation(s) and solve for the unknown.
(For complex problems, the solution may require a series of steps involving several concepts.
If you cannot identify the complete set of steps before you start, start anyway. As each piece
of the solution emerges, you are one step closer to the answer. You may make false starts.
However, even experienced people do not get it right on the ﬁrst try every time. Note also
that there is seldom one “right” way to solve a problem. You may therefore come up with an
entirely different correct solution method than the authors do.)
4. Check the answer to see that it is sensible—that is, is it in the “right ballpark?” Does it have
the correct sign? Do the units match?
4
Chapter 1 | Introduction
1.1 Introduction
NOTES...
1. These examples are chosen to
give you a concept of the scope 
of the application of electrical and
electronic technology and its inte-
gration with other technical disci-
plines. To illustrate this breadth, 
we have chosen illustrative appli-
cations from the ﬁelds of home
entertainment, health care, and
industrial manufacturing processes.
2. As you go through the examples
here, you will see components,
devices and electrical quantities
that have not yet been discussed.
You will learn about these later.
For the moment, just concentrate
on the general ideas.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGURE 1–2
An innovative Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) suite. This suite
features a movable high field MR machine,
a surgical information management
system, a data display system, and more.
The suite is engineered to permit image-
guided therapy without having to move 
the patient between machines during the
process. 
Section 1.1 | Introduction
5
iStockphoto/shippee
FIGURE 1–1
A home theater installation.
This system incorporates many aspects of
electrical and electronic technology.
Photo courtesy of IMRIS
Figure 1–2 shows another example, a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
suite. The heart of the suite is an MRI machine, a noninvasive medical diagnostic
machine that helps physicians diagnose and treat medical conditions. The suite
employs a sophisticated array of electrical, electronic, computer, mechanical, and
magnetic systems to permit its use in image-guided therapy.
Figure 1–3 shows another application, a manufacturing facility where
fine pitch surface-mount (SMT) components are placed on printed circuit
boards at high speed using laser centering and optical verification. The
bottom row of Figure 1–4 shows how small many of these components are.
Computer control provides the high precision needed to accurately position
parts as tiny as these.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6
Chapter 1 | Introduction
The solution of technical problems requires the use of units. At present, two
major systems—the English (US Customary) and the metric—are in everyday
use. For scientiﬁc and technical purposes, however, the English system has
been almost totally superseded. In its place the SI system is used. Table 1–1
shows a few frequently encountered quantities with units expressed in both
systems.
FIGURE 1–3
Laser centering and optical
verification in a manufacturing process.
This machine is installing surface mount
components of the type seen in Figure
10–30(a), Chapter 10. 
FIGURE 1–4
Some typical electronic com-
ponents. The part with 7 pins visible is an
integrated circuit, the small parts at the
bottom are “surface mount parts,” and the
rest are “discrete components”—see Notes.
Courtesy of Parker Vansco
Surface mount
parts
© Cengage Learning 2013
1.2 The SI System 
of Units
NOTES...
While most manufacturers now use
surface mount components in their
products, such parts are too small
for general use in introductory elec-
tronics laboratories, so you will
mostly encounter discrete compo-
nents and integrated circuits in your
basic studies.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.2 | The SI System of Units
7
The SI system combines the MKS metric units and the electrical units into
one unified system: See Table 1–2 and Table 1–3. (Do not worry about the elec-
trical units yet. We define them later, starting in Chapter 2.) Note that some
symbols and abbreviations use capital letters while others use lowercase letters.
A few non-SI units are still in use. For example, electric motors are com-
monly rated in horsepower, and wires are frequently specified in AWG sizes
(American Wire Gage, Section 3.2). On occasion, you will need to convert non-
SI units to SI units. Table 1–4 may be used for this purpose.
Deﬁnition of Units
When the metric system came into being in 1792, the meter was defined as one ten-
millionth of the distance from the north pole to the equator and the second as 
1⁄60  1⁄60  1⁄24 of the mean solar day. Later, more accurate definitions based on
Quantity
Symbol
Unit
Abbreviation
Length
l
meter
m
Mass
m
kilogram
kg
Time
t
second
s
Electric current
I, i
ampere
A
Temperature
T
kelvin
K
TABLE 1–2
Some SI Base Units
Quantity
Symbol
Unit
Abbreviation
Force
F
newton
N
Energy
W
joule
J
Power
P, p
watt
W
Voltage
V, v, E, e
volt
V
Charge
Q, q
coulomb
C
Resistance
R
ohm

Capacitance
C
farad
F
Inductance
L
henry
H
Frequency
f
hertz
Hz
Magnetic ﬂux

weber
Wb
Magnetic ﬂux density
B
tesla
T
TABLE 1–3
Some SI Derived Units*
*Electrical and magnetic quantities will be explained as you progress through the book. As in 
Table 1–2, the distinction between capitalized and lowercase letters is important.
1 meter  100 centimeters 
 39.37 inches
1 millimeter  39.37 mils
1 inch  2.54 centimeters
1 foot  0.3048 meter
1 yard  0.9144 meter
1 mile  1.609 kilometers
1 kilogram  1000 grams 
 2.2 pounds
1 gallon (US)  3.785 liters
TABLE 1–1
Common Quantities
When You Know
Multiply By
To Find
Length
inches (in.)
0.0254
meters (m)
feet (ft)
0.3048
meters (m)
miles (mi)
1.609
kilometers (km)
Force
pounds (lb)
4.448
newtons (N)
Power
horsepower (hp)
746
watts (W)
Energy
kilowatthour (kWh)
3.6  106
joules† (J)
foot-pound (ft-lb)
1.356
joules† (J)
TABLE 1–4
Conversions
†1 joule  1 newton-meter.
© Cengage Learning 2013
© Cengage Learning 2013
© Cengage Learning 2013
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

physical laws of nature were adopted. The meter is now defined as the distance
travelled by light in a vacuum in 1299 792 458 of a second, while the second is
defined in terms of the period of a cesium-based atomic clock. The definition of the
kilogram is the mass of a specific platinum-iridium cylinder (the international pro-
totype), preserved at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures in France
(although this is under review at the time of writing and may be changed).
Relative Size of the Units*
To gain a feel for the SI units and their relative size, refer to Table 1–1 
and Table 1–4. Note that 1 meter is equal to 39.37 inches; thus, 1 inch equals
139.37  0.0254 meter or 2.54 centimeters. A force of one pound is equal to
4.448 newtons; thus, 1 newton is equal to 14.448  0.225 pound of force,
which is about the force required to lift a quarter-pound weight. One joule is the
work done in moving a distance of one meter against a force of one newton. This
is about equal to the work required to raise a quarter-pound weight one meter.
Raising the weight one meter in one second requires about one watt of power.
The watt is also the SI unit for electrical power. A typical electric lamp, for
example, dissipates power at the rate of 60 watts, and a toaster at a rate of about
1000 watts.
The link between electrical and mechanical units can be easily established.
Consider an electrical generator. Mechanical power input produces electrical
power output. If the generator were 100% efficient, then one watt of mechani-
cal power input would yield one watt of electrical power output. This clearly
ties the electrical and mechanical systems of units together.
However, just how big is a watt? While the preceding examples suggest
that the watt is quite small, in terms of the rate at which a human can work, it
is actually quite large. For example, a person can do manual labor at a rate of
about 60 watts when averaged over an 8-hour day—just enough to power a
standard 60-watt electric lamp continuously over this time! A horse can do con-
siderably better. Based on experiment, James Watt determined that a strong
dray horse could average 746 watts. From this, he defined the horsepower (hp)
as 1 horsepower  746 watts. This is the figure that we still use today.
8
Chapter 1 | Introduction
*Paraphrased from Edward C. Jordan and Keith Balmain, Electromagnetic Waves and
Radiating Systems, Second Edition. (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc, 1968).
1.3 Converting Units
Sometimes quantities expressed in one unit must be converted to another. For
example, suppose you want to determine how many kilometers there are in 
10 miles. Given that 1 mile is equal to 1.609 kilometers (Table 1–1), you can
write 1 mi  1.609 km, using the abbreviations in Table 1–4. Now multiply
both sides by 10. Thus, 10 mi  16.09 km.
This procedure is quite adequate for simple conversions. However, for
complex conversions, it may be difficult to keep track of units. The procedure
outlined next helps. It involves writing units into the conversion sequence, can-
celling where applicable, then gathering up the remaining units to ensure that
the final result has the correct units.
To get at the idea, suppose you want to convert 12 centimeters to inches.
From Table 1–1, 2.54 cm  1 in. From this, you can write

2.5
1
4
in
cm
  1
or 
2.5
1
4
in
cm
  1
(1–1)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXAMPLE 1–1       
The quantities in Equation 1–1 are called conversion factors. As you can see,
conversion factors have a value of 1, and thus you can multiply them times any
expression without changing the value of that expression. For example, to com-
plete the conversion of 12 cm to inches, choose the second ratio (so that units
cancel), then multiply. Thus,
12 cm  12 cm  
2.5
1
4
in
cm
  4.72 in
When you have a chain of conversions, select factors so that all unwanted
units cancel. This provides an automatic check on the final result as illustrated
in part (b) of Example 1–1.
Section 1.3 | Converting Units
9
Given a speed of 60 miles per hour (mph),
a. convert it to kilometers per hour,
b. convert it to meters per second.
Solution
a. Recall, 1 mi  1.609 km. Thus,
1  
1.6
1
0
m
9 k
i
m

Now multiply both sides by 60 mih and cancel units:
60 mih  
60
h
mi
  
1.6
1
0
m
9 k
i
m
  96.54 kmh
b. Given that 1 mi  1.609 km, 1 km  1000 m, 1 h  60 min, and 1 min  60 s,
choose conversion factors as follows:
1  
1.6
1
0
m
9 k
i
m
,
1  
10
1
0
k
0
m
m
,
1  
60
1
m
h
in
,
and
1  
1
6
m
0
i
s
n

Thus,

60
h
mi
  
60
h
mi
  
1.6
1
0
m
9 k
i
m
  
10
1
0
k
0
m
m
  
60
1
m
h
in
  
1
6
m
0
i
s
n
  26.8 ms
You can also solve this problem by treating the numerator and denomina-
tor separately. For example, you can convert miles to meters and hours to sec-
onds, then divide (see Example 1–2). In the final analysis, both methods are
equivalent.
EXAMPLE 1–2       
Do Example 1–1(b) by expanding the top and bottom separately.
Solution
60 mi  60 mi  
1.6
1
0
m
9 k
i
m
  
10
1
0
k
0
m
m
  96 540 m
1 h  1 h  
60
1
m
h
in
  
1
6
m
0
i
s
n
  3600 s
Thus, velocity  96 540 m3600 s  26.8 ms as above.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
10
Chapter 1 | Introduction
1. Area  pr2. Given r  8 inches, determine area in square meters (m2).
2. A car travels 60 feet in 2 seconds. Determine
a. its speed in meters per second,
b. its speed in kilometers per hour.
For part (b), use the method of Example 1–1, then check using the method of
Example 1–2.
Answers
1. 0.130 m2; 2. a. 9.14 ms, b. 32.9 kmh
Electrical values vary tremendously in size. In electronic systems, for example,
voltages may range from a few millionths of a volt to several thousand volts, while
in power systems, voltages of up to several hundred thousand are common. To
handle this large range, the power of ten notation (Table 1–5) is used—see Note.
To express a number in the power of ten notation, move the decimal point
to where you want it, then multiply the result by the power of ten needed to
restore the number to its original value. Thus, 247 000  2.47  105. (The
number 10 is called the base, and its power is called the exponent.) An easy
way to determine the exponent is to count the number of places (right or left)
that you moved the decimal point. Thus,
247 000  2 4 7 0 0 0  2.47  105
5 4 3 2 1
Similarly, the number 0.003 69 may be expressed as 3.69  10	3 as illustrated
below.
0.003 69  0.0 0 3 6 9  3.69  10	3
1 2 3
Multiplication and Division Using Powers of Ten
To multiply numbers in power of ten notation, multiply their base numbers,
then add their exponents. Thus,
(1.2  103)(1.5  104)  (1.2)(1.5)  10(3
4)  1.8  107
For division, subtract the exponents in the denominator from those in the
numerator. Thus,

4
3
.5


10
1
	
0
2
2
  4
3
.5  102	(	2)  1.5  104
1 000 000  106
0.000001  10	6
100 000  105
0.00001  10	5
10 000  104
0.0001  10	4
1 000  103
0.001  10	3
100  102
0.01  10	2
10  101
0.1  10	1
1  100
1  100
TABLE 1–5
Common Power of Ten Multipliers
1.4 Power of Ten
Notation
NOTES...
The complete range of powers of
ten deﬁned in the SI system
includes twenty members.
However, only those powers of
common interest to us in circuit
theory are shown in Table 1–5.
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXAMPLE 1–4        
EXAMPLE 1–3        
Section 1.4 | Power of Ten Notation
11
Convert the following numbers to power of ten notation, then perform the opera-
tion indicated:
a. 276  0.009,
b. 98 20020.
Solution
a. 276  0.009  (2.76  102)(9  10	3)  24.8  10	1  2.48
b. 
98
2
2
0
00
  
9.
2
82


10
1
1
04
  4.91  103
Addition and Subtraction Using Powers of Ten
To add or subtract, first adjust all numbers to the same power of ten. It does not
matter what exponent you choose, as long as all are the same.
Add 3.25  102 and 5  103
a. using 102 representation,
b. using 103 representation.
Solution
a. 5  103  50  102. Thus, 3.25  102 
 50  102  53.25  102.
b. 3.25  102  0.325  103. Thus, 0.325  103 
 5  103  5.325  103,
which is the same as 53.25  102 as found in part (a).
Powers
Raising a number to a power is a form of multiplication (or division if the expo-
nent is negative). For example,
(2  103)2  (2  103)(2  103)  4  106
In general, (N  10n)m  Nm  10nm. In this notation, (2  103)2  22 
1032  4  106 as before.
Integer fractional powers represent roots. Thus, 412  4  2 and
2713  
3 27  3.
NOTES...
Use common sense when handling numbers. With calculators, for example, it is
often easier to work directly with numbers in their original form than to convert
them to power of ten notation. [As an example, it is more sensible to multiply
276  0.009 directly than to convert to power of ten notation as we did in
Example 1–3(a).] If the ﬁnal result is needed as a power of ten, you can convert
as a last step.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12
Chapter 1 | Introduction
In scientific work, it is common to find very large and very small numbers
expressed in power of ten notation. However, in engineering, certain elements of
style and standard practices have evolved, giving rise to what is referred to 
as engineering notation. In engineering notation, it is more common to use 
prefixes than powers of ten. The most common prefixes (along with their sym-
bols) are listed in Table 1–6. (Note: In this notation, powers of ten must be multi-
ples of three.) As an example, while a current of 0.0045 A (amperes) may be
expressed as 4.5  10	3 A, it is preferable to express it as 4.5 mA or as 4.5 mil-
liamps. Note also that there are often several equally acceptable choices. For
example, a time interval of 15  10	5 s may be expressed as 150 s, or as 150
microseconds, or as 0.15 ms, or as 0.15 milliseconds. Note also that it is not wrong
to express the number as 15  10	5; it is simply not common engineering prac-
tice. From here onward, we will use engineering notation almost exclusively.
Determine the following:
a. (6.9  105)(0.392  10	2)
b. (23.9  1011)(8.15  105)
c. 14.6  102 
 11.2  101 (Express in 102 and 101 notation.)
d. (29.6)3
e. (0.385)	2
Answers
a. 2.70  103; b. 2.93  106; c. 15.72  102  157.2  101; d. 25.9  103; e. 6.75
1.5 Preﬁxes,
Engineering
Notation, and
Numerical Results
EXAMPLE 1–5       
Expand the following:
a. (250)3
b. (0.0056)2
c. (141)	2
d. (60)13
Solution
a. (250)3  (2.5  102)3  (2.5)3  1023  15.625  106
b. (0.0056)2  (5.6  10	3)2  (5.6)2  10	6  31.36  10	6
c. (141)	2  (1.41  102)	2  (1.41)	2  (102)	2  0.503  10	4
d. (60)13  
3 60  3.915
Power of 10
Preﬁx
Symbol
1012
tera
T
109
giga
G
106
mega
M
103
kilo
k
10	3
milli
m
10	6
micro

10	9
nano
n
10	12
pico
p
TABLE 1–6
Engineering Preﬁxes
© Cengage Learning 2013
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 1.5 | Preﬁxes, Engineering Notation, and Numerical Results
13
EXAMPLE 1–7        
Convert 0.1 MV to kilovolts (kV).
Solution
0.1 MV  0.1  106 V  (0.1  103)  103 V  100 kV
Remember that a prefix represents a power of ten, and thus the rules for power
of ten computation apply. For example, when adding or subtracting, adjust to a
common base, as illustrated in Example 1–8.
EXAMPLE 1–6        
Express the following in engineering notation:
a. 10  104 volts
b. 0.1  10	3 watts
c. 250  10	7 seconds
Solution
a. 10  104 V  100  103 V  100 kilovolts  100 kV
b. 0.1  10	3 W  0.1 milliwatts  0.1 mW
c. 250  10	7 s  25  10	6 s  25 microseconds  25 s
EXAMPLE 1–8        
Compute the sum of 1 ampere (amp) and 100 milliamperes.
Solution
Adjust to a common base, either amps (A) or milliamps (mA). Thus,
1 A 
 100 mA  1 A 
 100  10	3 A  1 A 
 0.1 A  1.1 A
Alternatively, 1 A 
 100 mA  1000 mA 
 100 mA 
 1100 mA  1.1 A as above.
1. Convert 1800 kV to megavolts (MV).
2. In Chapter 4, we show that voltage is the product of current times resistance—
that is, V  I  R, where V is in volts, I is in amperes, and R is in ohms. 
Given I  25 mA and R  4 k, convert these to power of ten notation, then
determine V.
3. If I1  520 A, I2  0.157 mA, and I3  2.75  10	4 A,
what is I1 
 I2 
 I3 in mA? In microamps?
Answers
1. 1.8 MV; 2. 100 V; 3. 0.952 mA, 952 A
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14
Chapter 1 | Introduction
Numerical Results
While computers and calculators typically display many digits, the question is
how many should you actually retain in your answer? While it is tempting to
write them all down, a closer inspection shows that this may not be sensible.
To see why, note that much of engineering is based on measurement. In practice,
for example, voltage is measured with a voltmeter and current with an ammeter.
Such measured values are approximate since it is impossible to measure anything
exactly. Since measured values have an element of uncertainty, computations
based on them also have an element of uncertainty—see Notes. To illustrate, sup-
pose you want to know the area of a garden and you measure the length and
width as L  5.76 m and W  3.72 m. Assume an uncertainty of 1 in the last
digit of each—that is, L  5.76  0.01 and W  3.72  0.01. This means that
L can be as small as 5.75 and as large as 5.77, while W can range between 3.71
and 3.73. The area can thus be as small as 5.75 m  3.71 m  21.3 m2 or as large
as 5.77 m  3.73 m  21.5 m2. Note that we aren’t even sure what the first digit
is after the decimal place in this result. Now you can see why it doesn’t make
sense to write down all the digits that your calculator shows, since you would get
5.76 m  3.72 m  21.4272 m2 on a six-digit display—and it is clearly sense-
less to claim that you know what the four digits following the decimal point are
when in fact, you don’t even know what the first digit is.
So what do we do? A practical solution is to carry all the digits throughout
the solution of the problem (your calculator will probably do this anyway),
then round the answer to a suitable number of digits. As a useful guideline, you
should round your final answer to three digits unless it makes sense to do oth-
erwise. For the preceding example, this would yield an answer of 21.4 m2
which, as you can see, is the average of the high and low computed values.
When performing a chain calculation, make sure that you carry enough digits
all the way through—that is, do not write down three-digit intermediate
answers, then reenter them to continue the calculation—this will lead to more
uncertainty in the final answers.
NOTES...
1. Numbers may be exact or they may be approximate. Exact numbers are
typically obtained by a process of counting or by deﬁnition—for example, 
1 hour is deﬁned as 60 minutes. Here, 60 is exact (i.e., it is not 59.99 or
60.01). Computations based solely on exact numbers contain no uncer-
tainty. However, computations involving both exact and approximate num-
bers carry the uncertainty of the approximate numbers.
2. In this book, unless otherwise noted, all numbers in examples and
problems are to be taken as exact. Thus, there will be no uncertainty in
the computed answers.
3. We may show more than three digits in the answers in this book since the
process of solution is usually of primary importance and it can be obscured
by dropping digits too soon.
4. The topic of signiﬁcant digits, numerical accuracy, and working with 
approximate numbers has only been touched upon here. For additional
information, please visit our Web site at www.cengagebrain.com. In the
search box at the top of the page, key in Robbins and Miller. (This will take
you to the product page where your resources can be found.) Follow the
links to For Further Investigation, then select Signiﬁcant Digits and
Numerical Accuracy to access it.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1. All conversion factors have a value of what?
2. Convert 14 yards to centimeters.
3. What units does the following reduce to?
k
h
m  k
m
m
  m
h
in
  m
s
in

4. Express the following in engineering notation:
a. 4270 ms
b. 0.001 53 V
c. 12.3  10	4 s
5. Express the result of each of the following computations as a number times 10
to the power indicated:
a. 150  120 as a value times 104; as a value times 103.
b. 300  60.005 as a value times 104; as a value times 105; as a value times 106.
c. 430 
 15 as a value times 102; as a value times 101.
d. (3  10	2)3 as a value times 10	6; as a value times 10	5.
6. Express each of the following as indicated.
a. 752 A in mA.
b. 0.98 mV in V.
c. 270 s 
 0.13 ms in s and in ms.
Section 1.6 | Circuit Diagrams
15
FIGURE 1–5
An example block diagram. Pictured is a simpliﬁed representation of an
audio ampliﬁcation system.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Electrical and electronic circuits are constructed using components such as bat-
teries, switches, resistors, capacitors, transistors, and interconnecting wires. To
represent these circuits on paper, diagrams are used. In this book, we use three
types: block diagrams, schematic diagrams, and pictorials.
Block Diagrams
Block diagrams describe a circuit or system in simplified form. The overall
problem is broken into blocks, each representing a portion of the system or cir-
cuit. Blocks are labelled to indicate what they do or what they contain, then
interconnected to show their relationship to each other. General signal flow is
usually from left to right and top to bottom. Figure 1–5, for example, represents
an audio amplifier. Although you have not covered any of its circuits yet, you
should be able to follow the general idea quite easily—sound is picked up by
1.6 Circuit Diagrams
Amplification System
Sound
Waves
Microphone
Speaker
Sound
Waves
Power
Supply
Amplifier
Power
Amplifier
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16
Chapter 1 | Introduction
the microphone, converted to an electrical signal, amplified by a pair of ampli-
fiers, then output to the speaker, where it is converted back to sound. A power
supply energizes the system. The advantage of a block diagram is that it gives
you the overall picture and helps you understand the general nature of a prob-
lem. However, it does not provide detail.
Pictorial Diagrams
Pictorial diagrams provide detail. They help you visualize circuits and their
operation by showing components as they actually look physically. For exam-
ple, the circuit of Figure 1–6 consists of a battery, a switch, and an electric
lamp, all interconnected by wire. Operation is easy to visualize—when the
switch is closed, the battery causes current in the circuit, which lights the lamp.
The battery is referred to as the source and the lamp as the load.
Schematic Diagrams
While pictorial diagrams help you visualize circuits, they are cumbersome to
draw. Schematic diagrams get around this by using simplified, standard symbols
to represent components; see Table 1–7. (The meaning of these symbols will be
made clear as you progress through the book.) In Figure 1–7(a), for example, we
have used some of these symbols to create a schematic for the circuit of Figure
1–6. Each component has been replaced by its corresponding circuit symbol.
When choosing symbols, choose those that are appropriate to the occasion.
Consider the lamp of Figure 1–7(a). As we will show later, the lamp possesses
a property called resistance. When you wish to emphasize this property, use
the resistance symbol rather than the lamp symbol, as in Figure 1–7(b).
When we draw schematic diagrams, we usually draw them with horizon-
tal and vertical lines joined at right angles as in Figure 1–7. This is standard
practice. (At this point you should glance through some later chapters, e.g.,
Chapter 7, and study additional examples.)
Battery
(source)
Switch
Current
Lamp
(load)
Interconnecting wire
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 1–6
A pictorial diagram. The battery is referred to as a source while the lamp is
referred to as a load. (The 
 and 	 on the battery are discussed in Chapter 2.)
FIGURE 1–7
Schematic representation
of Figure 1–6. The lamp has a circuit
property called resistance (discussed
in Chapter 3).
Switch
Switch
(b) Schematic using resistance symbol
(a) Schematic using lamp symbol
Battery
Lamp
Battery
Resistance
+
–
+
–
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Computers and calculators are widely used for circuit analysis and design.
Software commonly employed for this purpose includes simulation software
(such as Multisim and PSpice) and numerical analysis software such as
Mathcad and Matlab—see Notes. We begin with simulation software.
Section 1.7 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers and Calculators
17
1.7 Circuit Analysis
Using Computers
and Calculators
Single
Cell
Multicell
Batteries
+
–
+
–
AC
Voltage
Source
Current
Source
Resistors
Capacitors
Inductors
Fuses
Grounds
Wires
Crossing
Wires
Joining
Lamp
SPST
SPDT
Switches
Microphone
Voltmeter
Ammeter
Ammeter
Transformers
Air Core
Iron Core
Ferrite Core
Circuit
Breakers
Dependent
Source
Speaker
Chassis
Earth
Fixed
Variable
Fixed
Variable
Air
Core
Iron
Core
Ferrite
Core
+
–
V
I
A
kV
TABLE 1–7
Schematic Circuit Symbols
NOTES...
1. Software for technical use falls into two broad categories—application
software (such as Multisim and PSpice) and programming languages (such as
Java and C

). Application software is designed to solve problems without
requiring programming on the part of the user, whereas programming lan-
guages require that you write code for each type of problem to be solved.
In this book, we do not consider programming languages.
2. Software tools should always be used wisely. Before you use Multisim or
PSpice, for example, be sure you understand the basics of the subject that you
are studying, as the uninformed use of such software can result in answers
that make no sense—and you need to be able to recognize this fact. This is
why you should solve many problems manually with your calculator ﬁrst—to
develop both an understanding of the theory and a “feel” for what is right.
3. Computer software is frequently updated, and the versions used in this book
are the versions current at the time of writing—see Appendix A.
4. Multisim® is a trademark of National Instruments Company; OrCAD®,
OrCAD Capture®, and PSpice® are registered trademarks of Cadence
Design Systems Inc.; Matlab is a trademark of MathWorks; and Mathcad®
is a trademark of Parametric Technology Corporation.
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18
Chapter 1 | Introduction
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 1–8
Multisim simulation of the
time delay alarm circuit featured in
Chapter 11. Not only does the software
analyze the circuit, it displays the results
graphically as color-coded waveforms.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 1–9
PSpice simulation of a trans-
former coupled circuit from Chapter 23.
The meters measure circuit variables and
show results in numerical form.
Circuit Simulation Software
Simulation software solves problems by simulating the behavior of electrical
and electronic circuits rather than by solving sets of equations. To analyze a
circuit, you “build” it on your screen by selecting components (resistors, capac-
itors, transistors, etc.) from a list of parts, which you then position and
interconnect to form the desired circuit. You can change component values, con-
nections, and analysis options instantly with the click of a mouse. Figures 1–8
and 1–9 show two examples. Software products such as these permit you to set
up and test your circuit on the computer screen without the need to build a hard-
ware prototype.
Most simulation packages use a software engine called SPICE, an
acronym for Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit Emphasis. Two of
the most popular products are PSpice and Multisim, the simulation tools
used in this book. Each has its strong points. Multisim, for instance, more
closely models an actual workbench (complete with realistic meters) than
does PSpice, but PSpice has other advantages, as you will see throughout
this book.
Prepackaged Math Software
Another useful category of software includes mathematics packages such as
Mathcad and Matlab. These programs (which use numerical analysis techniques
to solve equations, plot data, etc.) also require no programming—you simply
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

enter the data and let the computer do the work. Generally, they use standard
mathematical notation (or very close to it) and are great aids for solving simul-
taneous equations such as those encountered in mesh and nodal analysis, which
will be discussed in Chapter 8 and Chapter 19.
Calculators in Circuit Analysis
While the preceding software programs can be very useful, a calculator will be
your primary tool for learning circuit analysis. You will need one that is able to
work with complex numbers in both rectangular and polar forms. Such a cal-
culator saves a great deal of time and effort and cuts down dramatically on
errors. Figure 1–10 shows a typical calculator—the Sharp EL-506W. (It is the
calculator that we use for illustrative purposes throughout this book—see
Notes. The EL-506W has regional variants—for example, it is sold in Canada
as the EL-546W.) (Valuable tips on how to use calculators in circuit analysis
are integrated throughout the text and summarized in Appendix B.)
Problems
19
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 1–10
Calculators like this greatly
simplify the work involved in circuit
analysis. The photo shows a Sharp 
EL-506W, but check with your professor
or consult your book list to see which cal-
culator is recommended for your course.
NOTES...
A survey of current book adopters revealed a considerable variety of calculators in
use, with no one calculator a clear winner—consequently, we make no recom-
mendations about which one to buy. Be sure to check with your instructor (or
your book list) before you make a choice.
1.3
Converting Units
1. Perform the following conversions:
a. 27 minutes to seconds
d. 35 horsepower to watts
b. 0.8 hours to seconds
e. 1827 W to hp
c. 2 h 3 min 47 s to s
f. 23 revolutions to degrees
2. Perform the following conversions:
a. 27 feet to meters
e. 100 sq. ft to m2
b. 2.3 yd to cm
f. 124 sq. in. to m2
c. 36 F to degrees C
g. 47-pound force to newtons
d. 18 (US) gallons to liters
3. Set up conversion factors, compute the following, and express the answer in
the units indicated.
a. The area of a plate 1.2 m by 70 cm in m2.
b. The area of a triangle with base 25 cm, height 0.5 m in m2.
c. The volume of a box 10 cm by 25 cm by 80 cm in m3.
d. The volume of a sphere with 10 in. radius in m3.
Problems
NOTES...
1. Conversion factors may be found
on the inside of the front cover
or in the tables of Chapter 1.
2. Difﬁcult problems have their
question number printed in red.
3. Answers to odd-numbered
problems are in Appendix D.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4. An electric fan rotates at 300 revolutions per minute. How many degrees is
this per second?
5. If the surface mount robot machine of Figure 1–3 places 15 parts every 12 s,
what is its placement rate per hour?
6. If your laser printer can print 8 pages per minute, how many pages can it
print in one-tenth of an hour?
7. A car gets 27 miles per US gallon. What is this in kilometers per liter?
8. The equatorial radius of the earth is 3963 miles. What is the earth’s circum-
ference in kilometers at the equator?
9. A wheel rotates 18° in 0.02 s. How many revolutions per minute is this?
10. The height of horses is sometimes measured in “hands,” where 1 hand  4
inches. How many meters tall is a 16-hand horse? How many centimeters?
11. Suppose s  vt is given, where s is distance travelled, v is velocity, and t is
time. If you travel at v  60 mph for 500 seconds, you might make an
unthinking substitution s  vt  (60)(500)  30,000 miles. What is wrong
with this calculation? What is the correct answer?
12. A round pizza has a circumference of 47 inches. How long does it take for a
pizza cutter traveling at 0.12 ms to cut diagonally across it?
13. Joe S. was asked to convert 2000 ydh to meters per second. Here is Joe’s
work: velocity  2000  0.9144  6060  1828.8 ms. Determine conver-
sion factors, write units into the conversion, and ﬁnd the correct answer.
14. The mean distance from the earth to the moon is 238 857 miles. Radio sig-
nals travel at 299 792 458 ms. How long does it take a radio signal to reach
the moon?
15. If you walk at a rate of 3 kmh for 8 minutes, 5 kmh for 1.25 h, then con-
tinue your walk at a rate of 4 kmh for 12 minutes, how far will you have
walked in total?
16. Suppose you walk at a rate of 2 mph for 12 minutes, 4 mph for 0.75 h, then
ﬁnish off at 5 mph for 15 minutes. How far have you walked in total?
17. You walk for 15 minutes at a rate of 2 kmh, then 18 minutes at 5 kmh, and
for the remainder, your speed is 2.5 kmh. If the total distance covered is 2.85
km, how many minutes did you spend walking at 2.5 kmh?
18. You walk for 16 minutes at a rate of 1.5 mph, speed up to 3.5 mph for
awhile, then slow down to 3 mph for the last 12 minutes. If the total distance
covered is 1.7 miles, how long did you spend walking at 3.5 mph?
19. Your plant manager asks you to investigate two machines. The cost of
electricity for operating machine #1 is 43 centsminute, while that for
machine #2 is $200.00 per 8-hour shift. The purchase price, production
capacities, maintenance costs, and long-term reliability for both machines
are identical. Based on this information, which machine should you pur-
chase and why?
20. Given that 1 hp  550 ft-lbs, 1 ft  0.3048 m, 1 lb  4.448 N, 1 J  1 N-m,
and 1 W  1 Js, show that 1 hp  746 W.
1.4
Power of Ten Notation
21. Express each of the following in power of ten notation with one nonzero
digit to the left of the decimal point.
a. 8675
e. 0.003 48  105
b. 0.008 72
f. 0.000 215  10	3
c. 12.4  102
g. 14.7  100
d. 37.2  10	2
20
Chapter 1 | Introduction
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

22. Express the answer for each of the following in power of ten notation with
one nonzero digit to the left of the decimal point.
a. (17.6)(100)
d. 1  10	7  10	4  10.65
b. (1400)(27  10	3)
e. (12.5)(1000)(0.01)
c. (0.15  106)(14  10	4)
f. (18.4  100)(100)(1.5  10	5)(0.001)
23. Repeat the directions in Question 22 for each of the following.
a. 
1
1
0
2
0
5
0

c. 
(1
3
.5


1
1
0
0
4
6)

b. 
8
(0

.00
1
1
0
)
4

d.
24. Determine the answers for the following.
a. 123.7 
 0.05 
 1259  10	3
c. 86.95  102 	 383
b. 72.3  10	2 
 1  10	3
d. 452  10	2 
 (697)(0.01)
25. Convert the following to power of ten notation and, without using your cal-
culator, determine the answers.
a. (4  103)(0.05)2
d.
b. (4  103)(	0.05)2
e. 
(
(
	
23
0.

027
1
)
)
1
0
3

(	
1
0
0
.2
	
)
3
2

c.
26. For each of the following, convert the numbers to power of ten notation, then
perform the indicated computations. Round your answer to four digits.
a. (452)(6.73  104)
f. (	643  10	3)3
b. (0.009 85)(4700)
g. [(0.0025)12][1.6  104]
c. (0.0892)(0.000 067 3)
h. [(	0.027)13][1.5  10	4]
d. 12.40 	 236  10	2
i.
e. (1.27)3 
 47.9(0.8)2
27. For the following,
a. convert numbers to power of ten notation, then perform the indicated
computation,
b. perform the operation directly on your calculator without conversion.
What is your conclusion?
i. 842  0.0014
ii. 
0
0
.0
.0
0
3
7
5
9
2
1

28. Express each of the following in conventional notation.
a. 34.9  104
d. 6.97  10	2
b. 15.1  100
e. 45 786.97  10	1
c. 234.6  10	4
f. 6.97  10	5
29. One coulomb (Chapter 2) is the amount of charge represented by 6 240 000
000 000 000 000 electrons. Express this quantity in power of ten notation.
30. The mass of an electron is 0.000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 899
9 kg. Express as a power of ten with one nonzero digit to the left of the deci-
mal point.
31. If 6.24  1018 electrons pass through a wire in 1 s, how many pass through it
during a time interval of 2 h 47 min 10 s?
32. Compute the distance traveled in meters by light in a vacuum in 1.2  10–8
second.
(3.5  104)	2  (0.0045)2  (729)13

[(0.00872)  (47)3] 	 356
(3  2  10)2

(2  5  10	1)
(30 
 20)	2(2.5  106)(6000)

(1  103)(2  10	1)2
(16  10	7)(21.8  106)

(14.2)(12  10	5)
Problems
21
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

33. How long does it take light to travel 3.47  105 km in a vacuum?
34. How far in km does light travel in one light-year?
35. While investigating a site for a hydroelectric project, you determine that the
ﬂow of water is 3.73  104 m3s. How much is this in litershour?
36. The gravitational force between two bodies is F  6.6726  10	11 
m
r
1m
2
2
 N,
where masses m1 and m2 are in kilograms and the distance r between gravita-
tional centers is in meters. If body 1 is a sphere of radius 5000 miles and
density of 25 kgm3, and body 2 is a sphere of diameter 20 000 km and den-
sity of 12 kgm3, and the distance between centers is 100 000 miles, what is
the gravitational force between them?
1.5
Preﬁxes, Engineering Notation, 
and Numerical Results
37. What is the appropriate preﬁx and its abbreviation for each of the following
multipliers?
a. 1000
d. 0.000 001
b. 1 000 000
e. 10	3
c. 109
f. 10	12
38. Express the following in terms of their abbreviations—for example,
microwatts as W. Pay particular attention to capitalization (e.g., V, not v, for
volts).
a. milliamperes
e. micrometers
b. kilovolts
f. milliseconds
c. megawatts
g. nanoamps
d. microseconds
39. Express the following in the most sensible engineering notation (e.g., 1270 s 
1.27 ms).
a. 0.0015 s
b. 0.000027 s
c. 0.00035 ms
40. Convert the following:
a. 156 mV to volts
d. 0.057 MW to kilowatts
b. 0.15 mV to microvolts
e. 3.5  104 volts to kilovolts
c. 47 kW to watts
f. 0.000 035 7 amps to microamps
41. Determine the values to be inserted in the blanks.
a. 150 kV  ___  103 V  ___  106 V
b. 330 W  ___  10	3 W  ___  10	5 W
42. Perform the indicated operations and express the answers in the units 
indicated.
a. 700 A 	 0.4 mA  ___ A  ___ mA
b. 600 MW 
 300  104 W  ___ MW
43. Perform the indicated operations and express the answers in the units 
indicated.
a. 330 V 
 0.15 kV 
 0.2  103 V  ___ V
b. 60 W 
 100 W 
 2700 mW  ___ W
44. The voltage of a high-voltage transmission line is 1.15  105 V. What is its
voltage in kV?
22
Chapter 1 | Introduction
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
23
45. You purchase a 1500-W electric heater to heat your room. How many kW is
this?
46. A portion of an electronic circuit is shown in Figure 1–11. As you will 
learn in Chapter 6, for this circuit, I4  I1 
 I2 
 I3. If I1  1.25 mA,
I2  350 A, and I3  250  10	5 A, what is I4?
FIGURE 1–11
A nodal point in an electronic circuit. As you learn in Chapter 6, the current
leaving the junction is equal to the sum of currents entering.
I2
I1
I3
I4
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 1–12
I2
I1
I3
I4
© Cengage Learning 2013
47. For Figure 1–12, I1 
 I2 	 I3 
 I4  0. If I1  12 A, I2  0.150 kA 
and I4  250  10	1 A, what is I3?
48. In a certain electronic circuit, V1  V2 	 V3 	 V4. If V1  120 mV, V2 
5000 V, and V3  20  10	4 V, what is V4?
49. While repairing an antique radio, you come across a faulty capacitor designated
39 mmfd. After a bit of research, you ﬁnd that “mmfd” is an obsolete unit
meaning “micromicrofarads.” You need a replacement capacitor of equal value.
Consulting Table 1–6, what would 39 “micromicrofarads” be equivalent to?
50. a. If 0.045 coulomb of charge (Question 29) passes through a wire in 15 ms,
how many electrons is this?
b. At the rate of 9.36  1019 electrons per second, how many coulombs pass
a point in a wire in 20 s?
51. A radio signal travels at 299 792.458 kms and a telephone signal at 150 ms.
If they originate at the same point, which arrives ﬁrst at a destination 5000
km away? By how much?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52. In Chapter 4, you will learn that dc power is given by the product of voltage
times current, that is, P  V  I watts. 
a. If V  50 V and I  24 mA (both exact values), what is P in watts?
b. If voltage is measured with a voltmeter as V  50.0  0.1 volts, and cur-
rent is measured with an ammeter as I  24.0  0.1 mA, what can you
conclude about P based on these measured values?
53. In Chapter 4, you will learn that resistance is given by the ratio of voltage to
current, that is, R  V  I ohms. 
a. If V  50 V and I  24 mA (both exact values), what is R?
b. If voltage is measured as V  50.0  0.1 volts, and current as I  24.0 
0.1 mA, what can you conclude about R based on these measured values?
54. The component soldered onto the printed circuit of Figure 1–13(a) is an elec-
tronic device known as an integrated circuit. As indicated in (b), center-to-
center spacing of its leads is 0.8  0.1 mm. Lead diameters can vary from
0.25 mm to 0.45 mm. Considering these uncertainties, compute the minimum
and maximum distance between leads due to these manufacturing tolerances.
55. Open the mini-tutorial Signiﬁcant Digits and Numerical Accuracy found on
the Web site and do the exercise problems.
24
Chapter 1 | Introduction
FIGURE 1–13
© Cengage Learning 2013
(a)
© Cengage Learning 2013
(b)
1.6
Circuit Diagrams
56. Consider the pictorial diagram of Figure 1–14. Using the appropriate sym-
bols from Table 1–7, draw this in schematic form. Hint: In later chapters,
there are many schematic circuits containing resistors, inductors, and 
capacitors. Use these as aids.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

57. Draw the schematic diagram for a simple ﬂashlight.
Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
25
Switch
Capacitor
Resistor
Resistor
Iron-Core
Inductor
+
–
Jolt
Battery
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 1–14
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. One
2. 1280 cm
3. ms
4. a. 4.27 s
b. 1.53 mV
c. 1.23 ms
5. a. 1.8  104  18  103
b. 36  104  3.6  105  0.36  106
c. 4.45  102  44.5  101
d. 27  10	6  2.7  10	5
6. a. 0.752 mA
b. 980 V
c. 400 s  0.4 ms
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Ampere
Ampere-Hour
Atom
Autopolarity
Battery
Circuit Breaker
Conductor
Conventional Current 
Coulomb
Coulomb’s Law
Current
dc or Direct Current
dc Source
Electrical Charge
Free Electrons
Fuse
Insulator
Ion
Polarity
Potential Difference
Primary Batteries
Semiconductor
Secondary Batteries
Valence Electron
Voltage
I OUTLINE
Atomic Theory Review
The Unit of Electrical
Charge: The Coulomb
Voltage
Current
Practical dc Voltage
Sources
Measuring Voltage and
Current
Switches, Fuses, and
Circuit Breakers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• describe the basic makeup of an atom,
• explain the relationships between valence
shells, free electrons, and conduction,
• describe the fundamental (coulomb) force
within an atom and the energy required to
create free electrons,
• describe what ions are and how they are
created,
• describe the characteristics of conductors,
insulators, and semiconductors,
• describe the coulomb as a measure of
charge,
• deﬁne voltage,
• describe how a battery “creates” voltage,
• explain current as a movement of charge
and how voltage causes current in a 
conductor,
• describe important battery types and their
characteristics,
• describe how to measure voltage and 
current.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
VOLTAGE AND CURRENT
A
basic electric circuit consisting of a source of electrical energy, a switch, a load, and inter-
connecting wire is shown in Figure 2–1. When the switch is closed, current in the circuit
causes the light to come on. This circuit is representative of many common circuits found in
practice, including those of ﬂashlights and automobile headlight systems. We will use it to help
develop an understanding of voltage and current—see Notes and icon CircuitSim 02-1.
CHAPTER PREVIEW
CircuitSim 02-1 
NOTES...
CircuitSim 02-1 introduces a
new innovation to circuit
analysis textbooks—the 
ability to study the circuits of
the textbooks "live" and fully
functional on your computer—
see Learning Circuit Theory
Interactively on Your Computer
in the Preface. Each time you
see such an icon in this book,
it means that there is a com-
panion simulation available.
© Cengage Learning 2013
(a) Pictorial representation
Switch
Current
Lamp
(load)
Interconnecting wire
~
!
Jolt
Battery
(source)
(b) Schematic representation
FIGURE 2–1
A basic electric circuit.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

28
Chapter 2 | Voltage and Current
Putting It in Perspective
The Equations of Circuit Theory
IN THIS CHAPTER you meet the ﬁrst of the equations and formulas that we use to describe the rela-
tionships of circuit theory. Remembering formulas is made easier if you clearly understand the
principles and concepts on which they are based. As you may recall from high school physics, for-
mulas can come about in only one of three ways: through experiment, by deﬁnition, or by mathe-
matical manipulation.
Experimental Formulas
Circuit theory rests on a few basic experimental results. These are results that can be proven in
no other way; they are valid solely because experiment has shown them to be true. The most
fundamental of these are called “laws.” Four examples are Ohm’s law, Kirchhoff’s current law,
Kirchhoff’s voltage law, and Faraday’s law. (These laws will be met in various chapters throughout
the book.) When you see a formula referred to as a law or an experimental result, remember that
it is based on experiment and cannot be obtained in any other way.
Deﬁned Formulas
Some formulas are created by deﬁnition, that is, we make them up. For example, there are 
60 seconds in a minute because we deﬁne the second as 1/60 of a minute. From this we get 
the formula tsec  60  tmin.
Derived Formulas
This type of formula or equation is created mathematically by combining or manipulating other
formulas. In contrast to the other two types of formulas, the only way that a derived relationship
can be obtained is by mathematics.
An awareness of where circuit theory formulas come from is important to you. This awareness
not only helps you understand and remember formulas, it helps you understand the very founda-
tions of the theory—the basic experimental premises upon which it rests, the important deﬁni-
tions that have been made, and the methods by which these foundation ideas have been put
together. This can help enormously in understanding and remembering concepts. I
Elementary atomic theory shows that the current in Figure 2–1 is actually a ﬂow of
charges. The cause of their movement is the “voltage” of the source. While in Figure 2–1
this source is a battery, in practice it may be any one of a number of practical sources,
including generators, power supplies, solar cells, and so on.
In this chapter we look at the basic ideas of voltage and current. We begin with a
discussion of atomic theory. This leads us to free electrons and the idea of current as a
movement of charge. The fundamental deﬁnitions of voltage and current are then devel-
oped. Following this, we look at a number of common voltage sources. The chapter con-
cludes with a discussion of voltmeters and ammeters and the measurement of voltage
and current in practice. I
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 2.1 | Atomic Theory Review
29
The basic structure of an atom is shown symbolically in Figure 2–2. It consists
of a nucleus of protons and neutrons surrounded by a group of orbiting elec-
trons. As you learned in physics, the electrons are negatively charged (),
while the protons are positively charged (). Each atom (in its normal state)
has an equal number of electrons and protons, and since their charges are equal
and opposite, they cancel, leaving the atom electrically neutral, that is, with
zero net charge. The nucleus, however, has a net positive charge, since it con-
sists of positively charged protons and uncharged neutrons.
The basic structure of Figure 2–2 applies to all elements, but each element
has its own unique combination of electrons, protons, and neutrons. For exam-
ple, the hydrogen atom, the simplest of all atoms, has 1 proton and 1 electron,
while the copper atom has 29 electrons, 29 protons, and 35 neutrons. Silicon,
which is important because of its use in transistors and other electronic devices,
has 14 electrons, 14 protons, and 14 neutrons.
In the model of Figure 2–2, electrons that have approximately the same
orbital radiuses may be thought of as forming shells. This gives us the simpli-
fied picture of Figure 2–3, where we have grouped closely spaced orbits into
shells designated K, L, M, N, and so on. Only certain numbers of electrons can
exist within each shell, and no electrons can exist in the space between shells.
The maximum that any shell can hold is 2n2 where n is the shell number. Thus,
there can be up to 2 electrons in the K shell, up to 8 in the L shell, up to 18 in the
M shell, and up to 32 in the N shell. The number in any shell depends on the
element. For instance, the copper atom, which has 29 electrons, has all 3 of its
inner shells completely filled, but its outer shell (shell N) has only 1 electron, 
2.1 Atomic Theory
Review


Electron
(negative charge)
Proton (positive charge)
Neutron (uncharged)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–2
Bohr model of the atom. Electrons travel around the nucleus at incredible
speeds, making billions of trips in a fraction of a second. The force of attraction between
the electrons and the protons in the nucleus keeps them in orbit.
Nucleus
L
K
N
M
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–3
Simpliﬁed representation 
of the atom. Electrons travel in roughly
spherical orbits called “shells.”
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

as in Figure 2–4. This outermost shell is called its valence shell, and the elec-
tron in it is called its valence electron.
No element can have more than 8 valence electrons; when a valence shell
has 8 electrons, it is filled. As we shall see, the number of valence electrons that
an element has directly affects its electrical properties.
Electrical Charge
In the previous paragraphs, we mentioned the word “charge.” However, we
need to look at its meaning in more detail. First, we should note that electrical
charge is an intrinsic property of  electrons and protons that manifests itself in
the form of forces—electrons repel other electrons but attract protons, while
protons repel each other but attract electrons. It was through studying these
forces that scientists determined that the charge on the electron is negative
while that on the proton is positive.
However, the way in which we use the term “charge” extends beyond this.
To illustrate, consider again the basic atom of Figure 2–2. It has equal numbers
of electrons and protons, and since their charges are equal and opposite, they
cancel, leaving the atom as a whole uncharged. However, if the atom acquires
additional electrons (leaving it with more electrons than protons), we say that
it (the atom) is negatively charged; conversely, if it loses electrons and is left
with fewer electrons than protons, we say that it is positively charged. The term
“charge” in this sense denotes an imbalance between the number of electrons
and protons present in the atom.
Now move up to the macroscopic level. Here, substances in their normal
state are also generally uncharged; that is, they have equal numbers of electrons
and protons. However, this balance is easily disturbed—electrons can be
stripped from their parent atoms by simple actions such as walking across a
carpet, sliding off a chair, or spinning clothes in a dryer. (Recall “static cling.”)
Consider two additional examples from physics. Suppose you rub an ebonite
(hard rubber) rod with fur. This action causes a transfer of electrons from the fur
to the rod. The rod therefore acquires an excess of electrons and is thus nega-
tively charged. Similarly, when a glass rod is rubbed with silk, electrons are
transferred from the glass rod to the silk, leaving the rod with a deficiency and,
consequently, a positive charge. Here again, charge refers to an imbalance of
electrons and protons.
As the preceding examples illustrate, “charge” can refer to the charge on
an individual electron or to the charge associated with a whole group of elec-
trons. In either case, this charge is denoted by the letter Q, and its unit of mea-
surement in the SI system is the coulomb. (The definition of the coulomb is
considered in Section 2.2.) In general, the charge Q associated with a group of
electrons is equal to the product of the number of electrons times the charge on
30
Chapter 2 | Voltage and Current
Valence shell
(1 electron)
Shell  K (2 electrons)
Valence
electron
Shell L (8 electrons)
Shell M (18 electrons)
Nucleus
29
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–4
Copper atom. Since the valence electron is only weakly attracted to the
nucleus, it is said to be “loosely bound.”
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

each individual electron. Since charge manifests itself in the form of forces,
charge is defined in terms of these forces. This is discussed next.
Coulomb’s Law
The force between charges was studied by the French scientist Charles
Coulomb (1736–1806). Coulomb determined experimentally that the force
between two charges Q1 and Q2 (Figure 2–5) is directly proportional to the
product of their charges and inversely proportional to the square of the distance
between them. Mathematically, Coulomb’s law states
F  k
Q
r
1Q
2
2

[newtons, N]
(2–1)
where Q1 and Q2 are the charges in coulombs (to be defined in Section 2.2), 
r is the center-to-center spacing between them in meters, and k  9  109.
Coulomb’s law applies to aggregates of charges as in Figure 2–5(a) and (b), as
well as to individual electrons within the atom as in (c).
As Coulomb’s law indicates, force decreases inversely as the square of dis-
tance; thus, if the distance between two charges is doubled, the force decreases
to (12)2  14 (i.e., one quarter) of its original value. Because of this relation-
ship, electrons in outer orbits are less strongly attracted to the nucleus than
those in inner orbits; that is, they are less tightly bound to the nucleus than those
close by. Valence electrons are the least tightly bound and will, if they acquire
sufficient energy, escape from their parent atoms.
Free Electrons
The amount of energy required to escape depends on the number of electrons
in the valence shell. If an atom has only a few valence electrons, there will be
a relatively weak attraction between these electrons and the nucleus, and only
a small amount of additional energy is needed. For example, for a metal like
copper, valence electrons can gain sufficient energy from heat alone (thermal
energy), even at room temperature, to escape from their parent atoms and
wander from atom to atom throughout the material as depicted in Figure 2–6.
(Note that these electrons do not leave the substance, they simply wander from
the valence shell of one atom to the valence shell of another. The material
therefore remains electrically neutral.) Such electrons are called free electrons.
In copper, there are on the order of 1023 free electrons per cubic centimeter at
room temperature. As we shall see, it is the presence of this large number of
free electrons that makes copper such a good conductor of electric current. On
the other hand, if the valence shell is full (or nearly full), valence electrons are
much more tightly bound. Such materials have few (if any) free electrons.
Ions
As noted earlier, when a previously neutral atom gains or loses an electron, it
acquires a net electrical charge. The charged atom is referred to as an ion. If
the atom loses an electron, it is called a positive ion; if it gains an electron, it
is called a negative ion.
Conductors, Insulators, and Semiconductors
The atomic structure of matter affects how easily charges, that is, electrons,
move through a substance and hence how it is used electrically. Electrically,
materials are classified as conductors, insulators, or semiconductors.
Section 2.1 | Atomic Theory Review
31
Electron
Orbit


(a) Like charges
repel
(b) Unlike charges
attract
(c) The force of attraction
keeps electrons in orbit



Q1
F
F
Q2
r
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–5
Coulomb law forces.
FIGURE 2–6
Random motion of free 
electrons in a conductor.
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Conductors
Materials through which charges move easily are termed conductors. The most
familiar examples are metals. Good metal conductors have large numbers of
free electrons that are able to move about easily. In particular, silver, copper,
gold, and aluminum are excellent conductors. Of these, copper is the most widely
used. Not only is it an excellent conductor, it is inexpensive and easily formed into
wire, making it suitable for a broad spectrum of applications ranging from
common house wiring to sophisticated electronic equipment. Aluminum,
although it is only about 60% as good a conductor as copper, is also used,
mainly in applications where light weight is important, such as in overhead
power transmission lines. Silver and gold are too expensive for general use.
However, gold, because it oxidizes less than other materials, is used in special-
ized applications; for example, critical electrical connectors in electronic equip-
ment use it because it makes a more reliable connection than other materials.
Insulators
Materials that do not conduct (e.g., glass, porcelain, plastic, rubber, and so on)
are termed insulators. The covering on electric lamp cords, for example, is an
insulator. It is used to prevent the wires from touching and to protect us from
electric shock.
Insulators do not conduct because they have full or nearly full valence shells
and thus their electrons are tightly bound. However, when high enough voltage
is applied, the force is so great that electrons are literally torn from their parent
atoms, causing the insulation to break down and conduction to occur. In air, you
see this as an arc or flashover. In solids, charred insulation usually results.
Semiconductors
Silicon and germanium (plus a few other materials) have half-filled valence
shells and are thus neither good conductors nor good insulators. Known as
semiconductors, they have unique electrical properties that make them
important to the electronics industry. The most important material is silicon.
It is used to make transistors, diodes, integrated circuits, and other electronic
devices. Semiconductors have made possible personal computers, home the-
ater systems, cell phones, calculators, iPods, and a host of other electronic
products.
32
Chapter 2 | Voltage and Current
1. Describe the basic structure of the atom in terms of its constituent particles:
electrons, protons, and neutrons. Why is the nucleus positively charged? 
Why is the atom as a whole electrically neutral?
2. What are valence shells? What does the valence shell contain?
3. Describe Coulomb’s law and use it to help explain why electrons far from the
nucleus are loosely bound.
4. What are free electrons? Describe how they are created, using copper as an
example. Explain what role thermal energy plays in the process.
5. Brieﬂy distinguish between a normal (i.e., uncharged) atom, a positive ion,
and a negative ion.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 2.2 | The Unit of Electrical Charge: The Coulomb
33
As noted in the previous section, the unit of electrical charge in the SI system is
the coulomb (C). The coulomb is defined as the charge carried by 6.24  1018
electrons. Thus, if an electrically neutral (i.e., uncharged) body has 6.24  1018
electrons removed, it will be left with a net positive charge of 1 coulomb, that
is, Q  1 C. Conversely, if an uncharged body has 6.24  1018 electrons added,
it will have a net negative charge of 1 coulomb, that is, Q  1 C. Usually,
however, we are more interested in the charge moving through a wire. In this
regard, if 6.24  1018 electrons pass through a wire, we say that the charge that
passed through the wire is 1 C.
We can now determine the charge on one electron. It is Qe  1(6.24  1018) 
1.602  1019 C.
2.2 The Unit of
Electrical Charge:
The Coulomb
EXAMPLE 2–1        
An initially neutral body has 1.7 C of negative charge removed. Later,
18.7  1011 electrons are added. What is the body’s ﬁnal charge?
Solution
Initially the body is neutral, that is, Qinitial  0 C. When 1.7 C 
of electrons is removed, the body is left with a positive charge of 1.7 C. Now,
18.7  1011 electrons are added back. This is equivalent to
18.7  1011 electrons 
 0.3 C
of negative charge. The ﬁnal charge on the body is therefore Qf  1.7 C  0.3
C  1.4 C.
1 coulomb

6.24  1018 electrons
To get an idea of how large a coulomb is, we can use Coulomb’s law. If it
were possible to place 2 charges of 1 coulomb each 1 meter apart, the force
between them would be
F  (9  109) 
(1
(
C
1
)
m
(1
)2
C)
  9  109 N, that is, about 1 million tons!
1. Positive charges Q1  2 C and Q2  12 C are separated center to
center by 10 mm. Compute the force between them. Is it attractive or
repulsive?
2. Two equal charges are separated by 1 cm. If the force of repulsion between
them is 9.7  102 N, what is their charge? What may the charges be, both
positive, both negative, or one positive and one negative?
3. After 10.61  1013 electrons are added to a metal plate, it has a negative
charge of 3 C. What was its initial charge in coulombs?
Answers
1. 2160 N, repulsive; 2. 32.8 nC, both () or both (); 3. 14 C ()
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

When charges are detached from one body and transferred to another, a potential
difference or voltage results between them. A familiar example is the voltage
that develops when you walk across a carpet. Voltages in excess of ten thou-
sand volts can be created in this way. (We will deﬁne the volt rigorously very
shortly.) This voltage is due entirely to the separation of positive and negative
charges, that is, charges that have been pulled apart.
Figure 2–7 illustrates another example. During electrical storms, electrons
in thunderclouds are stripped from their parent atoms by the forces of turbulence
and carried to the bottom of the cloud, leaving a deficiency of electrons (posi-
tive charge) at the top and an excess (negative charge) at the bottom. The force
of repulsion then drives electrons away beneath the cloud, leaving the ground
positively charged. Hundreds of millions of volts are created in this way. (This
is what causes the air to break down and a lightning discharge to occur.)
Practical Voltage Sources
As the preceding examples show, voltage is created solely by the separation of
positive and negative charges. However, static discharges and lightning strikes
are not practical sources of electricity. We now look at practical sources. A
common example is the battery. In a battery, charges are separated by chemi-
cal action. An ordinary alkaline flashlight battery, Figure 2–8, illustrates the
concept. The alkaline material (a mixture of manganese dioxide, graphite, and
electrolytic) and a gelled zinc powder mixture, separated by a paper barrier
soaked in electrolyte, are placed in a steel can. The can is connected to the top
cap to form the cathode or positive terminal, while the zinc mixture, by means
of the brass pin, is connected to the bottom to form the anode or negative ter-
minal. (The bottom is insulated from the rest of the can.) Chemical reactions
result in an excess of electrons in the zinc mix and a deficiency in the man-
ganese dioxide mix. This separation of charges creates a voltage of approxi-
mately 1.5 V, with the top end cap  and the bottom of the can . The battery
is useful as a source since its chemical action creates a continuous supply of
energy that is able to do useful work, such as light a lamp or run a motor.
34
Chapter 2 | Voltage and Current
2.3 Voltage
Voltage difference


Voltage
difference
    
  

 
 


      
 

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–7
Voltages created by separa-
tion of charges in a thundercloud. The force
of repulsion drives electrons away beneath
the cloud, creating a voltage between the
cloud and earth as well. If voltage becomes
large enough, the air breaks down and a
lightning discharge occurs.
(a) Basic construction
(b) A typical D cell
End cap (positive
electrode)
Separator
Anode (–)
Zinc powder mix
Cathode (+)
Manganese dioxide
mix
Brass anode
collector pin
Insulating jacket
Gaskets and
sealant, etc.
Case end (negative
electrode)
© Cengage Learning 2013
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–8
Alkaline cell. Voltage is created by the separation of charges due to chemical
action. Nominal cell voltage is 1.5 V.
NOTES...
The source of Figure 2–8 is more
properly called a cell than a battery,
since “cell” refers to a single cell
while “battery” refers to a group of
cells. However, through common
usage, such cells are referred to as
batteries. In what follows, we will
also call them batteries.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Potential Energy
The concept of voltage is tied into the concept of potential energy. We there-
fore look briefly at energy.
In mechanics, potential energy is the energy that a body possesses because
of its position. For example, a bag of sand hoisted by a rope over a pulley has
the potential to do work when it is released. The amount of work that went into
giving it this potential energy is equal to the product of force times the distance
through which the bag was lifted (i.e., work equals force times distance). In the
SI system, force is measured in newtons and distance in meters. Thus, work has
the unit newton-meters (which we call joules, Section 1.2, Chapter 1).
In a similar fashion, work is required to move positive and negative
charges apart. This gives them potential energy. To understand why, consider
again the cloud of Figure 2–7, redrawn in Figure 2–9. Assume the cloud is
initially uncharged. Now assume a charge of Q electrons is moved from the
top of the cloud to the bottom. The positive charge left at the top of the cloud
exerts a force on the electrons that tries to pull them back as they are being
moved away. Since the electrons are being moved against this force, work
(force times distance) is required. Since the separated charges experience a
force to return to the top of the cloud, they have the potential to do work if
released, that is, they possess potential energy. Similarly for the battery of
Figure 2–8, the charges, which have been separated by chemical action, also
possess potential energy.
Deﬁnition of Voltage: The Volt
In electrical terms, a difference in potential energy is defined as voltage. In
general, the amount of energy required to separate charges depends on the volt-
age developed and the amount of charge moved. By definition, the voltage
between two points is one volt if it requires one joule of energy to move one
coulomb of charge from one point to the other. In equation form,
V  W
Q

[volts, V]
(2–2)
where W is energy in joules, Q is charge in coulombs, and V is the resulting
voltage in volts (see Notes).
Section 2.3 | Voltage
35
FIGURE 2–9
Work (force  distance) is required to move the charges apart.
Force of attraction
Electrons being
moved against
force
Cloud


© Cengage Learning 2013
NOTES...
The discussion found here may
seem a bit abstract and somewhat
detached from our ordinary experi-
ence, which suggests that voltage
is the “force or push” that moves
electric current through a circuit.
While both viewpoints are correct
(we look at the latter in great detail,
starting in Chapter 4), in order to
establish a coherent analytic
theory, we need a rigorous deﬁni-
tion. Equation 2–2 provides that
deﬁnition. Although it is a bit
abstract, it gives us the foundation
upon which rest many of the impor-
tant circuit relationships that you
will encounter shortly.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Note carefully that voltage is defined between points. For the case of the
battery, for example, voltage appears between its terminals. Thus, voltage does
not exist at a point by itself; it is always determined with respect to some other
point. (For this reason, voltage is also called potential difference. We often use
the terms interchangeably.) Note also that this argument applies regardless of
how you separate the charges, whether it be by chemical means as in a battery,
by mechanical means as in a generator, by photoelectric means as in a solar
cell, and so on.
Alternate arrangements of Equation 2–2 are useful:
W  QV
[joules, J]
(2–3)
Q  W
V

[coulombs, C]
(2–4)
36
Chapter 2 | Voltage and Current
Symbol for dc Voltage Sources
Consider again Figure 2–1. The battery is the source of electrical energy that
moves charges around the circuit. This movement of charges, as we will soon
see, is called an electric current. Because one of the battery’s terminals is
always positive and the other is always negative, current is always in the
same direction. Such a unidirectional current is called dc or direct current,
and the battery is called a dc source. Symbols for dc sources are shown in
Figure 2–10. The long bar denotes the positive terminal. On actual batteries,
the positive terminal is usually marked POS () and the negative terminal
NEG (). We refer to this designation as polarity—thus, the  terminal has
positive polarity and the  terminal has negative polarity.
EXAMPLE 2–2       
If it takes 35 J of energy to move a charge of 5 C from one point to another,
what is the voltage between the two points?
Solution
V  W
Q
  
3
5
5
C
J
  7 J/C  7 V
1. The voltage between two points is 19 V. How much energy is required to
move 67  1018 electrons from one point to the other?
2. The potential difference between two points is 140 mV. If 280 J of work
are required to move a charge Q from one point to the other, what is Q?
Answers
1. 204 J; 2. 2 mC
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Earlier, you learned that there are large numbers of free electrons in metals like
copper. These electrons move randomly throughout the material (Figure 2–6),
but their net movement in any given direction is zero.
Assume now that a battery is connected as in Figure 2–11. Since electrons
are attracted by the positive pole of the battery and repelled by the negative
pole, they move around the circuit, passing through the wire, the lamp, and the
battery. This movement of charge is called an electric current. The more elec-
trons per second that pass through the circuit, the greater is the current. Thus,
current is the rate of flow (or rate of movement) of charge.
The Ampere
Since charge is measured in coulombs, its rate of flow is coulombs per second.
In the SI system, 1 coulomb per second is defined as 1 ampere (commonly
abbreviated A). From this, we get that 1 ampere is the current in a circuit when
1 coulomb of charge passes a given point in 1 second (Figure 2–11). The
symbol for current is I. Expressed mathematically,
I  Q
t

[amperes, A]
(2–5)
where Q is the charge (in coulombs) and t is the time interval (in seconds) over
which it is measured. In Equation 2–5, it is important to note that t does not
Section 2.4 | Current
37


E
(a) Symbol for a cell


E
(b) Symbol for a battery


1.5 V
(c) A 1.5 volt battery
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–10
Battery symbol. The long bar denotes the positive terminal and the short
bar the negative terminal—thus it is not necessary to put  and  signs on the diagram
(although we often do). For simplicity, we use the symbol shown in (a) throughout this
book for batteries as well as for cells.
2.4 Current
When the amount of charge that
passes a point in one second is
one coulomb, the current is 
one ampere.
Lamp
Imaginary Plane
Movement of electrons through the wire
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–11
Electron flow in a conductor. Electrons () are attracted to the positive ()
pole of the battery. As electrons move around the circuit, they are replenished at the
negative pole of the battery. This flow of charge is called an electric current.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

represent a discrete point in time but is the interval of time during which the
transfer of charge occurs. Alternate forms of Equation 2–5 are
Q  It [coulombs, C]
(2–6)
and
t  Q
I

[seconds, s]
(2–7)
38
Chapter 2 | Voltage and Current
Although Equation 2–5 is the theoretical definition of current, we never
actually use it to measure current. In practice, we use an instrument called an
ammeter (Section 2.6). However, it is an extremely important theoretical rela-
tionship that we will soon use to develop other more practical relationships.
Current Direction
In the early days of electricity, it was believed that current was a movement of
positive charge and that these charges moved around the circuit from the posi-
tive terminal of the battery to the negative as depicted in Figure 2–12(a). Based
on this, all the laws, formulas, and symbols of circuit theory were developed.
(We now refer to this direction as the conventional current direction.) After the
discovery of the atomic nature of matter, it was learned that what actually moves
in metallic conductors are electrons and that they move through the circuit as in
Figure 2–12(b). This direction is called the electron flow direction. We thus have
two possible representations for current direction and a choice has to be made.
In this book, we use the conventional direction (see Notes).
Alternating Current (ac)
So far, we have considered only dc. Before we move on, we will briefly men-
tion ac or alternating current. Alternating current is current that changes 
direction cyclically—that is, charges alternately flow in one direction, then in
EXAMPLE 2–3       
If 840 coulombs of charge pass through the imaginary plane of Figure 2–11
during a time interval of 2 minutes, what is the current?
Solution
Convert t to seconds. Thus,
I  Q
t
  
(2
8

40
6
C
0)s
  7 C/s  7 A
1. Between t  1 ms and t  14 ms, 8 C of charge pass through a wire.
What is the current?
2. After the switch of Figure 2–1 is closed, current I  4 A. How much
charge passes through the lamp between the time the switch is closed and
the time that it is opened 3 minutes later?
Answers
1. 0.615 mA; 2. 720 C
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
NOTES...
A perfectly coherent theory can be
built around either of the directions
of Figure 2–12, and many circuit
analysis and electronics textbooks
have been written from each view-
point. There are, however, com-
pelling reasons for choosing the
conventional direction. Among these
are (1) Standard electronic symbols
used in circuit diagrams and found
in manufacturers’ data books are
based on it, (2) Computer software
such as PSpice and Multisim utilizes
it, and (3) All Engineering level
and virtually all EET level college
programs teach it.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the other in a circuit. The most common ac source is the commercial ac power
system that supplies energy to your home. We mention it here because you will
encounter it briefly in Section 2.5. It is covered in detail in Chapter 15.
Section 2.5 | Practical dc Voltage Sources
39
(a) Conventional current direction


E
I
 (b) Electron flow direction


E
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–12
Conventional current versus electron flow. In this book, we use conven-
tional current.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
1. Body A has a negative charge of 0.2 C and body B has a charge of 0.37 C
(positive). If 87  1012 electrons are transferred from A to B, what are the
charges in coulombs on A and on B after the transfer?
2. Brieﬂy describe the mechanism of voltage creation using the alkaline cell of
Figure 2–8 to illustrate.
3. When the switch in Figure 2–1 is open, the current is zero, yet free electrons 
in the copper wire are moving about. Describe their motion. Why does their
movement not constitute an electric current?
4. If 12.48  1020 electrons pass a certain point in a circuit in 2.5 s, what is the
current in amperes?
5. For Figure 2–1, assume a 12-V battery. The switch is closed for a short
interval, then opened. If I  6 A and the battery expends 230 040 J moving
charge through the circuit, how long was the switch closed?
Batteries
Batteries are the most common dc source. They are made in a variety of shapes,
sizes, and ratings, from miniaturized button batteries capable of delivering only
a few microamps to large automotive batteries capable of delivering hundreds
of amps. Common sizes are the AAA, AA, C, and D. All batteries use unlike
conductive electrodes immersed in an electrolyte. Chemical interaction
between the electrodes and the electrolyte creates the voltage of the battery.
We now look at some of the more common types—see Notes.
Primary and Secondary Batteries
Batteries eventually become “discharged.” Some types of batteries, however,
can be “recharged.” Such batteries are called secondary batteries. Other types,
called primary batteries, cannot be recharged. A familiar example of a sec-
ondary battery is the automobile battery. It can be recharged by passing current
2.5 Practical dc
Voltage Sources
NOTES...
Only a brief overview of various bat-
tery types is presented here. More
detailed information may be found
by searching the Internet.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

through it opposite to its discharge direction. A familiar example of a primary
cell is the flashlight battery.
Types of Batteries and Their Applications
The voltage of a battery, its service life, and other characteristics depend on the
material from which it is made.
Alkaline
These are popular, general-purpose batteries that are used in flashlights,
portable radios, TV remote controllers, cameras, toys, and so on. With a nom-
inal cell voltage of 1.5 V, they come in various sizes as depicted in Figure 2–13.
While some alkaline batteries are designed to be recharged, most are not.
Lithium
Lithium batteries (Figure 2–14) feature small size and long life (e.g., some
have shelf lives of 10 to 20 years). Applications include watches, pacemakers,
cameras, and battery backup of computer memories. Several types of lithium
cells are available, with voltages from of 2 V to 3.5 V and current ratings from
the microampere to the ampere range.
40
Chapter 2 | Voltage and Current
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–13
Alkaline batteries. From left
to right, a 9V rectangular battery, an AAA
cell, a D cell, an AA cell, and a C cell.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–14
An assortment of lithium
batteries. The battery on the computer
motherboard is for memory backup.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 2.5 | Practical dc Voltage Sources
41
Nickel-Cadmium (Ni-Cad)
Ni-Cads are general-purpose, rechargeable batteries that, although once popu-
lar, are gradually being superseded by NiMH and lithium ion batteries, which
have better performance characteristics and higher energy densities. Uses include
cordless power tools and home entertainment systems.
Nickel-Metal Hydride (NiMH)
NiMH batteries are rechargeable batteries that can have two to three times the
capacity of an equivalent-sized Ni-Cad battery. They are used for powering
electric vehicles, as well as in consumer electronics, such as cameras.
Lead-Acid
This is the familiar automotive battery. Its basic cell voltage is about 2 volts, but
typically, six cells are connected internally to provide 12 volts at its terminals.
Lead-acid batteries are capable of delivering large current (in excess of 100 A)
for short periods as required, for example, to start an automobile.
Battery Capacity
Batteries run down under use. However, an estimate of their useful life can be
determined from their capacity, that is, their ampere-hour rating. (The
ampere-hour rating of a battery is equal to the product of its current drain times
the length of time that you can expect to draw the specified current before the
battery becomes unusable.) For example, a battery rated at 200 Ah can theo-
retically supply 20 A for 10 h, or 5 A for 40 h, and so on. The relationship
between capacity, life, and current drain is
life  
cu
c
rr
a
e
p
n
a
t
c
d
it
r
y
ain

(2–8)
The capacity of batteries is not a fixed value as suggested above but is
affected by discharge rates, operating schedules, temperature, and other factors.
(For example, a battery discharged at a high rate will have a lower capacity
than the same battery discharged at a lower rate.) At best, therefore, capacity is
an estimate of expected life under certain conditions. To illustrate, consider
Figure 2–15. It shows a typical variation of capacity of a Ni-Cad battery with
changes in temperature.
100
90
80
70
60
50
215
25
5
15
25
35
Capacity (percent)
Temperature (C)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–15
Typical variation of capacity versus temperature for a Ni-Cad battery.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Other Characteristics
Because batteries are not perfect, their terminal voltage drops as the amount of
current drawn from them increases. (This issue is considered in Chapter 5.) In
addition, battery voltage is affected by temperature and other factors that affect
their chemical activity. However, these factors are not considered in this book.
42
Chapter 2 | Voltage and Current
Cells in Series and Parallel
Cells may be connected as in Figure 2–16 and Figure 2–17 to increase their
voltage and current capabilities. This is discussed in later chapters.
EXAMPLE 2–4       
Assume the battery of Figure 2–15 has a capacity of 240 Ah at 25	 C. What is
its capacity at 15	 C?
Solution
From the graph, capacity at –15° C is down to 65% of its value at
25° C. Thus, capacity  0.65  240  156 Ah.
1.5 V
(a) Total voltage is the
sum of the cell voltages
1.5 V

3V



 
 
1.5 V
1.5 V 
3V


(b) Schematic representation
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–16
Cells connected in series to
increase the available voltage.
(a) Terminal voltage remains
unchanged
1.5 V
1.5 V
1
2
1
2
1
2
Vout = 1.5 V
1.5 V
1.5 V
1.5 V


(b) Schematic representation
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–17
Cells connected in
parallel to increase the available
current. (Both must have the
same voltage.) Do not do this
for extended periods of time.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Electronic Power Supplies
Electronic systems such as TV sets, Blu-ray players, computers, and so on,
require dc for their internal circuit operation. Except for portable units, which
use batteries, they obtain their power from the commercial ac power lines by
means of built-in power supplies. Figure 2–18 shows a fixed voltage supply built
for such purposes. In other applications, variable voltage may be needed, as for
example during prototype development and circuit testing. Figure 2–19 shows a
remotely programmable, variable dc supply whose voltage and current can be
set remotely by the user.
Solar Cells
Solar cells convert light energy to electrical energy using photovoltaic means.
The basic cell consists of two layers of semiconductor material. When light
strikes the cell, many electrons gain enough energy to cross from one layer to
the other to create a dc voltage.
Solar energy has a number of practical applications.  Large solar farms, for
example (some covering nearly 1000 acres or 400 ha of land), use solar panels
to create dc which is then converted to ac and fed into the adjacent commercial
electrical power grid. Figure 2–20 shows a typical installation, built to serve the
needs of an Air Force base. Other, much smaller installations are found on
house rooftops in residential areas or on the roofs of commercial buildings. In
Section 2.5 | Practical dc Voltage Sources
43
Photo courtesy of Kepco Inc.
FIGURE 2–18
General-purpose 300 W
open frame power supply.
Photo courtesy of Kepco Inc.
FIGURE 2–19
Programmable power
supply. Voltage and current values may 
be set locally or by remote control. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

44
Chapter 2 | Voltage and Current
remote areas, solar panels are used to power communications systems and irri-
gation pumps. In space, they are used to power satellites. In everyday life, they
are used to power hand-held calculators.
AC Adapter
Many electronic devices—including laptop computers, answering machines, and
modems—utilize an ac adapter in order to provide dc for powering their circuits.
The adapter plugs into any standard 120 V ac outlet; converts ac to dc; and uses
this dc to power the desired device (such as the keyboard of Figure 2–21).
Voltage and current are usually measured in practice using a multimeter, an
instrument that combines voltage, current, and resistance (and sometimes other)
measuring functions in a single unit. While both digital and analog versions are
available, the hand-held digital multimeter (DMM), is by far the most popular
choice these days—see Notes. In terms of product choice, DMMs range from
Photo courtesy of United States Air Force, Nellis Air Force Base
FIGURE 2–20
Solar panel installation at
Nellis Air Force Base in Nevada. This
array of panels (which employs an
advanced sun tracking system) supplies a
significant percentage of the base’s electri-
cal power needs. 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–21
AC adapters are used as a
source of dc for many electronic devices.
2.6 Measuring Voltage
and Current
NOTES...
In this book, we consider only digital multimeters. However, a mini-tutorial
describing analog measurements may be found on our Web site at 
www.cengagebrain.com. Log in as per the instructions in the Preface and follow
the links to For Further Investigation and select Using Analog Multimeters.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 2.6 | Measuring Voltage and Current
45
inexpensive units such as those commonly used by home hobbyists to profes-
sional grade devices such as that shown in Figure 2–22.
Terminal Designations
Multimeters typically have a set of terminals marked V
, A, and COM that are
color coded red and black as in Figure 2–22(a). Terminal V
 is the terminal to
use to measure voltage and resistance, while terminal A is used for current
measurement. The terminal marked COM is the common terminal for all mea-
surements. (Some multimeters combine the V
 and A terminals into one ter-
minal marked V
A.) On some instruments the V
 terminal is called the 
terminal, and the COM terminal is called the  terminal. In the interests of
generality, we use the ,  designation in this book (Figure 2–23).
Courtesy of Fluke Corporation
(a) Hand-held digital multimeter
(DMM)
© Cengage Learning 2013
(b) Analog multimeter (VOM). Analog multimeters have
been largely superseded by DMMs.
FIGURE 2–22
Multimeters are multipurpose test instruments that combine the functions of a voltmeter, ammeter, and ohmmeter (plus some
secondary functions) into a single unit. Some instruments use terminal markings of V
 and COM, while others use a  and  designation.
Black and red color-coded test leads are industry standard.
NOTES...
DMMs as Learning Tools
Voltage and current as presented
earlier in this chapter are rather
abstract concepts involving energy,
charge, and charge movement.
Voltmeters and ammeters are intro-
duced at this point to help present
the ideas in more physically mean-
ingful terms. In particular, we con-
centrate on DMMs. Experience has
shown them to be powerful learning
tools. For example, when dealing
with the sometimes difﬁcult topics
of voltage polarity conventions, cur-
rent direction conventions, and so
on (as in later chapters), the use of
DMMs showing readings complete
with signs for voltage polarity and
current direction provides clarity and
aids understanding in a way that
simply drawing arrows and putting
numbers on diagrams does not. You
will ﬁnd that in the ﬁrst few chap-
ters of this book DMMs are used
for this purpose quite frequently.
(a) Set selector to V
to measure dc voltage


OFF
V
V
300mV
)))
A
A
V


47.2 V
47.2



OFF
V
V
300mV
)))
A
3.6
3.6 A (in)
3.6 A (out)
A
A
A
(b) Set selector to A
to measure dc current

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–23
Measuring voltage and current with a multimeter. Be sure to set the selector
switch to the correct function before you energize the circuit and connect the red lead to
the V
 () terminal and the black lead to the COM () terminal.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

How to Measure Current
As indicated by Figure 2–23(b), the current that you wish to measure must pass
through the meter. Consider Figure 2–25(a). To measure this current, open the
circuit as in (b) and insert the ammeter. The sign of the reading will be positive
if current enters the A or () terminal or negative if it enters the COM (or )
terminal as described in the Practical Notes.
46
Chapter 2 | Voltage and Current
Function Selection
DMMs generally include a function selector switch (or alternatively, a set of
push buttons) that permit you to select the quantity to be measured—such as
dc voltage, ac voltage, resistance, dc current, or ac current—and you must
set the meter to the desired function before you make a measurement,
(Figure 2–23). Note the symbols on the dial. The symbol 
denotes dc volt-
age, 
denotes ac voltage, 	 denotes resistance, and so on. When set to dc
volts, the meter measures and displays the voltage between its V	 (or )
and COM (or ) terminals as indicated in Figure 2–23(a); when set to dc
current, it measures the current passing through it, that is, the current enter-
ing its A (or ) terminal and leaving its COM (or ) terminal. Be sure to
note the sign of the measured quantity. (DMMs generally have an autopo-
larity feature that automatically determines the sign for you.) Thus, if the
meter is connected with its  lead connected to the  terminal of the source,
the display will show 47.2 V as indicated, while if the leads are reversed, the
display will show 47.2 V. Similarly, if the leads are reversed for current
measurement (so that current enters the COM terminal), the display will
show 3.6 A. Be sure to observe the standard color convention for test lead
connections—see Practical Notes.
How to Measure Voltage
Since voltage is the potential difference between two points, you measure volt-
age by placing the voltmeter leads across the component whose voltage you
wish to determine as we saw in Figure 2–23(a). Figure 2–24 shows another
example. To measure the voltage across the lamp, place one lead on each side
of the lamp as shown. If the meter is not autoscale and you have no idea how
large the voltage is, set the meter to its highest range, then work your way down
to avoid damage to the instrument.
Ã
V
NOTES...
Most DMMs have internal circuitry
that automatically selects the cor-
rect range for voltage measure-
ment. Such instruments are called
“autoranging” or “autoscaling”
devices.
E
Lamp
R


OFF
300mV
)))
V
70.3
V
V
A
A

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–24
To measure voltage, place
the voltmeter leads across the component
whose voltage you wish to determine. If
the voltmeter reading is positive, the point
where the red lead is connected is positive
with respect to the point where the black
lead is connected.
PRACTICAL NOTES...
Color-coded test leads (red and black) are industry standard. Standard practice
calls for you to insert the red lead into the V	 (i.e., ) socket of your meter, and
the black lead into the COM () socket. (This is a safety issue. If you follow this
practice you will know simply by looking at the probe which test lead is con-
nected to which socket on your meter.) Following this procedure, if the voltmeter
indicates a positive value, the point where the red lead is touching is positive with
respect to the point where the black lead is touching; inversely, if the meter indi-
cates negative, the point where the red lead is touching is negative with respect
to the point where the black lead is connected. For current measurements, if the
meter indicates a positive value, this means that the direction of current is into
the red, that is, () or V	A terminal and out of the black, that is, () or COM 
terminal; conversely, if the reading is negative, this means that the direction of
current is into the meter’s COM terminal and out of its () or V	A terminal.
CircuitSim 02-2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 2.7 | Switches, Fuses, and Circuit Breakers
47
R
E
16.7 mA
(a) Current to be measured


OFF
300mV
)))
A
mA
16.7
R
E
16.7 mA
(b) Ammeter correctly inserted
V
V
A
A

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–25
To measure current, insert the ammeter into the circuit so that the current
you wish to measure passes through the instrument. The reading is positive here because
current enters the  (A) terminal.
Meter Symbols
So far, we have shown meters pictorially. Usually, however, they are shown
schematically. The schematic symbol for a voltmeter is a circle with the letter
V, while the symbol for an ammeter is a circle with the letter I. The circuits of
Figures 2–24 and 2–25 have been redrawn (Figure 2–26) to indicate this.
(a) Voltmeter
R
E
V
(b) Ammeter
I
E
R


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–26
Schematic symbols for voltmeter and ammeter.
CircuitSim 02-3 
PRACTICAL NOTES...
1. One sometimes hears state-
ments such as “. . . the voltage
through a resistor” or “. . . the
current across a resistor.” These
statements are incorrect. Voltage
does not pass through anything;
voltage is a potential difference
and appears across things. This
is why we connect a voltmeter
across components to measure
their voltage. Similarly, current
does not appear across anything;
current is a ﬂow of charge that
passes through circuit elements.
This is why we put the ammeter
in the current path—to measure
the current in it. Thus, the cor-
rect statements are “. . . voltage
across the resistor . . .” and “. . .
current through the resistor. . . .”
2. Do not connect ammeters directly
across a voltage source. Ammeters
have nearly zero resistance and
damage will probably result.
(b) Closed
I
E
© Cengage Learning 2013
(a) Open
E
FIGURE 2–27
Single-pole, single-throw
(SPST) switch.
2.7 Switches, Fuses,
and Circuit
Breakers
Switches
The most basic switch is a single-pole, single-throw (SPST) switch as shown
in Figure 2–27. With the switch open, the current path is broken and the lamp
is off; with it closed, the lamp is on. This type of switch is used, for example,
for light switches in homes.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

48
Chapter 2 | Voltage and Current
Figure 2–28(a) shows a single-pole, double-throw (SPDT) switch. Two of
these switches may be used as in (b) for two-way control of a light. This type
of arrangement is sometimes used for stairway lights; you can turn the light on
or off from either the bottom or the top of the stairs.
Many other configurations of switches exist in practice. However, we will
leave the topic at this point.
Fuses and Circuit Breakers
Fuses and circuit breakers are wired into a circuit between the source and the
load as illustrated in Figure 2–29 to protect equipment or wiring against exces-
sive current. For example, in your home, if you connect too many appliances to
an outlet, the fuse or circuit breaker in your electrical panel “blows.” This opens
the circuit to protect against overloading and possible fire. Fuses and circuit
breakers may also be installed in equipment such as your automobile to protect
against internal faults. Figure 2–30 shows a variety of fuses and breakers.
Fuses use a metallic element that melts when current exceeds a preset
value. Thus, if a fuse is rated at 3 A, it will “blow” if more than 3 amps passes
through it. Fuses are made as fast-blow and slow-blow types. Fast-blow fuses
are very fast; typically, they blow in a fraction of a second. Slow-blow fuses,
on the other hand, react more slowly so that they do not blow on small, momen-
tary overloads.
Circuit breakers work on a different principle. When the current exceeds the
rated value of a breaker, the magnetic field produced by the excessive current
operates a mechanism that trips open a switch. After the fault or overload con-
dition has been cleared, the breaker can be reset and used again. Since they are
mechanical devices, their operation is slower than that of a fuse; thus, they do
not “pop” on momentary overloads as, for example, when you start a motor.
(b) Two-way switch control of a light
E
(a) SPDT switch
1
2
Switch 1
Switch 2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–28
Single-pole, single-throw (SPDT) switch.
Load
Source
Fuse
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–29
Using a fuse to protect a circuit.
CircuitSim 02-4 
Y
our company is considering the purchase of an electrostatic air cleaner
system for one of its facilities and your supervisor has asked you to prepare
a short presentation for the Board of Directors. Members of the Board under-
stand basic electrical theory but are unfamiliar with the specifics of electro-
static air cleaners. Go to your library (physics books are a good reference) or
the Internet and research and prepare a short description of the electrostatic
air cleaner. Include a diagram and a description of how it works.
Putting It into Practice
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
49
(a) A variety of fuses and circuit breakers
© Cengage Learning 2013
(b) Fuse symbols
(c) Circuit breaker
symbols
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–30
Fuses and circuit breakers.
Problems
2.1
Atomic Theory Review
1. How many free electrons are there in the following at room temperature?
a. 1 cubic meter of copper
b. a 5 m length of copper wire whose diameter is 0.163 cm
2. Two charges are separated by a certain distance, Figure 2–31. How is the
force between them affected if
a. the magnitudes of both charges are doubled?
b. the distance between the charges is tripled?
3. Two charges are separated by a certain distance. If the magnitude of one
charge is doubled and the other tripled and the distance between them
halved, how is the force affected?
4. A certain material has 4 electrons in its valence shell and a second material
has 1. Which is the better conductor?
5. a. What makes a material a good conductor? (In your answer, consider
valence shells and free electrons.)
b. Besides being a good conductor, list two other reasons why copper is so
widely used.
c. What makes a material a good insulator?
d. Normally air is an insulator. However, during lightning discharges, conduc-
tion occurs. Brieﬂy discuss the mechanism of charge ﬂow in this discharge.
6. a. Although gold is very expensive, it is sometimes used in electronics as a
plating on contacts. Why?
b. Why is aluminum sometimes used when its conductivity is only about
60% as good as that of copper?
Q1
Q2
r
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–31
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.2
The Unit of Electrical Charge: The Coulomb
7. Compute the electrical force between the following charges and state
whether it is attractive or repulsive.
a. A  1 C charge and a 7 C charge, separated 10 mm
b. Q1  8 C and Q2  4 C, separated 12 cm
c. Two electrons separated by 12  108 m
d. An electron and a proton separated by 5.3  1011 m
e. An electron and a neutron separated by 5.7  1011 m
8. What do we mean when we say that a body is “charged?”
9. The force between a positive charge and a negative charge that are 2 cm apart
is 180 N. If Q1  4 C, what is Q2? Is the force attraction or repulsion?
10. If you could place a charge of 1 C on each of two bodies separated 
25 cm center to center, what would be the force between them in newtons?
In tons?
11. The force of repulsion between two charges separated by 50 cm is 0.02 N. 
If Q2  5Q1, determine the charges and their possible signs.
12. How many electrons does a charge of 1.63 C represent?
13. Determine the charge possessed by 19  1013 electrons.
14. An electrically neutral metal plate acquires a negative charge of 47 C. How
many electrons were added to it?
15. A metal plate has 14.6  1013 electrons added. Later, 1.3 C of charge is
added. If the ﬁnal charge on the plate is 5.6 C, what was its initial charge?
2.3
Voltage
16. Sliding off a chair and touching someone can result in a shock. 
Explain why.
17. If 360 joules of energy are required to transfer 15 C of charge through the
lamp of Figure 2–1, what is the voltage of the battery?
18. If 600 J of energy are required to move 9.36  1019 electrons from one point
to the other, what is the potential difference between the two points?
19. If 1.2 kJ of energy are required to move 500 mC from one point to another,
what is the voltage between the two points?
20. How much energy is required to move 20 mC of charge through the lamp of
Figure 2–24?
21. How much energy is gained by a charge of 0.5 C as it moves through a
potential difference of 8.5 kV?
22. If the voltage between two points is 100 V, how much energy is required to
move an electron between the two points?
23. Given a voltage of 12 V for the battery in Figure 2–1, how much charge is
moved through the lamp if it takes 57 J of energy to move it?
2.4
Current
24. For the circuit of Figure 2–1, if 27 C pass through the lamp in 9 seconds,
what is the current in amperes?
25. If 250 C pass through the ammeter of Figure 2–32 in 5 ms, what will the
meter read?
50
Chapter 2 | Voltage and Current
E
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–32
NOTES...
All spacings in these questions are
center-to-center.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

26. If the current I  4 A in Figure 2–1, how many coulombs pass through 
the lamp in 7 ms?
27. How much charge passes through the circuit of Figure 2–25 in 
20 ms?
28. How long does it take for 100 C to pass a point if the current is 
25 mA?
29. If 93.6  1012 electrons pass through a lamp in 5 ms, what is the current?
30. The charge passing through a wire is given by q  10t  4, where q is in
coulombs and t in seconds,
a. How much charge has passed at t  5 s?
b. How much charge has passed at t  8 s?
c. What is the current in amps?
31. The charge passing through a wire is q  (80t  20) C. What is the 
current? Hint: Choose two arbitrary values of time and proceed as in
Question 30, or use calculus if you know how.
32. How long does it take 312  1019 electrons to pass through the circuit of
Figure 2–32 if the ammeter reads 8 A?
33. If 1353.6 J are required to move 47  1019 electrons through the lamp of
Figure 2–32 in 1.3 min, what are E and I?
2.5
Practical dc Voltage Sources
34. What do we mean by dc? By ac?
35. Consider three batteries connected as in Figure 2–33.
a. If E1  1.47 V, E2  1.61 V, and E3  1.58 V, what is ET?
b. If the connection to source 3 is reversed, what is ET?
36. How do you charge a secondary battery? Make a sketch. Can you charge a
primary battery?
37. A battery rated 1400 mAh supplies 28 mA to a load. How long can it be
expected to last?
38. The battery of Figure 2–15 is expected to last 17 h at a current drain of
1.5 A at 25	 C. How long do you expect it to last at 5	 C at a current drain
of 0.8 A?
39. The battery of Figure 2–15 is rated at 81 Ah at 5	 C. What is the expected
life (in hours) at a current draw of 5 A at 15	 C?
2.6
Measuring Voltage and Current
40. The digital voltmeters of Figure 2–34 have autopolarity. For each case,
determine the readings.
41. The current in the circuit of Figure 2–35 is 9.17 mA. Which ammeter
correctly indicates the current? (a) Meter 1, (b) Meter 2, (c) both.
42. Redraw the circuit of Figure 2–35 using schematic symbols for ammeters
instead of multimeter pictorials.
43. Current in the circuit of Figure 2–36 is 7 A. What are the expected readings
for Meter 1 and Meter 2?
44. What is wrong with the statement that the voltage through the lamp of 
Figure 2–24 is 70.3 V?
45. What is wrong with the metering scheme shown in Figure 2–37? Fix it.
Problems
51
E1
ET
E2
E3


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–33
CircuitSim 02-5 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52
Chapter 2 | Voltage and Current
(a)
25 V


OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

(b)
25 V


OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

V
V
A
A
(c)
10 V
4 V


OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

(d)
10 V
4 V


OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–34


OFF
300mV
)))
A


OFF
300mV
)))
A
Meter 2
Meter 1
9.17 mA
V
V
A
A
V
V
A
A


© Cengage Learning 2013


OFF
300mV
)))
A
V
V
A
A

Meter 2
Meter 1
© Cengage Learning 2013


OFF
300mV
)))
A
V
V
A
A

FIGURE 2–35
FIGURE 2–36
E
I
V
Lamp
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 2–37
What is wrong here?
CircuitSim 02-6 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2.7
Switches, Fuses, and Circuit Breakers
46. We wish to control a light using two switches as indicated in Table 2–1.
Draw the required circuit.
47. Fuses have a current rating so that you can select the proper size to protect a
circuit against overcurrent. They also have a voltage rating. Why? Hint: Read
the section on insulators, Section 2.1.
Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
53
Switch 1
Switch 2
Lamp
Open
Open
Off
Open
Closed
On
Closed
Open
On
Closed
Closed
On
TABLE 2–1
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. An atom consists of a nucleus of protons and neutrons orbited by electrons.
The nucleus is positive because protons are positive, but the atom is neutral
because it contains the same number of electrons as protons, and their
charges cancel.
2. The valence shell is the outermost shell. It contains the atom’s valence electrons.
The number of electrons in this shell determines the properties of the material
with regard to whether it is a conductor, insulator, or semiconductor.
3. The force between charged particles is proportional to the product of their
charges and inversely proportional to the square of their spacing. Since force
decreases as the square of the spacing, electrons far from the nucleus experi-
ence little force of attraction.
4. If a loosely bound electron gains sufﬁcient energy, it may break free from its
parent atom and wander throughout the material. Such an electron is called a
free electron. For materials like copper, heat (thermal energy) can give an
electron enough energy to dislodge it from its parent atom.
5. A normal atom is neutral because it has the same number of electrons as pro-
tons and their charges cancel. An atom that has lost an electron is called a
positive ion, while an atom that has gained an electron is called a negative ion.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
1. QA  13.7 C (pos.), QB  13.6 C (neg.)
2. Chemical action creates an excess of electrons in the zinc mixture and a deﬁ-
ciency in the manganese dioxide mix. This separation of charges results in a
voltage of 1.5 V. The zinc mixture is connected to the top end cap by the
steel can (making it the positive electrode) and the manganese dioxide mix-
ture is connected to the bottom of the can by the brass pin (making it the
negative electrode).
3. Motion is random. Since the net movement in all directions is zero, current is
zero.
4. 80 A
5. 3195 s
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
American Wire Gauge
(AWG)
Conductance
Diode
Ohmmeter
Open Circuit
Photocell
Resistance
Resistivity
Short Circuit
Superconductor
Temperature Coefﬁcient
Thermistor
Varistor
I OUTLINE
Resistance of Conductors
Electrical Wire Tables
Resistance of Wires—
Circular Mils
Temperature Effects
Types of Resistors
Color Coding of Resistors
Measuring Resistance—
The Ohmmeter
Thermistors
Photoconductive Cells
Nonlinear Resistance
Conductance
Superconductors
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• calculate the resistance of a section of a 
conductor, given its cross-sectional area
and length,
• convert between areas measured in square
mils, square meters, and circular mils,
• use tables of wire data to obtain the cross-
sectional dimensions of various gauges of
wire and predict the allowable current for a
particular gauge of wire,
• use the temperature coefﬁcient of a material
to calculate the change in resistance as the
temperature of the sample changes,
• use resistor color codes to determine the
resistance and tolerance of a given ﬁxed-
composition resistor,
• demonstrate the procedure for using an
ohmmeter to determine circuit continuity and
to measure the resistance of both an iso-
lated component and one that is located in 
a circuit,
• develop an understanding of various ohmic
devices such as thermistors and photocells,
• develop an understanding of the resistance
of nonlinear devices such as varistors and
diodes,
• calculate the conductance of any resistive
component.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
RESISTANCE
Y
ou have been introduced to the concepts of voltage and current in previous chapters and
have found that current involves the movement of charge. In a conductor, the charge carri-
ers are the free electrons that are moved due to the voltage of an externally applied source.
As these electrons move through the material, they constantly collide with atoms and other
electrons within the conductor. In a process similar to friction, the moving electrons give up
some of their energy in the form of heat. These collisions represent an opposition to charge
movement that is called resistance. The greater the opposition (i.e., the greater the resistance),
the smaller will be the current for a given applied voltage.
Circuit components (called resistors) are speciﬁcally designed to possess resistance and
are used in almost all electronic and electrical circuits. Although the resistor is the simplest
component in any circuit, its effect is very important in determining the operation of a circuit.
Resistance is represented by the symbol R (Figure 3–1) and is measured in units of ohms
(after Georg Simon Ohm). The symbol for ohms is the capital Greek letter omega ().
In this chapter, we examine resistance in its various forms. Beginning with metallic conductors,
we study the factors that affect resistance in conductors. Following this, we look at commercial
resistors, including both ﬁxed and variable types. We then discuss important nonlinear resistance
devices and conclude with an overview of superconductivity and its potential impact and use. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
R
E
Resistor
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–1
Basic resistive circuit.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

56
Chapter 3 | Resistance
As mentioned in the chapter preview, conductors are materials that permit the
ﬂow of charge. However, conductors do not all behave the same way. Rather,
we ﬁnd that the resistance of a material is dependent upon several factors:
• Type of material
• Length of the conductor
• Cross-sectional area
• Temperature
If a certain length of wire is subjected to a current, the moving electrons
will collide with other electrons within the material. Differences at the atomic
level of various materials cause variation in how the collisions affect resistance.
For example, silver has more free electrons than copper, and so the resistance
of a silver wire will be less than the resistance of a copper wire having the iden-
tical dimensions. We may therefore conclude the following:
Putting It in Perspective
Georg Simon Ohm and Resistance
ONE OF THE FUNDAMENTAL RELATIONSHIPS of circuit theory is that between voltage, current, and resis-
tance. This relationship and the properties of resistance were investigated by the German physicist
Georg Simon Ohm (1787–1854) using a circuit similar to that of Figure 3–1. Working with Volta’s
recently developed battery and wires of different materials, lengths, and thicknesses, Ohm found
that current depended on both voltage and resistance. For a ﬁxed resistance, he found that dou-
bling the voltage doubled the current, tripling the voltage tripled the current, and so on. Also, for a
ﬁxed voltage, Ohm found that the opposition to current was directly proportional to the length of
the wire and inversely proportional to its cross-sectional area. From this, he was able to deﬁne the
resistance of a wire and show that current was inversely proportional to this resistance; that is,
when he doubled the resistance, he found that the current decreased to half of its former value.
These two results when combined form what is known as Ohm’s law. (You will study Ohm’s
law in great detail in Chapter 4.) Ohm’s results are of such fundamental importance that they 
represent the real beginnings of what we now call electrical circuit analysis. I
Hulton Archive/Getty Images
3.1 Resistance 
of Conductors
56
Chapter 3 | Resistance
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The resistance of a conductor is dependent upon the type of material.
If we were to double the length of the wire, we can expect that the number
of collisions over the length of the wire would double, thereby causing the
resistance to also double. This effect may be summarized as follows:
The resistance of a metallic conductor is directly proportional to the length
of the conductor.
A somewhat less intuitive property of a conductor is the effect of cross-
sectional area on the resistance. As the cross-sectional area is increased, the
moving electrons are able to move more freely through the conductor, just as
water moves more freely through a large-diameter pipe than a small-diameter
pipe. If the cross-sectional area is doubled, the electrons would be involved in
half as many collisions over the length of the wire. We may summarize this
effect as follows:
The resistance of a metallic conductor is inversely proportional to the
cross-sectional area of the conductor.
The factors governing the resistance of a conductor at a given temperature
may be summarized mathematically as follows:
R  r
A

[ohms, ]
(3–1)
where
r  resistivity, in ohm-meters (-m)
  length, in meters (m)
A  cross-sectional area, in square meters (m2).
In the previous equation the lowercase Greek letter rho (r) is the constant of
proportionality and is called the resistivity of the material. Resistivity is a
physical property of a material and is measured in ohm-meters (-m) in the SI
system. Table 3–1 lists the resistivities of various materials at a temperature of
20 C. The effects on resistance due to changes in temperature will be exam-
ined in Section 3.4.
Since most conductors are circular, as shown in Figure 3–2, we may
determine the cross-sectional area from either the radius or the diameter as
follows:
A  pr2  p
d
2

2
 p
4
d2

(3–2)
Section 3.1 | Resistance of Conductors
57
Resistivity, , 
Material
at 20 C (-m)
Silver
1.645  108
Copper
1.723  108
Gold
2.443  108
Aluminum
2.825  108
Tungsten
5.485  108
Iron
12.30  108
Lead
22  108
Mercury
95.8  108
Nichrome
99.72  108
Carbon
3500  108
Germanium
20–2300*
Silicon
500*
Wood
108–1014
Glass
1010–1014
Mica
1011–1015
Hard rubber
1013–1016
Amber
5  1014
Sulphur
1  1015
Teﬂon
1  1016
*The resistivities of these materials are depen-
dent upon the impurities within the materials.
TABLE 3–1
Resistivity of Materials, 
© Cengage Learning 2013
A = pr2 = pd2
4  
l
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–2
Conductor with a circular cross section.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58
Chapter 3 | Resistance
EXAMPLE 3–1       
Most homes use solid copper wire having a diameter of 1.63 mm to provide
electrical distribution to outlets and light sockets. Determine the resistance of
75 meters of a solid copper wire having the above diameter.
Solution
We will ﬁrst calculate the cross-sectional area of the wire using
Equation 3–2.
A  p
4
d2

 
p(1.63 
4
103 m)2

 2.09  106 m2
Now, using Table 3–1, the resistance of the length of wire is found as
R  r
A


 0.619 
(1.723  108 -m)(75 m)

2.09  106 m2
Find the resistance of a 100-m long tungsten wire that has a circular cross 
section with a diameter of 0.1 mm (T  20 C).
Answer
698 
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
EXAMPLE 3–2       
Bus bars are bare solid conductors (usually rectangular) used to carry large
currents within buildings such as power generating stations, telephone
exchanges, and large factories. Given a piece of aluminum bus bar as shown
in Figure 3–3, determine the resistance between the ends of this bar at a tem-
perature of 20 C.
Solution
The cross-sectional area is
A  (150 mm)(6 mm)
 (0.15 m)(0.006 m)
 0.0009 m2
 9.00  104 m2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.2 | Electrical Wire Tables
59
Although the SI system is the standard measurement for electrical and other phys-
ical quantities, the English system is still used extensively in the United States and
to a lesser degree throughout the rest of the English-speaking world. One area that
has been slow to convert to the SI system is the designation of cables and wires,
where the American Wire Gauge (AWG) is the primary system used to denote
wire diameters. In this system, each wire diameter is assigned a wire gauge
number. As Figure 3–4 shows, the higher the AWG number, the smaller the diam-
eter of the cable or wire, for example, AWG 22-gauge wire is a smaller diameter
than AWG 14 gauge. Since resistance is inversely proportional to the square of
the diameter, a given length of 22-gauge wire will have more resistance than an
equal length of 14-gauge wire. Because of the difference in resistance, we can
intuitively deduce that large-diameter cables will be able to handle more current
than smaller-diameter cables. Table 3–2 provides a listing of data for standard
bare copper wire.
Even though Table 3–2 provides data for solid conductors up to AWG 40,
most applications do not use solid conductor sizes beyond AWG 10. Solid
conductors are difficult to bend and are easily damaged by mechanical flexing.
FIGURE 3–4
Typical conductor cross-
sections (actual size).
The resistance between the ends of the bus bar is determined as
R  r
A


 8.48  103   8.48 m
(2.825  108 -m)(270 m)

9.00  104 m2
150 mm
6 mm
Aluminum
l = 270 m
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–3
Conductor with a rectangular cross section.
1. Given two lengths of wire having identical dimensions, if one wire is made of
copper and the other is made of iron, which wire will have the greater
resistance? How much greater will the resistance be?
2. Given two pieces of copper wire that have the same cross-sectional area,
determine the relative resistance of the one that is twice as long as the other.
3. Given two pieces of copper wire that have the same length, determine the
relative resistance of the one that has twice the diameter of the other.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
3.2 Electrical Wire
Tables
© Cengage Learning 2013
10 AWG
4 AWG
3/0 AWG
750 MCM
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60
Chapter 3 | Resistance
*This current is suitable for single conductors and surface or loose wiring.
†This current may be accommodated in up to three wires in a sheathed cable. For four to six wires, the current in each wire must be reduced to 80% of the
indicated value. For seven to nine wires, the current in each wire must be reduced to 70% of the indicated value.
Size
Diameter
Area
Resistance
Current Capacity
(AWG)
(inches)
(mm)
(CM)
(mm2)
(/1000 ft)
(A)
56
0.0005
0.012
0.240
0.000122
43 200
54
0.0006
0.016
0.384
0.000195
27 000
52
0.0008
0.020
0.608
0.000308
17 000
50
0.0010
0.025
0.980
0.000497
10 600
48
0.0013
0.032
1.54
0.000779
6 750
46
0.0016
0.040
2.46
0.00125
4 210
45
0.0019
0.047
3.10
0.00157
3 350
44
0.0020
0.051
4.00
0.00243
2 590
43
0.0022
0.056
4.84
0.00245
2 140
42
0.0025
0.064
6.25
0.00317
1 660
41
0.0028
0.071
7.84
0.00397
1 320
40
0.0031
0.079
9.61
0.00487
1 080
39
0.0035
0.089
12.2
0.00621
847
38
0.0040
0.102
16.0
0.00811
648
37
0.0045
0.114
20.2
0.0103
521
36
0.0050
0.127
25.0
0.0127
415
35
0.0056
0.142
31.4
0.0159
331
34
0.0063
0.160
39.7
0.0201
261
33
0.0071
0.180
50.4
0.0255
206
32
0.0080
0.203
64.0
0.0324
162
31
0.0089
0.226
79.2
0.0401
131
30
0.0100
0.254
100
0.0507
104
29
0.0113
0.287
128
0.0647
81.2
28
0.0126
0.320
159
0.0804
65.3
27
0.0142
0.361
202
0.102
51.4
26
0.0159
0.404
253
0.128
41.0
0.75*
25
0.0179
0.455
320
0.162
32.4
24
0.0201
0.511
404
0.205
25.7
1.3*
23
0.0226
0.574
511
0.259
20.3
22
0.0253
0.643
640
0.324
16.2
2.0*
21
0.0285
0.724
812
0.412
12.8
20
0.0320
0.813
1 020
0.519
10.1
3.0*
19
0.0359
0.912
1 290
0.653
8.05
18
0.0403
1.02
1 620
0.823
6.39
5.0†
17
0.0453
1.15
2 050
1.04
5.05
16
0.0508
1.29
2 580
1.31
4.02
10.0†
15
0.0571
1.45
3 260
1.65
3.18
14
0.0641
1.63
4 110
2.08
2.52
15.0†
13
0.0720
1.83
5 180
2.63
2.00
12
0.0808
2.05
6 530
3.31
1.59
20.0†
11
0.0907
2.30
8 230
4.17
1.26
10
0.1019
2.588
10 380
5.261
0.998 8
30.0†
9
0.1144
2.906
13 090
6.632
0.792 5
8
0.1285
3.264
16 510
8.367
0.628 1
7
0.1443
3.665
20 820
10.55
0.498 1
6
0.1620
4.115
26 240
13.30
0.395 2
5
0.1819
4.620
33 090
16.77
0.313 4
4
0.2043
5.189
41 740
21.15
0.248 5
3
0.2294
5.827
52 620
26.67
0.197 1
2
0.2576
6.543
66 360
33.62
0.156 3
1
0.2893
7.348
83 690
42.41
0.123 9
10
0.3249
8.252
105 600
53.49
0.098 25
20
0.3648
9.266
133 100
67.43
0.077 93
30
0.4096
10.40
167 800
85.01
0.061 82
40
0.4600
11.68
211 600
107.2
0.049 01
TABLE 3–2
Standard Solid Copper Wire at 20 C
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.2 | Electrical Wire Tables
61
FIGURE 3–5
Stranded wire (7 strands).
For this reason, large-diameter cables are nearly always stranded rather than
solid. Stranded wires and cables use anywhere from seven strands, as shown in
Figure 3–5, to in excess of a hundred strands.
As one might expect, stranded wire uses the same AWG notation as solid
wire. Consequently, AWG 10 stranded wire will have the same cross-sectional
conductor area as AWG 10 solid wire. However, due to the additional space lost
between the conductors, the stranded wire will have a larger overall diameter
than the solid wire. Also, because the individual strands are coiled as a helix,
the overall strand length will be slightly longer than the cable length.
Wire tables similar to Table 3–2 are available for stranded copper cables
and for cables constructed of other materials (notably aluminum).
By examining Table 3–2, several important points may be observed:
• If the wire size increases by three gauge sizes, the cross-sectional area will
approximately double. Since resistance is inversely proportional to cross-
sectional area, a given length of larger-diameter cable will have a resistance that
is approximately half as large as the resistance of a similar length of the smaller-
diameter cable.
• If there is a difference of three gauge sizes between cables, then the larger-
diameter cable will be able to handle approximately twice as much current
as the smaller-diameter cable. The amount of current that a conductor can
safely handle is directly proportional to the cross-sectional area.
• If the wire size increases by ten gauge sizes, the cross-sectional area will
increase by a factor of about ten. Due to the inverse relationship between
resistance and cross-sectional area, the larger-diameter cable will have about
one-tenth the resistance of a similar length of the smaller-diameter cable.
• For a 10-gauge difference in cable sizes, the larger-diameter cable will have
ten times the cross-sectional area of the smaller-diameter cable and so it will
be able to handle approximately ten times more current.
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 3–3        
Calculate the resistance of 200 feet of AWG 16 solid copper wire at 20 C.
Solution
From Table 3–2, we see that AWG 16 wire has a resistance of 
4.02  per 1000 feet. Since we are given a length of only 200 feet, the resistance
will be determined as
R 
1
4
0
.0
0
2
0

ft
(200 ft)  0.804 
EXAMPLE 3–4        
If AWG 14 solid copper wire is able to handle 15 A of current, determine the
expected current capacity of AWG 24 and AWG 8 copper wire at 20 C.
Solution
Since AWG 24 is ten sizes smaller than AWG 14, the smaller cable
will be able to handle about one-tenth the capacity of the larger-diameter cable.
AWG 24 will be able to handle approximately 1.5 A of current.
AWG 8 is six sizes larger than AWG 14. Since current capacity doubles for
an increase of three sizes, AWG 11 would be able to handle 30 A and AWG 8
will be able to handle 60 A.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

62
Chapter 3 | Resistance
The American Wire Gauge system for specifying wire diameters was devel-
oped using a unit called the circular mil (CM), which is deﬁned as the area con-
tained within a circle having a diameter of 1 mil (1 mil  0.001 inch). A square
mil is deﬁned as the area contained in a square having side dimensions of 1 mil.
From Figure 3–6, it is apparent that the area of a circular mil is smaller than the
area of a square mil.
FIGURE 3–6
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
1. From Table 3–2 ﬁnd the diameters in millimeters and the cross-sectional 
areas in square millimeters of AWG 19 and AWG 30 solid wire.
2. By using the cross-sectional areas for AWG 19 and AWG 30, approximate 
the areas that AWG 16 and AWG 40 should have.
3. Compare the actual cross-sectional areas as listed in Table 3–2 to the areas
found in Problems 1 and 2. (You will ﬁnd a slight variation between your 
calculated values and the actual areas. This is because the actual diameters of
the wires have been adjusted to provide optimum sizes for manufacturing.)
Answers
1. dAWG19  0.912 mm
AAWG19  0.653 mm2
dAWG30  0.254 mm
AAWG30  0.0507 mm2
2. AAWG16  1.31 mm2
AAWG40  0.0051 mm2
3. AAWG16  1.31 mm2
AAWG40  0.00487 mm2
1. AWG 12-gauge wire is able to safely handle 20 amps of current. How much
current should an AWG 2-gauge cable be able to handle?
2. The electrical code actually permits up to 120 A for the cable in Problem 1.
How does the actual value compare to your theoretical value? Why do you
think there is a difference?
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
3.3 Resistance of
Wires—Circular
Mils
0.001 inch
(1 mil)
(a) Circular mil
1 mil
1 mil
(b) Square mil
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Because not all conductors have circular cross sections, it is occasionally
necessary to convert areas expressed in square mils into circular mils. We will
now determine the relationship between the circular mil and the square mil.
Suppose that a wire has the circular cross section shown in Figure 3–6(a).
By applying Equation 3–2, the area, in square mils, of the circular cross sec-
tion is determined as follows:
A  p
4
d2

 
p(1
4
mil)2

 p
4
 sq. mil
From the above derivation the following relations must apply:
1 CM  p
4
 sq. mil
(3–3)
1 sq. mil  p
4
 CM
(3–4)
The greatest advantage of using the circular mil to express areas of wires
is the simplicity with which calculations may be made. Unlike previous area
calculations which involved the use of p, area calculations may be reduced to
simply finding the square of the diameter.
If we are given a circular cross section with a diameter d (in mils), the area
of this cross section is determined as
A  p
4
d2

[square mils]
Using Equation 3–4, we convert the area from square mils to circular mils.
Consequently, if the diameter of a circular conductor is given in mils, we deter-
mine the area in circular mils as
ACM  dmil2 [circular mils, CM]
(3–5)
Section 3.3 | Resistance of Wires—Circular Mils
63
EXAMPLE 3–5        
Determine the cross-sectional area in circular mils of a wire having the 
following diameters:
a. 0.0159 inch (AWG 26 wire)
b. 0.500 inch
Solution
a. d  0.0159 inch
 (0.0159 inch)(1000 milsinch)
 15.9 mils
Now, using Equation 3–5, we obtain
ACM  (15.9)2  253 CM
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Example 3–5(b) we see that the cross-sectional area of a cable may be a
large number when it is expressed in circular mils. In order to simplify the units
for area, the Roman numeral M is often used to represent 1000. If a wire has a
cross-sectional area of 250 000 CM, it is more easily written as 250 MCM.
Clearly, this is a departure from the SI system, where M is used to repre-
sent one million. Since there is no simple way to overcome this conflict, the
student working with cable areas expressed in MCM will need to remember
that the M stands for one thousand and not for one million.
64
Chapter 3 | Resistance
From Table 3–2, we see that the previous result is precisely the area given for 
AWG 26 wire.
b. d  0.500 inch
 (0.500 inch)(1000 milsinch)
 500 mils
ACM  (500)2  250 000 CM
EXAMPLE 3–6       
a. Determine the cross-sectional area in square mils and in circular mils of a
copper bus bar having cross-sectional dimensions of 0.250 inch  6.00 inch.
b. If this copper bus bar were to be replaced by AWG 20 cables, how many
cables would be required?
Solution
a. Asq. mil  (250 mils)(6000 mils)
 1 500 000 sq. mils
The area in circular mils is found by applying Equation 3–4, and this will be
ACM(250 mils)(6000 mils)
(1 500 000 sq. mils)p
4
 CMsq. mil
1 910 000 CM
1910 MCM
b. From Table 3–2, we see that AWG 20 cable has a cross-sectional area of
133.1 MCM (133 100 CM), and so the bus bar is equivalent to the fol-
lowing number of cables:
n  
1
1
3
9
3
1
.
0
1
M
M
C
C
M
M
  14.4
This example illustrates that 15 cables would need to be installed to be
equivalent to a single 6-inch by 0.25-inch bus bar. Due to the expense and awk-
wardness of using this many cables, we see the economy of using solid bus bar.
The main disadvantage of using bus bar is that the conductor is not covered with
an insulation, and so the bus bar does not offer the same protection as cable.
However, since bus bar is generally used in locations where only experienced
technicians are permitted access, this disadvantage is a minor one.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.3 | Resistance of Wires—Circular Mils
65
As we have seen in Section 3.1, the resistance of a conductor was deter-
mined to be
R  r
A

Although the original equation used SI units, the equation will also apply
if the units are expressed in any other convenient system. If cable length is gen-
erally expressed in feet and the area in circular mils, then the resistivity must
be expressed in the appropriate units. Table 3–3 gives the resistivities of some
conductors represented in circular mil-ohms per foot.
The following example illustrates how Table 3–3 may be used to determine
the resistance of a given section of wire.
Resistivity, , 
Material
at 20 C (CM-ft)
Silver
9.90
Copper
10.36
Gold
14.7
Aluminum
17.0
Tungsten
33.0
Iron
74.0
Lead
132.
Mercury
576.
Nichrome
600.
TABLE 3–3
Resistivity of Conductors, 
EXAMPLE 3–7        
Determine the resistance of an AWG 16 copper wire at 20 C if the wire has a
diameter of 0.0508 inch and a length of 400 feet.
Solution
The diameter in mils is found as
d  0.0508 inch  50.8 mils
Therefore the cross-sectional area (in circular mils) of AWG 16 is
ACM  50.82  2580 CM
Now, by applying Equation 3–1 and using the appropriate units, we obtain the
following:
R  A
r
C

M


 1.61 
10.36 
CM
ft
-
(400 ft)

2580 CM
1. Determine the resistance of 1 mile (5280 feet) of AWG 19 copper wire at
20 C, if the cross-sectional area is 1290 CM.
2. Compare the above result with the value that would be obtained by using
the resistance (in ohms per thousand feet) given in Table 3–2.
3. An aluminum conductor having a cross-sectional area of 1843 MCM 
is used to transmit power from a high-voltage dc (HVDC) generating 
station to a large urban center. If the city is 900 km from the generating
station, determine the resistance of the conductor at a temperature of
20 C. (Use 1 ft  0.3048 m.)
Answers
1. 42.4 ; 2. 42.5 ; 3. 27.2 
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The rate at which the resistance of a material changes with a variation in
temperature is dependent on the temperature coefficient of the material,
which is assigned the Greek letter alpha (a). Some materials have only very
slight changes in resistance, while other materials demonstrate dramatic
changes in resistance with a change in temperature.
Any material for which resistance increases as temperature increases is
said to have a positive temperature coefficient.
For semiconductor materials such as carbon, germanium, and silicon,
increases in temperature allow electrons to escape their usually stable orbits
and become free to move within the material. Although additional collisions do
occur within the semiconductor, the effect of the collisions is minimal when
compared with the contribution of the extra electrons to the overall flow of
charge. As the temperature increases, the number of charge electrons increases,
resulting in more current. Therefore, an increase in temperature results in a
decrease in resistance. Consequently, these materials are referred to as having
negative temperature coefficients.
Table 3–4 gives the temperature coefficients, a per degree Celsius, of var-
ious materials at 20 C and at 0 C.
66
Chapter 3 | Resistance
A conductor has a cross-sectional area of 50 square mils. Determine the cross-
sectional area in circular mils, square meters, and square millimeters.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Section 3.1 indicated that the resistance of a conductor will not be constant at
all temperatures. As temperature increases, more electrons will escape their
orbits, causing additional collisions within the conductor. For most conducting
materials, the increase in the number of collisions translates into a relatively
linear increase in resistance, as shown in Figure 3–7.
3.4 Temperature
Effects
FIGURE 3–7
Temperature effects on resistance of a conductor.
T
0
2273.15
Absolute
zero
T1
T2
DT
T (º C)
Slope m = DR
DT
R (V)
R1
R2
DR
2
1
Temperature intercept
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.4 | Temperature Effects
67
	
	
T
( C)1
( C)1
( C)
at 20 C
at 0 C
Silver
243
0.003 8
0.004 12
Copper
234.5
0.003 93
0.004 27
Aluminum
236
0.003 91
0.004 24
Tungsten
202
0.004 50
0.004 95
Iron
162
0.005 5
0.006 18
Lead
224
0.004 26
0.004 66
Nichrome
2270
0.000 44
0.000 44
Brass
480
0.002 00
0.002 08
Platinum
310
0.003 03
0.003 23
Carbon
0.000 5
Germanium
0.048
Silicon
0.075
TABLE 3–4
Temperature Intercepts and Coefﬁcients for Common Materials
If we consider that Figure 3–7 illustrates how the resistance of copper
changes with temperature, we observe an almost linear increase in resistance as
the temperature increases. Further, we see that as the temperature is decreased
to absolute zero (T  273.15 C), the resistance approaches zero.
In Figure 3–7, the point at which the linear portion of the line is extrapo-
lated to cross the abscissa (temperature axis) is referred to as the temperature
intercept or the inferred absolute temperature T of the material.
By examining the straight-line portion of the graph, we see that we have
two similar triangles, one with the apex at point 1 and the other with the apex
at point 2. The following relationship applies for these similar triangles.

T2
R

2
T
  
T1
R

1
T

This expression may be rewritten to solve for the resistance R2 at any temper-
ature T2 as follows:
R2  
T
T
2
1


T
T
 R1
(3–6)
An alternate method of determining the resistance R2 of a conductor at a tem-
perature T2 is to use the temperature coefficient a of the material. Examining
Table 3–4, we see that the temperature coefficient is not a constant for all tem-
peratures, but rather is dependent upon the temperature of the material. The
temperature coefficient for any material is defined as
a  R
m
1

(3–7)
The value of a is typically given in chemical handbooks. In the preceding
expression, a is measured in ( C)1, R1 is the resistance in ohms at a temper-
ature T1, and m is the slope of the linear portion of the curve (m  
R
T). It
is left as an end-of-chapter problem for the student to use Equations 3–6 and
3–7 to derive the following expression from Figure 3–6.
R2  R1[1  	1(T2  T1)]
(3–8)
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

68
Chapter 3 | Resistance
EXAMPLE 3–8       
An aluminum wire has a resistance of 20  at room temperature (20 C). Calculate
the resistance of the same wire at temperatures of 40 C, 100 C, and 200 C.
Solution
From Table 3–4, we see that aluminum has a temperature intercept
of –236 C.
At T  40 C:
The resistance at 40 C is determined using Equation 3–6.
R40 C 
20  
20   15.3 
At T  100 C:
R100 C 
20   
20   26.3 
At T  200 C:
R200 C 
20  
20   34.1 
This phenomenon indicates that the resistance of conductors changes quite dra-
matically with changes in temperature. For this reason manufacturers generally
specify the range of temperatures over which a conductor may operate safely.

436 C
256 C

200 C  (236 C)

20 C  (236 C)

336 C
256 C

100 C  (236 C)

20 C  (236 C)

196 C
256 C

40 C  (236 C)

20 C  (236 C)
EXAMPLE 3–9       
Tungsten wire is used as ﬁlaments in incandescent light bulbs. Current in the wire
causes the wire to reach extremely high temperatures. Determine the temperature
of the ﬁlament of a 100-W light bulb if the resistance at room temperature is
measured to be 11.7  and when the light is on, the resistance is determined to
be 144 .
Solution
If we rewrite Equation 3–6, we are able to solve for the temperature
T2 as follows:
T2  (T1  T) R
R
2
1
  T
 [20 C (202 C)] 
1
1
1
4
.
4
7


  (202 C)
 2530 C
An HVDC (high-voltage dc) transmission line must be able to operate over a
wide temperature range. Calculate the resistance of 900 km of 1843 MCM
aluminum conductor at temperatures of 40 C and 40 C.
Answers
20.8 , 29.3 
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Virtually all electric and electronic circuits involve the control of voltage
andor current. The best way to provide such control is by inserting appropri-
ate values of resistance into the circuit. Although various types and sizes of
resistors are used in electrical and electronic applications, all resistors fall into
two main categories: ﬁxed resistors and variable resistors.
Fixed Resistors
As the name implies, fixed resistors are resistors having resistance values that
are essentially constant. There are numerous types of fixed resistors, ranging in
size from almost microscopic (as in integrated circuits) to high-power resistors
that are capable of dissipating many watts of power. Figure 3–8 illustrates the
basic structure of a molded carbon composition resistor.
As shown in Figure 3–8, the molded carbon composition resistor consists
of a carbon core mixed with an insulating filler. The ratio of carbon to filler
determines the resistance value of the component: the higher the proportion of
carbon, the lower the resistance. Metal leads are inserted into the carbon core,
and then the entire resistor is encapsulated with an insulated coating. Carbon
composition resistors are available in resistances from less than 1  to 100 M
and typically have power ratings from 1⁄8 W to 2 W. Figure 3–9 shows various
sizes of resistors, with the larger resistors being able to dissipate more power
than the smaller resistors.
Although carbon-core resistors have the advantages of being inexpensive and
easy to produce, they tend to have wide tolerances and are susceptible to large
changes in resistance due to temperature variation. As shown in Figure 3–10, the
resistance of a carbon composition resistor may change by as much as 5% when
temperature is changed by 100 C.
Section 3.5 | Types of Resistors
69
FIGURE 3–8
Structure of a molded carbon composition resistor.
Explain what is meant by the terms positive temperature coefﬁcient and negative
temperature coefﬁcient. To which category does aluminum belong?
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
3.5 Types of 
Resistors
Color coding
Leads imbedded
into resistive
material
Insulated coating
Carbon
composition
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Other types of fixed resistors include carbon film, metal film, metal oxide,
wire-wound, and integrated circuit packages.
If fixed resistors are required in applications where precision is an impor-
tant factor, then film resistors are usually employed. These resistors consist
of either carbon, metal, or metal-oxide film deposited onto a ceramic cylin-
der. The desired resistance is obtained by removing part of the resistive mate-
rial, resulting in a helical pattern around the ceramic core. If variation of
resistance due to temperature is not a major concern, then low-cost carbon is
used. However, if close tolerances are required over a wide temperature
range, then the resistors are made of films consisting of alloys such as nickel
chromium, constantum, or manganin, which have very small temperature
coefficients.
Occasionally a circuit requires a resistor to be able to dissipate large quan-
tities of heat. In such cases, wire-wound resistors may be used. These resistors
are constructed of a metal alloy wound around a hollow porcelain core, which
is then covered with a thin layer of porcelain to seal it in place. The porcelain
is able to quickly dissipate heat generated due to current through the wire.
Figure 3–11 shows a few of the various types of power resistors available.
In circuits where the dissipation of heat is not a major design consideration,
fixed resistances may be constructed in miniature packages (called integrated
70
Chapter 3 | Resistance
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–9
Actual size of carbon resis-
tors (2 W, 1 W, 1⁄2 W, 1⁄4 W, 1⁄8 W).
FIGURE 3–10
Variation in resistance of a
carbon composition fixed resistor.
275
250
225
0
25
50
75
100
T (° C)
100
R (V)
100-V resistor
20
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.5 | Types of Resistors
71
FIGURE 3–12
circuits or ICs) capable of containing many individual resistors. The obvious
advantage of such packages is their ability to conserve space on a circuit board.
Figure 3–12 illustrates a typical resistor IC package.
Variable Resistors
Variable resistors provide indispensable functions that we use in one form or
another almost daily. These components are used to adjust the volume of our
radios, set the level of lighting in our homes, and adjust the heat of our stoves
and furnaces. Figure 3–13 shows the internal and the external view of typical
variable resistors.
In Figure 3–14, we see that variable resistors have three terminals, two of
which are fixed to the ends of the resistive material. The central terminal is
connected to a wiper that moves over the resistive material when the shaft is
rotated with either a knob or a screwdriver. The resistance between the two
outermost terminals will remain constant, while the resistance between the
FIGURE 3–11
Power resistors.
© Cengage Learning 2013
(b) Integrated resistor network
Courtesy of Bourns, Inc.
(a) Internal resistor arrangement
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

central terminal and either terminal will change according to the position of
the wiper.
If we examine the schematic of a variable resistor as shown in Figure 3–14(b),
we see that the following relationship must apply:
Rac  Rab  Rbc
(3–9)
Variable resistors are used for two principal functions. Potentiometers,
shown in Figure 3–14(c), are used to adjust the amount of potential (voltage)
provided to a circuit. Rheostats, the connections and schematic of which are
shown in Figure 3–15, are used to adjust the amount of current within a cir-
cuit. Applications of potentiometers and rheostats will be covered in later
chapters.
72
Chapter 3 | Resistance
FIGURE 3–13
Variable resistors.
(a) External view of variable resistors
(b) Internal view of variable resistor
Courtesy of Bourns, Inc.
FIGURE 3–14
(a) Variable resistors
Courtesy of Bourns, Inc.
a
c
Rab
Rbc
Connection to 
moving wiper
This voltage
is dependent
upon the
location of
the moving
contact
a
c
b
(b) Terminals of a variable resistor
(c) Variable resistor used 
as a potentiometer
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.6 | Color Coding of Resistors
73
Band 1
Band 2
Band 3 (multiplier)
Band 4 (tolerance)
Band 5 (reliability)
significant figures
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–16
Resistor color codes.
Large resistors such as the wire-wound resistors or the ceramic-encased power
resistors have their resistor values and tolerances printed on their cases. Smaller
resistors, whether constructed of a molded carbon composition or a metal ﬁlm,
may be too small to have their values printed on the component. Instead, these
smaller resistors are usually covered by an epoxy or similar insulating coating
over which several colored bands are printed radially as shown in Figure 3–16.
The colored bands provide a quickly recognizable code for determining the
value of resistance, the tolerance (in percentage), and occasionally the expected
reliability of the resistor. The colored bands are always read from left to right,
left being defined as the side of the resistor with the band nearest to it.
The first two bands represent the first and second digits of the resistance
value. The third band is called the multiplier band and represents the number of
zeros following the first two digits; it is usually given as a power of ten. The
fourth band indicates the tolerance of the resistor, and the fifth band (if present)
is an indication of the expected reliability of the component. The reliability is a
statistical indication of the expected number of components that will no longer
have the indicated resistance value after 1000 hours of use. For example, if a
particular resistor has a reliability of 1%, it is expected that after 1000 hours of
use, no more than 1 resistor in 100 is likely to be outside the specified range of
resistance as indicated in the first four bands of the color codes. Table 3–5 shows
the colors of the various bands and the corresponding values.
FIGURE 3–15
a
c
Rab = 0 when the 
moving contact is at a
b
(No connections)
(a) Connections of a rheostat
a
b
(b) Symbol of a rheostat
Rab
© Cengage Learning 2013
3.6 Color Coding 
of Resistors
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

74
Chapter 3 | Resistance
Band 1
Band 2
Band 3
Band 4
Band 5
Color
Sig. Fig.
Sig. Fig.
Multiplier
Tolerance
Reliability
Black
0
100  1
Brown
1
1
101  10
1%
Red
2
2
102  100
0.1%
Orange
3
3
103  1 000
0.01%
Yellow
4
4
104  10 000
0.001%
Green
5
5
105  100 000
Blue
6
6
106  1 000 000
Violet
7
7
107  10 000 000
Gray
8
8
White
9
9
Gold
0.1
5%
Silver
0.01
10%
No color
20%
TABLE 3–5
Resistor Color Codes
EXAMPLE 3–10       
Determine the resistance of a carbon ﬁlm resistor having the color codes shown
in Figure 3–17.
A resistor manufacturer produces carbon composition resistors of 100 M, with
a tolerance of 5%. What will be the color codes on the resistor? (Left to right)
Answer
Brown, Black, Violet, Gold
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
Brown (1)
Gray (8)
Orange (3 103)
Gold (5% tolerance)
Red (0.1% reliability)
© Cengage Learning 2013
Solution
From Table 3–5, we see that the resistor will have a value determined as
R  18  103   5%
 18 k  0.9 k with a reliability of 0.1%
This speciﬁcation indicates that the resistance will fall between 17.1 k and
18.9 k. After 1000 hours, we would expect that no more than 1 resistor in 1000
would fall outside the speciﬁed range.
FIGURE 3–17
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The ohmmeter is an instrument that is generally part of a multimeter (usually
including a voltmeter and an ammeter) and is used to measure the resistance of
a component. Although it has limitations, the ohmmeter is used almost daily in
service shops and laboratories to measure resistance of components and also to
determine whether a circuit is faulty. In addition, the ohmmeter may also be used
to determine the condition of semiconductor devices such as diodes and transis-
tors. Figure 3–18 shows a typical digital multimeter with an ohms function.
In order to measure the resistance of an isolated component or circuit, the
ohmmeter is placed across the component under test, as shown in Figure 3–19.
The resistance is then simply read from the meter display.
When using an ohmmeter to measure the resistance of a component that is
located in an operating circuit, the following steps should be observed:
1. As shown in Figure 3–20(a), remove all power supplies from the circuit or
component to be tested. If this step is not followed, the ohmmeter reading
will, at best, be meaningless, and the ohmmeter may be severely damaged.
2. If you wish to measure the resistance of a particular component, it is nec-
essary to isolate the component from the rest of the circuit. This is done
by disconnecting at least one terminal of the component from the balance
of the circuit as shown in Figure 3–20(b). If this step is not followed, in
all likelihood the resistance reading indicated by the ohmmeter will not
be the resistance of the desired resistor, but rather the resistance of the
combination.
Section 3.7 | Measuring Resistance—The Ohmmeter
75


OFF
300mV
)))
A
V
V
A
A
k
27.0

© Cengage Learning 2013
Courtesy of Fluke Corporation
FIGURE 3–18
Digital multimeter. To measure ohms, set
the dial to .
FIGURE 3–19
Ohmmeter used to measure
an isolated component.
3.7 Measuring
Resistance—
The Ohmmeter
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3. As shown in Figure 3–20(b), connect the two probes of the ohmmeter
across the component to be measured. The black and red leads of the ohm-
meter may be interchanged when measuring resistors. When measuring
resistance of other components, however, the measured resistance will be
dependent upon the direction of the sensing current. Such devices are
covered brieﬂy in a later section of this chapter.
4. Ensure that the ohmmeter is on the correct range to provide the most
accurate reading. For example, although a digital multimeter (DMM) can
measure a reading for a 1.2-k resistor on the 2-M range, the same ohm-
meter will provide additional signiﬁcant digits (hence more precision)
when it is switched to the 2-k range. For analog meters, the best accu-
racy is obtained when the needle is approximately in the center of the
scale.
5. When you are ﬁnished, turn the ohmmeter off. Because the ohmmeter uses
an internal battery to provide a small sensing current, it is possible to drain
the battery if the probes accidently connect together for an extended period.
In addition to measuring resistance, the ohmmeter may also be used to
indicate the continuity of a circuit. Many modern digital ohmmeters have an
audible tone to indicate that a circuit is unbroken from one point to another
point. As demonstrated in Figure 3–21(a), the audible tone of a digital ohm-
meter allows the user to determine continuity without having to look away
from the circuit under test.
Ohmmeters are particularly useful instruments in determining whether a
given circuit has been short circuited or open circuited.
A short circuit occurs when a low-resistance conductor such as a piece of
wire or any other conductor is connected between two points in a circuit. Due
to the very low resistance of the short circuit, current will bypass the rest of the
76
Chapter 3 | Resistance
(a) Disconnect the circuit from the
voltage/current source
V
A
VOLTAGE
Coarse
Fine
CURRENT
Max.
OUTPUT
POWER
ON
OFF


I
O
Voltage source
(b) Isolate and measure the component


OFF
k
4.70
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–20
Using an ohmmeter to measure resistance in a circuit.
PRACTICAL NOTE...
When a digital ohmmeter measures
an open circuit, the display on the
meter will usually be the digit 1 at
the left-hand side, with no following
digits. This reading should not be
confused with a reading of 1 , 1 k,
or 1 M, which would appear on
the right-hand side of the display.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.8 | Thermistors
77
circuit and go through the short. An ohmmeter will indicate a very low (theo-
retically zero) resistance when used to measure across a short circuit.
An open circuit occurs when a conductor is broken between the points
under test. An ohmmeter will indicate infinite resistance when used to measure
the resistance of a circuit having an open circuit.
Figure 3–21 illustrates circuits having a short circuit and an open circuit.
In Section 3.4 we saw how resistance changes with changes in temperature.
While this effect is generally undesirable in resistors, there are many applica-
tions that use electronic components having characteristics that vary according
to changes in temperature. Any device or component that causes an electrical
change due to a physical change is referred to as a transducer.
A thermistor is a two-terminal transducer in which resistance changes
significantly with changes in temperature (hence a thermistor is a “thermal
resistor”). The resistance of thermistors may be changed either by external
Audible Alarm
Wire
short circuit


OFF

0.000
(a) Short circuit
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

Break


OFF

1
(b) Open circuit
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–21
An ohmmeter is used to measure across the terminals of a switch.
a. What will the ohmmeter indicate when the switch is closed?
b. What will the ohmmeter indicate when the switch is opened?
Answers
a. 0  (short circuit)
b.  (open circuit)
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
3.8 Thermistors
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

78
Chapter 3 | Resistance
T
(b) Symbol
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–22
Thermistors.
(a) Photograph
© Cengage Learning 2013
temperature changes or by changes in temperature caused by current through the
component. By applying this principle, thermistors may be used in circuits to
control current and to measure or control temperature. Typical applications
include electronic thermometers and thermostatic control circuits for furnaces.
Figure 3–22 shows a typical thermistor and its electrical symbol.
Thermistors are constructed of oxides of various materials such as cobalt,
manganese, nickel, and strontium. As the temperature of the thermistor is
increased, the outermost (valence) electrons in the atoms of the material
become more active and break away from the atom. These extra electrons are
now free to move within the circuit, thereby causing a reduction in the resis-
tance of the component (negative temperature coefficient). Figure 3–23 shows
how resistance of a thermistor varies with temperature effects.
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
T (° C)
R (V)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–23
Thermistor resistance as a
function of temperature.
Referring to Figure 3–22, determine the approximate resistance of a thermistor
at each of the following temperatures:
a. 10 C
b. 30 C
c. 50 C
Answers
a. 550 ; b. 250 ; c. 120 
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 7
3.9 Photoconductive
Cells
Photoconductive cells or photocells are two-terminal transducers that have a
resistance determined by the amount of light falling on the cell. Most photo-
cells are constructed of either cadmium sulﬁde (CdS) or cadmium selenide
(CdSe) and are sensitive to light having wavelengths between 4000 Å (blue
light) and 10 000 Å (infrared). The angstrom (Å) is a unit commonly used to mea-
sure the wavelength of light and has a dimension given as 1 Å  1  1010 m.
Light, which is a form of energy, strikes the material of the photocell and
causes the release of valence electrons, thereby reducing the resistance of the
component. Figure 3–24 shows the structure, symbol, and resistance charac-
teristics of a typical photocell.
Photocells may be used to measure light intensity andor to control light-
ing. They are typically used as part of a security system.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.10 | Nonlinear Resistance
79
Up to this point, the components we have examined have had values of resis-
tance that were essentially constant for a given temperature (or, in the case of
a photocell, for a given amount of light). If we were to examine the current
versus voltage relationship for these components, we would ﬁnd that the rela-
tionship is linear, as shown in Figure 3–25.
If a device has a linear (straight-line) current-voltage relation then it is
referred to as an ohmic device. (The linear current-voltage relationship will
be will be covered in greater detail in the next chapter.) Often in electronics,
we use components that do not have a linear current-voltage relationship;
these devices are referred to as nonohmic devices. On the other hand, some
components, such as the thermistor, can be shown to have both an ohmic
region and a nonohmic region. For large current through the thermistor, the
component will get hotter. This increase in temperature will result in a
decrease of resistance. Consequently, for large currents, the thermistor is a
nonohmic device.
We will now briefly examine two common nonohmic devices.
Diodes
The diode is a semiconductor device that permits charge to flow in only one
direction. Figure 3–26 illustrates the appearance and the symbol of a typical
diode.
Conventional current through a diode is in the direction from the anode toward
the cathode (the end with the line around the circumference). When current is
I (A)
V (V)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–25
Linear current-voltage 
relationship.
Ceramic base
Metal case
Glass window
CdS or CdSe element
Leads
(a) Structure
© Cengage Learning 2013

(b) Symbol of a photocell
© Cengage Learning 2013
1000
500
200
100
50
20
10
5
2
1 M
500 k
200 k
100 k
50 k
20 k
10 k
5 k
2 k
1 k
500
200
100
Illumination
R ()
 (l m/m2, lux)
(c) Resistance versus illumination
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–24
Photocell.
3.10 Nonlinear
Resistance
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

80
Chapter 3 | Resistance
in this direction, the diode is said to be forward biased and operating in its for-
ward region. Since a diode has very little resistance in its forward region, it is
often approximated as a short circuit.
If the circuit is connected such that the direction of current is from the
cathode to the anode (against the arrow in Figure 3–26), the diode is reverse
biased and operating in its reverse region. Due to the high resistance of a
reverse-biased diode, it is often approximated as an open circuit.
Although this textbook does not attempt to provide an in-depth study of
diode theory, Figure 3–27 shows the basics of diode operation both when for-
ward biased and when reverse biased.
(a) Typical structure
(b) Symbol
Anode
Cathode
Direction of conventional current
Anode
Cathode
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–26
Diode.


VD  0 V
ID
E
(a) Forward-biased
diode
ID z 0 A


VD z E
ID
E
(b) Reverse-biased
diode
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–27
Current-voltage relation for a silicon diode.
PRACTICAL NOTES...
Because an ohmmeter uses an internal voltage source to generate a small sens-
ing current, the instrument may easily be used to determine the terminals (and
hence the direction of conventional ﬂow) of a diode. (See Figure 3–28.) 
1
2
OFF
V
1
I = 0
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A
V
(a) Diode operating in its
reverse region
(b) Diode operating in its
forward region
1
2
OFF
V
0.742
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A
V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–28
Determining
diode terminals with an 
ohmmeter.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.10 | Nonlinear Resistance
81
Varistors
Varistors, as shown in Figure 3–29, are semiconductor devices that have very
high resistances when the voltage across the varistors is below the breakdown
value. However, when the voltage across a varistor (either polarity) exceeds
the rated value, the resistance of the device suddenly becomes very small,
allowing charge to flow. Figure 3–30 shows the current-voltage relation for
varistors.
Varistors are used in sensitive circuits, such as those in computers, to
ensure that if the voltage suddenly exceeds a predetermined value, the varistor
will effectively become a short circuit to the unwanted signal, thereby protect-
ing the rest of the circuit from excessive voltage.
(b) Varistor symbols
© Cengage Learning 2013
(a) Photograph
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–29
Varistors.
If we measure the resistance of the diode in both directions, we will ﬁnd that
the resistance will be low when the positive terminal of the ohmmeter is con-
nected to the anode of the diode. When the positive terminal is connected to
the cathode, virtually no current will occur in the diode and so the indication 
on the ohmmeter will be inﬁnite resistance normally shown by the numeral 1 on
the left.
Forward
region
Reverse
region
200 V
V (V)
200 V
I (A)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–30
Current-voltage relation of a 200-V (peak) varistor.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

82
Chapter 3 | Resistance
Conductance, G, is deﬁned as the measure of a material’s ability to allow the
ﬂow of charge and is assigned the SI unit the siemens (S). A large conduc-
tance indicates that a material is able to conduct current well, whereas a low
value of conductance indicates that a material does not readily permit the
ﬂow of charge. Mathematically, conductance is deﬁned as the reciprocal of
resistance. Thus
G  R
1

[siemens, S]
(3–10)
where R is resistance, in ohms ().
Although the SI unit of conductance (siemens) is almost universally accepted,
older books and data sheets list conductance in the unit given as the mho (ohm
spelled backward) and having an upside-down omega, 
, as the symbol. In
such a case, the following relationship holds:
1 
 1 S
(3–11)


3.11 Conductance
EXAMPLE 3–11       
Determine the conductance of the following resistors:
a. 5 
b. 100 k
c. 50 m
Solution
a. G  5
1

  0.2 S  200 mS
b. G  
100
1
k
  0.01 mS  10 mS
c. G  
50
1
m
  20 S
1. A given cable has a conductance given as 5.0 mS. Determine the value of
the resistance, in ohms.
2. If the conductance is doubled, what happens to the resistance?
Answers
1. 200 ; 2. It halves
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 3.12 | Superconductors
83
R (V)
T (K)
4.6 K
0 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–31
Critical temperature of
mercury.
As you have seen, all power lines and distribution networks have internal resis-
tance, which results in energy loss due to heat as charge flows through the con-
ductor. If there was some way of eliminating the resistance of the conductors,
electricity could be transmitted farther and more economically. The idea that
energy could be transmitted without losses along a “superconductor” trans-
mission line was formerly a distant goal. However, recent discoveries in high-
temperature superconductivity promise the almost magical ability to transmit
and store energy with no loss in energy.
In 1911, the Dutch physicist Heike Kamerlingh Onnes discovered the phe-
nomenon of superconductivity. Studies of mercury, tin, and lead verified that
the resistance of these materials decreases to no more than one ten-billionth of
the room temperature resistance when subjected to temperatures of 4.6 K,
3.7 K, and 6 K, respectively. Recall that the relationship between kelvins and
degrees Celsius is as follows:
TK  T( C)  273.15
(3–12)
The temperature at which a material becomes a superconductor is referred to
as the critical temperature, TC, of the material. Figure 3–31 shows how the
resistance of a sample of mercury changes with temperature. Notice how the
resistance suddenly drops to zero at a temperature of 4.6 K.
Experiments with currents in supercooled loops of superconducting wire
have determined that the induced currents will remain undiminished for many
years within the conductor provided that the temperature is maintained below
the critical temperature of the conductor.
A peculiar, seemingly magical property of superconductors occurs when a
permanent magnet is placed above the superconductor. The magnet will float
above the surface of the conductor as if it is defying the law of gravity, as
shown in Figure 3–32.
This principle, which is referred to as the Meissner effect (named after
Walther Meissner), may be simply stated as follows:
When a superconductor is cooled below its critical temperature, magnetic 
ﬁelds may surround but not enter the superconductor.
The principle of superconductivity is explained in the behavior of elec-
trons within the superconductor. Unlike conductors, which have electrons
moving randomly through the conductor and colliding with other electrons
[Figure 3–33(a)], the electrons in superconductors form pairs which move
A speciﬁcation sheet for a radar transmitter indicates that one of the compo-
nents has a conductance of 5 
.
a. Express the conductance in the proper SI preﬁx and unit.
b. Determine the resistance of the component, in ohms.
Answers
a. 5 pS; b. 2  1011 

PRACTICE PROBLEMS 9
3.12 Superconductors
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

84
Chapter 3 | Resistance
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Direction of
electron flow
(a)


Direction of
electron flow
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(b)


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–33
(a) In conductors, electrons
are free to move in any direction through the
conductor. Energy is lost due to collisions
with atoms and other electrons, giving rise to
the resistance of the conductor. (b) In super-
conductors, electrons are bound in pairs and
travel through the conductor in step, avoid-
ing all collisions. Since there is no energy
loss, the conductor has no resistance.
through the material in a manner similar to a band marching in a parade. The
orderly motion of electrons in a superconductor, shown in Figure 3–33(b),
results in an ideal conductor, since the electrons no longer collide.
The economy of having a high critical temperature has led to the search for
high-temperature superconductors. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, research
at the IBM Zurich Research Laboratory in Switzerland and the University of
Houston in Texas yielded superconducting materials that are able to operate at
temperatures as high as 98 K (175 C). While this temperature is still very low,
it means that superconductivity can now be achieved by using the readily avail-
able liquid nitrogen rather than the much more expensive and rare liquid helium.
Superconductivity has been found in such seemingly unlikely materials as
ceramics consisting of barium, lanthanum, copper, and oxygen. Research is
now centered on developing new materials that become superconductors at
ever higher temperatures and that are able to overcome the disadvantages of the
early ceramic superconductors. While hopes were high that the new supercon-
ducting materials would result in significant improvements in transportation,
medical treatment, and energy storage and transmission, the potential has gone
largely unrealized.
Very expensive, low-temperature superconductivity continues to be used in
some giant particle accelerators and, to a limited degree, in electronic compo-
nents (such as superfast Josephson junctions and SQUIDs, i.e., superconduct-
ing quantum interference devices, which are used to detect very small magnetic
fields). By far, the most important application of superconductors is to gener-
ate the very strong magnetic fields needed in magnetic resonance imagers
(MRI). Once research produces commercially viable, high-temperature super-
conductors, however, the possibilities of the applications will be virtually lim-
itless. High-temperature superconductivity promises to yield improvements in
transportation, energy storage and transmission, computers, and medical treat-
ment and research.
Y
ou are a troubleshooting specialist working for a small telephone company.
One day, word comes in that an entire subdivision is without telephone ser-
vice. Everyone suspects that a cable was cut by one of several backhoe oper-
ators working on a waterline project near the subdivision. However, no one
is certain exactly where the cut occurred. You remember that the resistance
of a length of wire is determined by several factors, including the length.
This gives you an idea for determining the distance between the telephone
central ofﬁce and location of the cut.
First you go to the telephone cable records, which show that the subdivi-
sion is served by 26-gauge copper wire. Then, since each customer’s tele-
phone is connected to the central ofﬁce with a pair of wires, you measure the
resistance of several loops from the central ofﬁce. As expected, some of the
measurements indicate open circuits. However, several pairs of the wire were
shorted by the backhoe, and each of these pairs indicates a total resistance of
338 . How far from the central ofﬁce did the cut occur?
Putting It into Practice
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
85
1/4"
l = 250 ft
h
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 3–34
Problems
3.1
Resistance of Conductors
1. Determine the resistance, at 20 C, of 100 m of solid aluminum wire having
the following radii:
a. 0.5 mm
c. 0.005 mm
b. 1.0 mm
d. 0.5 cm
2. Determine the resistance, at 20 C, of 200 feet of iron conductors having the
following cross sections:
a. 0.25 inch by 0.25 inch square
b. 0.125 inch diameter round
c. 0.125 inch by 4.0 inch rectangle
3. A 250-foot length of solid copper bus bar, shown in Figure 3–34, is used to con-
nect a voltage source to a distribution panel. If the bar is to have a resistance of
0.02  at 20 C, calculate the required height of the bus bar (in inches).
4. Nichrome wire is used to construct heating elements. Determine the length of
1.0-mm diameter Nichrome wire needed to produce a heating element that
has a resistance of 2.0  at a temperature of 20 C.
5. A copper wire having a diameter of 0.80 mm is measured to have a resistance
of 10.3  at 20 C. How long is this wire in meters? How long is the wire in
feet?
6. A piece of aluminum wire has a resistance, at 20 C, of 20 . If this wire is
melted down and used to produce a second wire having a length four times
the original length, what will be the resistance of the new wire at 20 C?
(Hint: The volume of the wire has not changed.)
7. Determine the resistivity (in ohmmeters) of a carbon-based graphite cylinder
having a length of 6.00 cm, a diameter of 0.50 mm, and a measured resis-
tance of 3.0  at 20 C. How does this value compare with the resistivity
given for carbon?
8. A solid circular wire of length 200 m and diameter of 0.4 mm has a resistance
measured to be 357  at 20 C. Of what material is the wire constructed?
9. A 2500-m section of alloy wire has a resistance of 32 . If the wire has a
diameter of 1.5 mm, determine the resistivity of the material in ohm-meters.
Is this alloy a better conductor than copper?
10. A section of iron wire having a diameter of 0.030 inch is measured to have a
resistance of 2500  (at a temperature of 20 C).
a. Determine the cross-sectional area in square meters and in square mil-
limeters. (Note: 1 inch  2.54 cm  25.4 mm.)
b. Calculate the length of the wire in meters.
3.2
Electrical Wire Tables
11. Use Table 3–2 to determine the resistance of 300 feet of AWG 22 and AWG 19
solid copper conductors. Compare the diameters and the resistances of the
wires.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12. Use Table 3–2 to ﬁnd the resistance of 250 m of AWG 8 and AWG 2 
solid copper conductors. Compare the diameters and the resistances 
of the wires.
13. Determine the maximum current that could be handled by AWG 19 wire and
by AWG 30 wire.
14. If AWG 8 is rated at a maximum of 40 A, how much current could AWG 2
handle safely?
15. A spool of AWG 36 copper transformer wire is measured to have 
a resistance of 550  at a temperature of 20 C. How long is this wire 
in meters?
16. How much current should AWG 36 copper wire be able to handle?
3.3
Resistance of Wires—Circular Mils
17. Determine the area in circular mils of the following conductors (T  20 C):
a. Circular wire having a diameter of 0.016 inch
b. Circular wire having a diameter of 2.0 mm
c. Rectangular bus bar having dimensions 0.25 inch by 6.0 inch
18. Express the cross-sectional areas of the conductors of Problem 17 in square
mils and in square millimeters.
19. Calculate the resistance, at 20 C, of 400 feet of copper conductors having
the cross-sectional areas given in Problem 17.
20. Determine the diameter in inches and in millimeters of circular cables
having cross-sectional areas as given below. (Assume the cables to be solid
conductors.)
a. 250 CM
c. 250 MCM
b. 1000 CM
d. 750 MCM
21. A 200-foot length of solid copper wire is measured to have a resistance of
0.500 .
a. Determine the cross-sectional area of the wire in both square mils and
circular mils.
b. Determine the diameter of the wire in mils and in inches.
22. Repeat Problem 21 if the wire had been made of Nichrome.
23. A spool of solid copper wire having a diameter of 0.040 inch is measured to
have a resistance of 12.5  (at a temperature of 20 C).
a. Determine the cross-sectional area in both square mils and circular mils.
b. Calculate the length of the wire in feet.
24. Iron wire having a diameter of 30 mils was occasionally used for telegraph
transmission. A technician measures a section of telegraph line to have a
resistance of 2500  (at a temperature of 20 C).
a. Determine the cross-sectional area in both square mils and circular mils.
b. Calculate the length of the wire in feet and in meters. (Note: 1 ft 
0.3048 m.) Compare your answer to the answer obtained in Problem 10.
3.4
Temperature Effects
25. An aluminum conductor has a resistance of 50  at room temperature. Find
the resistance of the same conductor at 30 C, 0 C, and at 200 C.
86
Chapter 3 | Resistance
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
87
26. AWG 14 solid copper house wire is designed to operate within a temperature
range of 40 C to 90 C. Calculate the resistance of 200 circuit feet of
wire at both temperatures. Note: A circuit foot is the length of cable needed
for a current to travel to and from a load.
27. A given material has a resistance of 20  at room temperature (20 C) and
25  at a temperature of 85 C.
a. Does the material have a positive or a negative temperature coefﬁcient?
Explain brieﬂy.
b. Determine the value of the temperature coefﬁcient a at 20 C.
c. Assuming the resistance-versus-temperature function to be linear, deter-
mine the expected resistance of the material at 0 C (the freezing point of
water) and at 100 C (the boiling point of water).
28. A given material has a resistance of 100  at room temperature (20 C) and
150  at a temperature of 25 C.
a. Does the material have a positive or a negative temperature coefﬁcient?
Explain brieﬂy.
b. Determine the value of the temperature coefﬁcient a at 20 C.
c. Assuming the resistance-versus-temperature function to be linear, deter-
mine the expected resistance of the material at 0 C (the freezing point of
water) and at 40 C.
29. An electric heater is made of Nichrome wire. The wire has a resistance of
15.2  at a temperature of 20 C. Determine the resistance of the Nichrome
wire when the temperature of the wire is increased to 260 C.
30. A silicon diode is measured to have a resistance of 500  at 20 C.
Determine the resistance of the diode if the temperature of the component is
increased with a soldering iron to 30 C. (Assume that the resistance-versus-
temperature function is linear.)
31. An electrical device has a linear temperature response. The device has a
resistance of 120  at a temperature of 20 C and a resistance of 190  at
a temperature of 120 C.
a. Calculate the resistance at a temperature of 0 C.
b. Calculate the resistance at a temperature of 80 C.
c. Determine the temperature intercept of the material.
32. Derive the expression of Equation 3–8.
3.5
Types of Resistors
33. A 10-k variable resistor has its wiper (movable terminal b) initially at
the bottom terminal, c. Determine the resistance Rab between terminals a
and b and the resistance Rbc between terminals b and c under the following
conditions:
a. The wiper is at c.
b. The wiper is one-ﬁfth of the way around the resistive surface.
c. The wiper is four-ﬁfths of the way around the resistive surface.
d. The wiper is at a.
34. The resistance between wiper terminal b and bottom terminal c of a 
200-k variable resistor is measured to be 50 k. Determine the resis-
tance that would be measured between the top terminal a and the wiper
terminal b.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.6
Color Coding of Resistors
35. Given resistors having the following color codes (as read from left to right),
determine the resistance, tolerance, and reliability of each component.
Express the uncertainty in both percentage and ohms.
a. Brown
Green
Yellow
Silver
b. Red
Gray
Gold
Gold
Yellow
c. Yellow
Violet
Blue
Gold
d. Orange
White
Black
Gold
Red
36. Determine the color codes required if you need the following resistors for a
project:
a. 33 k  5%, 0.1% reliability
b. 820   10%
c. 15   20%
d. 2.7 M  5%
3.7
Measuring Resistance—The Ohmmeter
37. Explain how an ohmmeter may be used to determine whether a light bulb is
burned out.
38. If an ohmmeter were placed across the terminal of a switch, what resistance
would you expect to measure when the contacts of the switch are closed?
What resistance would you expect to measure when the contacts are opened?
39. Explain how you could use an ohmmeter to determine approximately how
much wire is left on a spool of AWG 24 copper wire.
40. An analog ohmmeter is used to measure the resistance of a two-terminal
component. The ohmmeter indicates a resistance of 1.5 k. When the leads
of the ohmmeter are reversed, the meter indicates that the resistance of the
component is an open circuit. Is the component faulty? If not, what kind of
component is being tested?
3.8
Thermistors
41. A thermistor has the characteristics shown in Figure 3–23.
a. Determine the resistance of the device at room temperature, 20 C.
b. Determine the resistance of the device at a temperature of 40 C.
c. Does the thermistor have a positive or a negative temperature coefﬁcient?
Explain.
3.9
Photoconductive Cells
42. For the photocell having the characteristics shown in Figure 3–24(c),
determine the resistance
a. in a dimly lit basement having an illuminance of 10 lux
b. in a home having an illuminance of 50 lux
c. in a classroom having an illuminance of 500 lux
88
Chapter 3 | Resistance
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3.11
Conductance
43. Calculate the conductance of the following resistances:
a. 0.25 
b. 500 
c. 250 k
d. 12.5 M
44. Determine the resistance of components having the following conductances:
a. 62.5 S
b. 2500 mS
c. 5.75 mS
d. 25.0 S
45. Determine the conductance of 1000 m of AWG 30 solid copper wire at a
temperature of 20 C.
46. Determine the conductance of 200 feet of aluminum bus bar (at a tempera-
ture of 20 C) which has a cross-sectional dimension of 4.0 inches by
0.25 inch. If the temperature were to increase, what would happen to the
conductance of the bus bar?
Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
89
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. Iron wire will have approximately seven times more resistance than copper.
2. The longer wire will have twice the resistance of the shorter wire.
3. The wire having the greater diameter will have one quarter the resistance of
the small-diameter wire.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
1. 200 A
2. The actual value is less than the theoretical value. Since only the surface of
the cable is able to dissipate heat, the current must be decreased to prevent
heat buildup.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
A  63.7 CM
A  3.23  108 m2  0.0323 mm2
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
Positive temperature coefﬁcient means that resistance of a material increases as
temperature increases. Negative temperature coefﬁcient means that the resistance
of a material decreases as the temperature increases. Aluminum has a positive tem-
perature coefﬁcient.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
dc Resistance
Dynamic Resistance
Efﬁciency
Energy
Kilowatthours
Linear Resistance
Nonlinear Resistance
Ohmic
Ohm’s Law
Open Circuit
Power
Schematic Capture
Voltage Reference
Convention
I OUTLINE
Ohm’s Law
Voltage Polarity and
Current Direction
Power
Power Direction
Convention
Energy
Efﬁciency
Nonlinear and Dynamic
Resistances
Computer-Aided Circuit
Analysis
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• compute voltage, current, and resistance in
simple circuits using Ohm’s law,
• use the voltage reference convention to
determine polarity,
• describe how voltage, current, and power
are related in a resistive circuit,
• compute power in dc circuits,
• use the power reference convention to
describe the direction of power transfer,
• compute energy used by electrical loads,
• determine energy costs,
• determine the efﬁciency of machines and
systems,
• use PSpice and Multisim to solve Ohm’s law
problems.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4
OHM’S LAW, POWER, AND ENERGY
I
n the previous two chapters, you studied voltage, current, and resistance separately. In this
chapter, we consider them together. Beginning with Ohm’s law, you will study the relationship
between voltage and current in a resistive circuit, reference conventions, power, energy, and
efﬁciency. Also in this chapter, you begin the process of learning how to use computer simula-
tion software packages (Multisim and PSpice) to solve circuit analysis problems on your com-
puter. (For those of you who have used the Multisim simulation courseware in Chapter 2, you
may notice some duplication.) I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

92
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
Consider the circuit of Figure 4–1. Using a circuit similar in concept to this,
Ohm determined experimentally that current in a resistive circuit is directly
proportional to its applied voltage and inversely proportional to its resistance.
In equation form, Ohm’s law states
I  E
R

[amps, A]
(4–1)
4.1 Ohm’s Law
92
Chapter 3 | Resistance
Putting It in Perspective
Georg Simon Ohm
IN CHAPTER 3, WE LOOKED BRIEFLY at Ohm’s experiments. We now take a look at Ohm the person.
Georg Simon Ohm was born in Erlangen, Bavaria, on March 16, 1787. His father was a master
mechanic who determined that his son should obtain an education in science. Although Ohm
became a teacher in a high school, he had aspirations to receive a university appointment. The
only way that such an appointment could be realized would be if Ohm could produce important
results through scientiﬁc research. Since the science of electricity was in its infancy, and because
the electric cell had recently been invented by the Italian Conte Alessandro Volta, Ohm decided to
study the behavior of current in resistive circuits. Because equipment was expensive and hard to
come by, Ohm made much of his own, thanks, in large part, to his father’s training. Using this
equipment, Ohm determined experimentally that the amount of current transmitted along a wire
was directly proportional to its cross-sectional area and inversely proportional to its length. From
these results, Ohm was able to deﬁne resistance and show that there was a simple relationship
between voltage, resistance, and current. This result, now known as Ohm’s law, is probably the
most fundamental relationship in circuit theory. However, when published in 1827, Ohm’s results
were met with ridicule. As a result, not only did Ohm miss out on a university appointment, he
was also forced to resign from his high school teaching position. While Ohm was living in poverty
and shame, his work became known and appreciated outside Germany. In 1842, Ohm was
appointed a member of the Royal Society. Finally, in 1849, he was appointed as a professor at the
University of Munich, where he was at last recognized for his important contributions. I
SCIENCE SOURCE/Photo Researchers/Getty Images
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.1 | Ohm’s Law
93


mA
100 
OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A
A

Jolt
R
Resistor
(a) Test circuit


V12
OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

~
!
E
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
R
E
I 
(b) Schematic, meters not shown
I = E
R
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–1
Circuit for illustrating Ohm’s law. (This is a modern-day equivalent of Ohm’s test circuit.)
where
E is the applied voltage in volts,
R is the resistance in ohms,
I is the current in amperes.
From this you can see that the larger the applied voltage, the larger the current,
while the larger the resistance, the smaller the current.
The proportional relationship between voltage and current described by
Equation 4–1 may be demonstrated by direct substitution as indicated in
Figure 4–2. For a fixed resistance, doubling the voltage as shown in (b) dou-
bles the current, while tripling the voltage as shown in (c) triples the current,
and so on.
The inverse relationship between resistance and current is demonstrated in
Figure 4–3. For a fixed voltage, doubling the resistance as shown in (b) halves
the current, while tripling the resistance as shown in (c) reduces the current to
one-third of its original value, and so on.
Ohm’s law may also be expressed in the following forms by rearrangement
of Equation 4–1:
E  IR [volts, V]
(4–2)
CircuitSim 04-1 
NOTES...
You can use the simulation of
CircuitSim 04-1 to study the Ohm's
law circuit of Figure 4–1 “live” on
your screen—see Learning Circuit
Theory Interactively on Your
Computer in the Preface.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

94
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
and
R  E
I

[ohms, ]
(4–3)
When using Ohm’s law, be sure to express all quantities in base units of volts,
ohms, and amps as in Examples 4–1 to 4–3, or utilize the relationships between
prefixes as in Example 4–4.
R = 10 
E = 10 V
I = 1 A
R = 10 
E = 20 V
I = 2 A
R = 10 
E = 30 V
I = 3 A
(a) I = 10 V = 1 A
10 
(b) I = 20 V = 2 A
10 
(c) I = 30 V = 3 A
10 
© Cengage Learning 2013
R = 12 
E = 36 V
I = 3 A
R = 24 
E = 36 V
I = 1.5 A
R = 36 
E = 36 V
I = 1 A
(a) I = 36 V = 3 A
12 
(b) I = 36 V = 1.5 A
24 
(c) I = 36 V = 1 A
36 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–2
For a fixed resistance, cur-
rent is directly proportional to voltage;
thus, doubling the voltage as in (b) dou-
bles the current, while tripling the voltage
as in (c) triples the current, and so on.
FIGURE 4–3
For a fixed voltage, current is inversely proportional to resistance; thus, dou-
bling the resistance as in (b) halves the current, while tripling the resistance as in (c) results in
one-third the current, and so on.
EXAMPLE 4–1       
A 27- resistor is connected to a 12-V battery. What is the current?
Solution
Substituting the resistance and voltage values into Ohm’s law yields
I  E
R
  
2
1
7
2

V
  0.444 A
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.1 | Ohm’s Law
95
EXAMPLE 4–3        
If 125 A is the current in a resistor with color bands red, red, yellow, what is
the voltage across the resistor?
Solution
Using the color code of Chapter 3, R  220 k. From Ohm’s law,
E  IR  (125  10–6 A)(220  103 )  27.5 V.
EXAMPLE 4–4        
A resistor with the color code brown, red, yellow is connected to a 30-V source.
What is I?    
Solution
When E is in volts and R is in k, the answer comes out directly in
mA. From the color code, R  120 k. Thus,
I  E
R
  
12
3
0
0
k
V

  0.25 mA
EXAMPLE 4–2        
The lamp of Figure 4–4 draws 25 mA when connected to a 6-V battery. What
is its resistance?
Solution
Using Equation 4–3,
R  E
I
  
25 
6
1
V
03 A
  240 
R = ?
E = 6 V
I = 25 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–4
CircuitSim 04-2 
CircuitSim 04-3 
Traditionally, circuits are drawn with the source on the left and the load on
the right as indicated in Figures 4–1 to 4–3. However, you will also encounter
circuits with other orientations. For these, the same principles apply; as we did
in Figure 4–4, simply draw the current arrow pointing out from the positive end
of the source and apply Ohm’s law in the usual manner. More examples are
shown in Figure 4–5.
I = 2.95 μA
I = 2.65 mA
I = 0.424 A
 = 2.95 μA
 65 V
 22 M
(a) I =
 = 2.65 mA
 18 V
 65 V
 18 V
 6.8 k
 6.8 k
(b) I =
 = 0.424 A
 140 V
140 V
 330 
 330 
(c) I =
22 M
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Ohm’s Law in Graphical Form
The relationship between current and voltage described by Equation 4–1 may
be shown graphically as in Figure 4–6. The graphs, which are straight lines,
show clearly that the relationship between voltage and current is linear, that is,
that current is directly proportional to voltage.
96
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
1. a. For the circuit of Figure 4–2(a), show that halving the voltage halves the
current.
b. For the circuit of Figure 4–3(a), show that halving the resistance doubles
the current.
c. Are these results consistent with the verbal statement of Ohm’s law?
2. For each of the following, draw the circuit with values marked, then solve 
for the unknown.
a. A 10 000-milliohm resistor is connected to a 24-V battery. What is the
resistor current?
b. How many volts are required to establish a current of 20 A in a 100-k
resistor?
c. If 125 V is applied to a resistor and 5 mA results, what is the resistance?
3. For each circuit of Figure 4–7 determine the current, including its direction
(i.e., the direction that the current arrow should point).
4. Verify all points on Figure 4–6 for R  10 .
FIGURE 4–7
What is the current direction and value of I for each case?
Answers
1. a. 5 V10   0.5 A
b. 36 V6   6 A
c. Yes
2. a. 2.4 A
b. 2.0 V
c. 25 k
3. a. 2.49 A, left
b. 15.6 mA, right
c. 51.1 mA, left
I 
 42 V
(b)
2700 
I 
 97 V
(a)
39 
I 
24 V
 470 
(c)
© Cengage Learning 2013
CircuitSim 04-4 
FIGURE 4–6
Graphical representation of Ohm’s law. The red plot is for a 10- resistor
while the green plot is for a 20- resistor.
I (A)
0
10
20
30
40
50 E (V)
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
R = 10 
R = 20 
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Open Circuits
Current can only exist where there is a conductive path (e.g., a length of wire).
For the circuit of Figure 4–8, I equals zero since there is no conductor between
points a and b. We refer to this as an open circuit, Since I  0, substitution of
this into Equation 4–3 yields
R  E
I
  E
0
 ⇒ ohms
Thus, an open circuit has infinite resistance.
Voltage Symbols
Two different symbols are commonly used to represent voltage. For sources,
use uppercase E; for loads (and other components), use uppercase V. This is
illustrated in Figure 4–9.
Using the symbol V, Ohm’s law may be rewritten in its several forms as
I  V
R

[amps]
(4–4)
V  IR
[volts]
(4–5)
R  V
I

[ohms]
(4–6)
These relationships hold for every resistor in a circuit, no matter how complex
the circuit. Since V  IR, these voltages are often referred to as IR drops.
Section 4.1 | Ohm’s Law
97
CircuitSim 04-5 
R =  
E
I = 0 A
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–8
An open circuit has infinite
resistance.
V
1
2
1
2
E
R
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–9
Symbols used to represent
voltages. E is used for source voltages
while V is used for voltage across circuit
components such as resistors.
EXAMPLE 4–5        
The current through each resistor of Figure 4–10 is I  0.5 A (see Note).
Compute V1 and V2.
Solution
V1  IR1  (0.5 A)(20 )  10 V. Note, I is also the current
through R2. Thus, V2  IR2  (0.5 A)(100 )  50 V.
I = 0.5 A
R1 = 20 
R2 = 100 
V1 
V2 




© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–10
Ohm’s law applies to each resistor.
NOTES...
In the interest of brevity (as in
Figure 4–10), we sometimes draw
only a portion of a circuit with the
rest of the circuit implied rather
than shown explicitly.
Thus, this circuit contains a
source and connecting wire, even
though they are not shown here.
CircuitSim 04-6 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

98
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
So far, we have paid little attention to the polarity of voltages across resistors—
that is, at which end should we place the 	 sign for voltage and at which end
should we place the  sign? However, the issue is of extreme importance.
Fortunately, there is a simple relationship between current direction and volt-
age polarity. To get at the idea, consider Figure 4–11(a). Here the polarity of V
is obvious since the resistor is connected directly to the source. This makes the
top end of the resistor positive with respect to the bottom end, and V  E  12 V
as indicated by the meters—remember, they have autopolarity.
Now consider current. The direction of I is from top to bottom through
the resistor as indicated by the current direction arrow. Examining voltage
polarity, we see that the plus sign for V is at the tail of this arrow. This obser-
vation turns out to be true in general and gives us a convention (the voltage
reference convention) for marking voltage polarity on circuit diagrams. For
voltage across a resistor, always place the plus sign at the tail of the current
reference arrow. Several additional examples are shown in Figures 4–11(b)
and (c).
4.2 Voltage Polarity 
and Current
Direction
(a) Defining convention
V
E = 12 V
I




V12


V12
OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

I
(b) Examples
V
I


V


(c) Another example
5A
5 


V
25
OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–11
Convention for voltage polarity. Place the 	 sign for V at the tail of the current direction arrow.
For each resistor of Figure 4–12, compute V and show its polarity.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
CircuitSim 04-7 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.2 | Voltage Polarity and Current Direction
99
V
I = 0.15 mA
V
I = 0.1 A
(a) R = 10 k
(b) R = 3 M
I = 0.3 A
V
(c) R = 400 
I = 2.5 A
(d) R = 0.4 
V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–12
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
1. A resistor has color bands brown, black, and red and a current of 25 mA.
Determine the voltage across it.
2. For a resistive circuit, what is I if E  500 V and R is open circuited? Will the
current change if the voltage is doubled?
3. A certain resistive circuit has voltage E and resistance R. If I  2.5 A, what
will be the current if:
a. E remains unchanged but R is doubled?
b. E remains unchanged but R is quadrupled?
c. E remains unchanged but R is reduced to 20% of its original value?
d. R is doubled and E is quadrupled?
4. The voltmeters of Figure 4–13 have autopolarity. Determine the reading of
each meter, its magnitude and sign.
(a) R = 10 
I = 3 A



OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A
(b) R = 36 
I = 2 A



OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A
(c) R = 15 
I = 6 A



OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A
(d) R = 40 
I = 4 A



OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–13
Answers
a. 1000 V, 	 at left; b. 450 V, 	 at right; c. 120 V, 	 at top; d. 1 V, 	 at bottom
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Current Representation Revisited
Before we move on, we will comment on one more aspect of current representa-
tion. First, note that to completely specify current, you must include both its value
and its direction. (This is why we show current direction reference arrows on cir-
cuit diagrams.) Normally we show the current coming out of the plus (	) terminal
of the source as in Figure 4–14(a). (Here, I  ER  5 A in the direction shown.
This is the actual direction of the current.) As you can see from this (and all pre-
ceding examples in this chapter and in practice), determining the actual current
direction in single-source networks is easy. However, when analyzing complex cir-
cuits (such as those with multiple sources as in later chapters and in practice), it is
not always easy to tell in advance in what direction all currents will be. As a result,
when you solve such problems (or measure their currents), you may find that some
currents have negative values. What does this mean?
To get at the answer, consider both parts of Figure 4–14. In (a), current is
shown in the usual direction, while in (b), it is shown in the opposite direction.
To compensate for the reversed direction, we have changed the sign of the
value of I. The interpretation placed on this is that a positive current in one
direction is the same as a negative current in the opposite direction. Therefore,
(a) and (b) are two representations of the same current. Thus, if during the solu-
tion of a problem (or in the course of a lab measurement) you obtain a positive
value for current, this means that its actual direction is the same as the refer-
ence arrow; conversely, if you obtain a negative value, its direction is opposite
to the reference arrow. 
Why Is This Important?
In a practical sense, knowing this interpretation is important to you. For exam-
ple, suppose you are in the lab and one of your current measurements is neg-
ative. What should you do—should you de-energize the circuit, reverse the
ammeter leads, and power up again just to get a positive reading? Or should
you carry on knowing that, even though the reading is negative, it still tells
you all you need to know about the current, namely its magnitude and its
direction? Most experienced lab personnel would simply log the results and
carry on. 
Which Representation Should You Use?
You should use the representation of Figure 4–14(a). The value of Figure 4–14(b)
lies in its giving you an interpretation of what a negative value for current actu-
ally means when you encounter it. [You will see a brief reference to the repre-
sentation of Figure 4–14(b) in Example 4–9 later in this chapter, but you will
encounter this interpretation many times in later chapters.]
100
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
(a) Standard representation
2 
10 V
I = 5 A
(b) Alternate interpretation
2 
10 V
I = 5 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–14
Two representations of the
same current. While we generally focus on
the representation of (a), there are practical
reasons why you should be familiar with
(b) as well—see text.
Power is familiar to all of us, at least in a general sort of way. We know, for
example, that electric heaters and light bulbs are rated in watts (W) and that
motors are rated in horsepower (or watts), both being units of power as dis-
cussed in Chapter 1. We also know that the higher the watt rating of a
device, the more energy we can get out of it per unit time. Figure 4–15 illus-
trates the idea. In (a), the greater the power rating of the light, the more light
energy it can produce per second. In (b), the greater the power rating of the
heater, the more heat energy it can produce per second. In (c), the larger the
power rating of the motor, the more mechanical work it can do per second.
4.3 Power
CircuitSim 04-8 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

As you can see, power is related to energy, which is the capacity to do
work. Formally, power is defined as the rate of doing work or, equivalently, as
the rate of transfer of energy. The symbol for power is P. By definition,
P  W
t

[watts, W]
(4–7)
where W is the work (or energy) in joules and t is the corresponding time inter-
val of t seconds (see Notes).
The SI unit of power is the watt. From Equation 4–7, we see that P also
has units of joules per second. If you substitute W  1 J and t  1 s, you get 
P  1 J1 s  1 W. From this, you can see that one watt equals one joule per
second. Occasionally, you also need power in horsepower. To convert, recall
that 1 hp  746 watts.
Power in Electrical and Electronic Systems
Since our interest is in electrical power, we need expressions for P in terms of
electrical quantities. Recall from Chapter 2 that voltage is defined as work per
unit charge and current as the rate of transfer of charge,
V  W
Q

(4–8)
and
I  Q
t

(4–9)
From Equation 4–8, W  QV. Substituting this into Equation 4–7 yields P 
Wt  (QV)t  V(Qt). Replacing Qt with I, we get
P  VI [watts, W]
(4–10)
and, for a source,
P  EI [watts, W]
(4–11)
Additional relationships are obtained by substituting V  IR and I  VR into
Equation 4–10:
P  I2R [watts, W]
(4–12)
Section 4.3 | Power
101
(a) A 100-W lamp produces
more light energy per
second than a 40-W lamp
P
(b) Hair dryer
P
Hot
air
out
Cool
air
in
Electric heating
element
Fan
(c) A 10-hp motor can do more work in
      a given time than a 1/2-hp motor
P
Mechanical
energy out
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–15
Energy conversion. Power P is a measure of the rate of energy conversion.
NOTES...
1. Since the denominator of
Equation 4–7 represents an
interval of time, it would be
mathematically more appropriate
to use 
t instead of t. Similarly,
since the numerator represents
an amount of work done during
this interval, it would be more
proper to use 
W. In this
notation, power would be
expressed as
P  
W/
t
(4–7a)
However, in introductory circuit
analysis texts such as this, it is
common to show power as we
do in Equation 4–7, and we will
continue to do so here. However,
in later chapters where it
becomes appropriate to do so,
we will change to the form
represented by Equation 4–7a.
2. The symbol for energy is W and
the abbreviation for watts is W.
Multiple use of symbols is
common in technology. In such
cases, you have to look at the
context in which a symbol is
used to determine its meaning.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and
P  V
R
2

[watts, W]
(4–13)
102
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
EXAMPLE 4–6       
Compute the power supplied to the electric heater of Figure 4–16 using all
three electrical power formulas.
Solution
I  VR  120 V12   10 A. Thus, the power may be calculated
as follows:
a. P  VI  (120 V)(10 A)  1200 W
b. P  I2R  (10 A)2(12 )  1200 W
c. P  V2R  (120 V)212   1200 W
Note that all give the same answer, as they must.
V = 120 V
R = 12 V
E = 120 V
1
2
I
Heater
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–16
Power to the load (i.e., the heater) can be computed from any of the
power formulas.
EXAMPLE 4–7       
Compute the power to each resistor in Figure 4–17 using Equation 4–13.
Solution
You must use the appropriate voltage in the power equation. For
resistor R1, use V1; for resistor R2, use V2.
a. P1  V1
2R1  (10 V)220   5 W
b. P2  V2
2R2  (50 V)2100   25 W
I
R1 = 20 V
1
2
V1 = 10 V
R2 = 100 V
1
2
V2 = 50 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–17
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Power Rating of Resistors
Resistors must be able to safely dissipate their heat without damage. For this
reason, resistors are rated in watts. (For example, common resistors of the type
used in electronics are made with standard ratings of 1⁄8, 1⁄4, 1⁄2, 1, and 2 W, as you
saw in Figure 3–8.) To provide a safety margin, it is customary to select a resis-
tor that is capable of dissipating two or more times its computed power. A resis-
tor that is overrated will run a little cooler.
Section 4.3 | Power
103
EXAMPLE 4–8        
If the dc motor of Figure 4–15(c) draws 6 A from a 120-V source,
a. Compute its power input in watts.
b. Assuming the motor is 100% efﬁcient (i.e., that all electrical power sup-
plied to it is output as mechanical power), compute its power output in
horsepower.
Solution
a. Pin  VI  (120 V)(6 A)  720 W
b. Pout  Pin  720 W. Converting to horsepower, Pout  (720 W)
(746 Whp)  0.965 hp.
a. Show that I P
R

b. Show that V  PR
c. A 100- resistor dissipates 169 W. What is its current?
d. A 3- resistor dissipates 243 W. What is the voltage across it?
e. For Figure 4–17, I  0.5 A. Use Equations 4–10 and 4–12 to compute power
to each resistor. Compare your answers to the answers of Example 4–7.
Answers
c. 1.3 A; d. 27 V; e. P1  5 W, P2  25 W (same)
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–18
The resistor on the right has
been damaged by overheating.
PRACTICAL NOTES...
A properly chosen resistor is able to dissipate its heat safely without becom-
ing excessively hot. However, if through bad design or subsequent compo-
nent failure its current becomes excessive, it will overheat, and damage may
result, as shown in Figure 4–18. One of the symptoms of overheating is that
the resistor becomes noticeably hotter than other resistors in the circuit. (Be
careful, however, as you might get burned if you try to check by touch.)
Component failure may also be detected by smell. Burned components have
a characteristic odor that you will soon come to recognize. If you detect any
of these symptoms, turn the equipment off and look for the source of the
problem. Note, however, an overheated component is often the symptom of
a problem, rather than its cause.
CircuitSim 04-9 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Measuring Power
Power can be measured using a device called a wattmeter. However, since
wattmeters are used primarily for ac power measurement, we will hold off their
consideration until Chapter 17. (You seldom need a wattmeter for dc circuits
since you can determine power directly as the product of voltage times current,
and V and I are easy to measure.)
104
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
For circuits with one source and one load, energy ﬂows from the source to the
load and the direction of power transfer is obvious. For circuits with multiple
sources and loads, however, the direction of energy ﬂow in some parts of the
network may not be at all apparent. We therefore need to establish a clearly
deﬁned power transfer direction convention.
A resistive load (Figure 4–19) may be used to illustrate the idea. Since the
direction of power flow can only be into a resistor, never out of it (since resis-
tors do not produce energy), we define the positive direction of power transfer
as from the source to the load as in (a) and indicate this by means of an arrow:
P→. We then adopt the convention that, for the relative voltage polarities and
current and power directions shown in Figure 4–19(a), when power transfer is
in the direction of the arrow, it is positive, whereas when it is in the direction
opposite to the arrow, it is negative.
To help interpret the convention, consider Figure 4–19(b), which high-
lights the source end. From this we see that power out of a source is positive
when both the current and power arrows point out from the source, both I and
P have positive values, and the source voltage has the polarity indicated.
Now consider Figure 4–19(c), which highlights the load end. Note the rel-
ative polarity of the load voltage and the direction of the current and power
arrows. From this, we see that power to a load is positive when both the cur-
rent and power direction arrows point into the load, both have positive values,
and the load voltage has the polarity indicated.
In Figure 4–19(d), we have generalized the concept. The box may contain
either a source or a load. If P has a positive value, power transfer is into the box;
if P has a negative value, its direction is out.
4.4 Power Direction
Convention
V
E


I
P
R
(a) Power transfer
E
I
P
(b) Source end
V


I
P
R
(c) Load end
(d) Generalization
I
P
V


Source
or
load
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–19
Reference convention for power.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.5 | Energy
105
EXAMPLE 4–9        
Use the power direction convention to describe power transfer for the electric
vehicle of Figure 4–20.
Solution
During normal operation, the batteries supply power to the motors, and
current and power are both positive, Figure 4–20(b). However, when the vehicle is
going downhill, its motors are driven by the weight of the car and they act as
generators—as in (c). Since the motors now act as the source and the batteries as the
load, the actual current is opposite in direction to the reference arrow shown and is
thus negative (recall Figure 4–14). Thus, P  VI is negative. The interpretation is,
therefore, that power transfer is in the direction opposite to the power reference
arrow. For example, if V  48 volts and I  10 A, then P  VI  (48 V)(10 A) 
480 W. This is consistent with what is happening, since minus 480 W into the
motors is the same as plus 480 W out. This 480 W of power ﬂows from the motors
to the batteries, helping to charge them as the car goes downhill.
(a)
Batteries
Control
Drive motors
P
(b)
E
I
Batteries
Motors
P
V


(c)
E
I
Batteries
Generator
P
V


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–20
Earlier (Equation 4–7), we defined power as the rate of doing work. When you
transpose this equation, you get the formula for energy:
W  Pt
(4–14)
If t is measured in seconds, W has units of watt-seconds (i.e., joules, J), while if t
is measured in hours, W has units of watthours (Wh). Note that in Equation 4–14,
P must be constant over the time interval under consideration. If it is not, apply
Equation 4–14 to each interval over which P is constant as described later in
this section. (For the more general case, you need calculus, which we don’t
consider here.)
4.5 Energy
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The most familiar example of energy usage is the energy that we use in our
homes and pay for on our utility bills. This energy is the energy used by the
lights and electrical appliances in our homes. For example, if you run a 100-W
lamp for 1 hour, the energy consumed is W  Pt  (100 W)(1 h)  100 Wh,
while if you run a 1500-W electric heater for 12 hours, the energy consumed is
W  (1500 W)(12 h)  18 000 Wh.
The last example illustrates that the watthour is too small a unit for practi-
cal purposes. For this reason, we use kilowatthours (kWh). By definition,
energy(kWh)  
ene
1
r
0
g
0
y
0
(Wh)

(4–15)
Thus, for the preceding example, W  18 kWh. In most of North America, the
kilowatthour (kWh) is the unit used on your utility bill.
For multiple loads, the total energy is the sum of the energy of individual
loads.
106
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
EXAMPLE 4–10       
Determine the total energy used by a 100-W lamp for 12 hours and a 1.5-kW
heater for 45 minutes.
Solution
Convert all quantities to the same set of units, for example, convert
1.5 kW to 1500 W and 45 minutes to 0.75 h. Then,
W  (100 W)(12 h) 	 (1500 W)(0.75 h)  2325 Wh  2.325 kWh
Alternatively, convert all power to kilowatts ﬁrst. Thus,
W  (0.1 kW)(12 h) 	 (1.5 kW)(0.75 h)  2.325 kWh
EXAMPLE 4–11       
Suppose you use the following electrical appliances: a 1.5-kW heater for 71⁄2  hours;
a 3.6-kW broiler for 17 minutes; three 100-W lamps for 4 hours; and a 900-W
toaster for 6 minutes. At $0.11 per kilowatthour, how much will this cost you?
Solution
Convert time in minutes to hours. Thus,
W  (1500)(71⁄2 ) 	 (3600)1
6
7
0
 	 (3)(100)(4) 	 (900)6
6
0

 13 560 Wh  13.56 kWh
cost  (13.56 kWh)($0.11kWh)  $1.49
In those areas of the world where in everyday life the SI system dominates,
the megajoule (MJ) is sometimes used instead of the kWh (as the kWh is not
an SI unit). The relationship is 1 kWh  3.6 MJ.
Watthour Meter
In practice, energy is measured by watthour meters, many of which are electro-
mechanical devices that incorporate a small electric motor whose speed is pro-
portional to power to the load. This motor drives a set of dials through a gear
train (Figure 4–21). Since the angle through which the dials rotate depends on
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the speed of rotation (i.e., power consumed) and the length of time that this
power flows, the dial position indicates energy used. Note, however, that
electromechanical devices are now giving way to electronic meters, which per-
form this function electronically and display the result on digital readouts.
Law of Conservation of Energy
Before leaving this section, we consider the law of conservation of energy. It
states that energy can neither be created nor destroyed, but is instead converted
from one form to another. You have seen examples of this—for example, the
conversion of electrical energy into heat energy by a resistor, and the conver-
sion of electrical energy into mechanical energy by a motor. In fact, several
types of energy may be produced simultaneously. For example, electrical
energy is converted to mechanical energy by a motor, but some heat is also pro-
duced. This results in a lowering of efficiency, a topic we consider next.
Section 4.6 | Efﬁciency
107
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–21
Watthour meter. This meter uses a gear train to drive the dials. Newer
meters use electronic sensing and digital displays.
Poor efﬁciency results in wasted energy and higher costs. For example, an inef-
ﬁcient motor costs more to run than an efﬁcient one for the same output. An
inefﬁcient piece of electronic gear generates more heat than an efﬁcient one,
and this heat must be removed, resulting in increased costs for fans, heat sinks,
and the like.
Efficiency can be expressed in terms of either energy or power. Power is
generally easier to measure, so we usually use power. The efficiency of a
device or system (Figure 4–22) is defined as the ratio of power output Pout to
power input Pin, and it is usually expressed in percent and denoted by the Greek
letter h (eta). Thus,
h  P
P
o
i
u
n
t
  100%
(4–16)
In terms of energy,
h  W
W
o
i
u
n
t
  100%
(4–17)
4.6 Efﬁciency
Pout
Pin
Plosses
Device
or System
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–22
Input power equals output
power plus losses.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Since Pin  Pout 	 Plosses, efficiency can also be expressed as
h 
 100% 
 100%
(4–18)
The efficiency of equipment and machines varies greatly. Large power
transformers, for example, have efficiencies of 98% or better, while many elec-
tronic amplifiers have efficiencies lower than 50%. Note that efficiency will
always be less than 100%.
1

1 	 P
P
lo
o
s
u
s
t
es
Pout
Pout 	 Plosses
108
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
EXAMPLE 4–12       
A 120-V dc motor draws 12 A and develops an output power of 1.6 hp.
a. What is its efﬁciency?
b. How much power is wasted?
Solution
a. Pin  EI  (120 V)(12 A)  1440 W, and Pout  1.6 hp  746 Whp 
1194 W. Thus,
h  
P
P
o
i
u
n
t  
1
1
1
4
9
4
4
0
W
W
  100  82.9%
b. Plosses  Pin  Pout  1440  1194  246 W
EXAMPLE 4–13       
The efﬁciency of a power ampliﬁer is the ratio of the power delivered to the
load (e.g., speakers) to the power drawn from the power supply. Generally, this
efﬁciency is not very high. For example, suppose a power ampliﬁer delivers
400 W to its speaker system. If the power loss is 509 W, what is its efﬁciency?
Solution
Pin  Pout 	 Plosses  400 W 	 509 W  909 W
h  P
P
o
i
u
n
t  100%  
4
9
0
0
0
9
W
W
  100%  44%
For systems with subsystems or components in cascade (Figure 4–23),
overall efficiency is the product of the efficiencies of each individual part,
where efficiencies are expressed in decimal form. Thus,
hT  h1  h2  h3  · · ·  hn
(4–19)
Pin
Pout
h1
h2
hn
(a) Cascaded system
hT
Pin
Pout
(b) Equivalent of (a)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–23
For systems in cascade, the resultant efficiency is the product of the efficiencies of the individual stages.







Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 4.6 | Efﬁciency
109
EXAMPLE 4–14        
a. For a certain system, h1  95%, h2  85%, and h3  75%. What is hT?
b. If hT  65%, h2  80%, and h3  90%, what is h1?
Solution
a. Convert all efﬁciencies to a decimal value, then multiply. Thus, hT 
h1h2h3  (0.95)(0.85)(0.75)  0.61 or 61%.
b. h1  hT(h2h3)  (0.65)(0.80  0.90)  0.903 or 90.3%
EXAMPLE 4–16        
The motor of Figure 4–24 is operated from 9:00 A.M. to 12:00 noon and from
1:00 P.M. to 5:00 P.M. each day, for 5 days a week, outputting 7 hp to a load. At
$0.085kWh, it costs $22.19 per week for electricity. What is the efﬁciency of
the motor/gearbox combination?
Solution
Win  
$
$
0
2
.0
2
8
.1
5
9
k
w
W
k
h
  261.1 kWhwk
The motor operates 35 hwk. Thus,
Pin  W
t
in  
261
3
.1
5
k
h
W
w
h
k
wk
  7460 W
hT  
P
P
o
i
u
n
t 
(7 hp
7

46
7
0
46
W
Whp)
  0.7
Thus, the motor/gearbox efﬁciency is 70%.
EXAMPLE 4–15        
A motor drives a pump through a gearbox (Figure 4–24). Power input to the
motor is 1200 W. How many horsepower are delivered to the pump?
Solution
The efﬁciency of the motor/gearbox combination is hT  h1  h2 
(0.90)(0.70)  0.63. The output of the gearbox (and hence the input to the
pump) is Pout  hT  Pin  (0.63)(1200 W)  756 W. Converting to horse-
power, Pout  (756 W)(746 Whp)  1.01 hp.
(a) Physical system
Pin
Motor
(h1 = 90%)
Gearbox
(h2 = 70%)
Pout
To pump
(b) Block diagram
Pin
Pout
h1
h2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–24
Motor driving pump through a gearbox.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

110
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
All resistors considered so far have constant values that do not change with
voltage or current. Such resistors are termed linear or ohmic since their current-
voltage (I-V) plot is a straight line. However, the resistance of some materi-
als changes with voltage or current as you saw in Chapter 3, Section 3.10.
These materials are termed nonlinear because their I-V plot is curved
(Figure 4–25).
Since the resistance of all materials changes with temperature, all resistors
are to some extent nonlinear, since they all produce heat and this heat changes
their resistance. For most resistors, however, this effect is small over their
normal operating range, and such resistors are considered to be linear. (The
commercial resistors shown in Figure 3–8 and most others that you will
encounter in this book are linear.)
Since an I-V plot is a graph of Ohm’s law, resistance can be computed from
the ratio VI. First, consider the linear plot of Figure 4–25. Because the slope
is constant, the resistance is constant and you can compute R at any point. For
example, at V  10 V, I  20 mA, and R  10 V20 mA  500 . Similarly,
at V  20 V, I  40 mA, and R  20 V40 mA  500 , which is the same as
before. This is true at all points on this linear curve. The resulting resistance is
referred to as dc resistance, Rdc. Thus, Rdc  500 . This is the type of resis-
tance that we have considered so far in this chapter.
An alternate way to compute resistance is illustrated in Figure 4–26. At
point 1, V1  I1R. At point 2, V2  I2R. Subtracting voltages and solving for R
yields
R  
V
I
2
2


V
I1
1
  

V
I

[ohms, ]
(4–20)
where 
V
I is the inverse of the slope of the line. (Here, 
 is the Greek letter
delta. It is used to represent a change or increment in value.) To illustrate, if
you select 
V to be 20 V, you find that the corresponding 
I from Figure 4–26
is 40 mA. Thus, R  
V
I  20 V40 mA  500  as before. Resistance
4.7 Nonlinear and
Dynamic
Resistances
I (mA)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
20
40
60
80
100
V (V)
I
Linear
resistor
Nonlinear
resistor


V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–25
Linear and nonlinear resistance characteristics.
I
(mA)
0
20
40
60
80
0
20
40
60
80
100
V (V)
120
I = 40 mA
V = 20 V
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–26
R  
V
I  20 V40 mA  500 .
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

calculated as in Figure 4–26 is called differential or dynamic resistance. For
linear resistors, Rdynamic  Rdc.
Now consider the nonlinear resistance plot of Figure 4–25. At V  20 V,
I  20 mA. Therefore, Rdc  20 V20 mA  1.0 k; at V  120 V, I  60 mA,
and Rdc  120 V60 mA  2.0 k. This resistance therefore increases with
applied voltage. However, for small variations about a fixed point on the
curve, the dynamic resistance will be constant. This is an important concept
that you will utilize later in your study of electronics. We leave the topic
for now.
Section 4.8 | Computer-Aided Circuit Analysis
111
We end our introduction to Ohm’s law by solving several simple problems
using Multisim and PSpice. Note, however, that although both software pack-
ages are described here, most users will select one or the other. (Regardless of
which one you choose, you should install its corresponding shortcut icon on
your screen when you install the software. A shortcut icon permits you to
launch your software with a click of the mouse. If you do not have the short-
cut, you can still launch from the Windows Start button menu as detailed in
Appendix A.)
You will create a number of files throughout this course, so an organized
filing system helps. First, create a folder on your computer called Multisim
Files (if you are a Multisim user), or PSpice Files (if you are a PSpice user).
(This is a Windows file creation process and is not detailed here. If you need
help, see Appendix A.) In this folder, create a subfolder called Ch 4 in which
to save the files for Chapter 4. As you go through the book, add a subfolder for
each new chapter.
To begin the analysis, you must first build the circuit on your screen, a
process referred to as schematic capture. Let us use the circuit of Figure 4–27
to get started. Because this is your first look at circuit simulation, consider-
able detail is included. (Although the procedures may seem complex, they
become quite intuitive with a little practice.) When setting up a problem for
analysis, there are generally several ways that you can proceed, and with
experience you will learn shortcuts. In the meantime, to get started, use the
methods suggested here.
4.8 Computer-Aided
Circuit Analysis
I 
 12.5 V
25 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–27
Simple circuit to illustrate computer analysis.
PSPICE
MultiSim
Multisim
For the most part, Multisim usage is straightforward. The example below
shows you how to get started—or alternatively, proceed as per Note 1. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Getting Started 
Double-click the Multisim shortcut icon on your computer. A screen similar to
that of Figure 4–28 (except that it is blank) opens. Place your mouse pointer on
View and left-click. If either Spreadsheet View or Description Box is selected,
click the selected item to deselect it.
112
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–28
Multisim simulation of circuit of Figure 4–27.
NOTES...
Multisim Operational Notes
1. We have put together a “hands-on” Multisim Beginners Tutorial that you
might ﬁnd helpful. Using annotated screen shots and illustrated
instructions, it walks you step by step through the process of creating and
running the simulation of Figure 4–28 on your screen. Visit our Web site at
cengagebrain.com and follow the links to Multisim Beginners Tutorial. 
2. Unless directed otherwise, use the left button for all operations.
3. Multisim circuits require a ground.
4. To select a component already placed on the screen, click it. A dashed box
appears, indicating selection.
5. To deselect a component, place the cursor outside the dashed box and
click the left button.
6. To reposition a component, select it, then, holding the left button down,
drag it to the new position and release.
7. To delete a component, select it, then press the delete key.
8. We frequently use a shorthand designation to represent sequential
actions. For example, if you are told to click View/Toolbars, this is
a shorthand way of saying, “click View on the menu bar, then select
Toolbars on the drop-down list that appears.”
9. To rotate a component, select it—then, while holding down the Ctrl key,
press the R key. (In shorthand notation, this may be written as Ctrl/R.
Each Ctrl/R rotates the component by 90.)
10. To place a connector dot, select Place on the menu bar, then click
Junction. Position the dot on the screen and click to place it.
11. A maximum of four wires may be connected to any point (junction).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To ensure that you have the toolbars selected that you need for this problem,
right-click View, then confirm that the following are selected: Basic, Measurement
Components, Power Source Component, and Simulation Switch. (For legacy soft-
ware users, select Simulation instead of Simulation Switch.) Click any that are not
selected to add them to your screen. (Don’t worry if others are selected—you may
need them in later examples.) Now compare your screen to that of Figure 4–28.
You will probably find that the screen layouts are different, but that all items
pointed to by arrows on Figure 4–28 are found somewhere on your screen. 
To gain familiarity with your workspace screen, experiment a bit. For
example, locate each of the items indicated by arrows on Figure 4–28 and place
your mouse pointer on them. A small banner opens identifying each.
(Familiarity is important because, in what follows, we refer to items by name
and you need to be able to locate them.) 
Creating Your First Multisim Circuit
First, briefly study the Multisim Operational Notes, then proceed to build the
circuit as follows. (If you have utilized the CircuitSim interactive study com-
panion files in this and previous chapters, you will be somewhat familiar with
some of what follows.)
• With your mouse pointer, locate the dc power source icon (the dc voltage
source), left-click it and move your mouse pointer out into the workspace
screen. You will see that it has a battery symbol attached to it. (This symbol
is referred to as a “ghost.”)
• Position the ghost on your workspace as in Figure 4–28, then click the left
button to place it. (If the ghost remains after the source has been placed,
right-click to cancel.)
• Repeat the procedure to select and place the ammeter. 
• Click the resistor symbol and move it to the workspace. Note that it is horizon-
tal.Beforeplacing,pressCtrl/R(seeNote9),thenclicktoplacetherotatedresis-
tor. (If you place it before you rotate it, select it and rotate as per Notes 4 and 9.)
• Similarly, select and place the ground symbol and the voltmeter symbol.
Reposition anything that needs to be moved by dragging it with the mouse.
• “Wire” the circuit as follows: Move the mouse pointer to the tip of the bat-
tery symbol and it will change to a crosshair. Click to start the connection
and  a wire follows. Move to the destination pin (in this case, the left amme-
ter pin) then click again. The wire attaches. Repeat to attach a wire from the
battery to the ground. 
• Continue until the wiring is ﬁnished. (When placing a wire, you can click at
points along its path to nail it in place, e.g., at a corner.) Reposition any wire
that needs to be moved by dragging it.
• Double-click the battery symbol. In its dialog box, click the Value tab (if not
already selected), change the voltage to 25, then click OK. Similarly, change
the resistor value to 12.5, select Ohms, then click OK.
• On your menu bar, click File/Save As. A dialog box opens. At the far right of
the box labelled Save In, click the small arrow, and navigate to your newly cre-
ated folder (i.e., Multisim Files/Ch 4) and select it. Now locate the File Name
box near the bottom of the dialog window, type Figure 4–28, then click Save.
• Activate the circuit by clicking the simulation ON/OFF switch.
After simulation is complete, the meters will display circuit current (2 A) and
resistor voltage (25 V) as depicted in Figure 4–28. To close Multisim, click its
Windows close button.
Section 4.8 | Computer-Aided Circuit Analysis
113
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PSpice
PSpice provides you with a variety of analysis options. For this example, we
will use bias point analysis. While this option has limited capability, it is easy
to use and is a good choice for dc circuits with fixed sources.
Getting Started
Double-click the PSpice shortcut icon—see Notes 1 and 2. On the screen that
opens, click File, select New, then Project. In the New Project box, type
Figure 4–29 into the Name box, ensure that Analog or Mixed A/D is selected,
then click the Browse button. Navigate your way through the directory tree
until you locate Ch 4, (the subfolder that you just created), double-click, then
click OK to close the box. 
Click OK again. This opens the Create PSpice Project box. Select Create
a blank project, then click OK. On the next screen, you will see Schematic 1:
Page1. (This is the screen on which you will build your circuit. Click its
Maximize button. It should look much like Figure 4–29 of the textbook except
that it will be blank, and the Place Part box on the right-hand side will not be
open.) Note the buttons, tools, and other items identified on Figure 4–29.
Locate these on your screen. Poke around with your mouse and spend a bit of
time studying the screen to get familiar with it. (Familiarity is important as we
refer to items by name and you need to be able to locate them.) Note that a
number of items are inactive, but they will become active when needed.
114
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
Relaunch Multisim and rebuild the circuit of Figure 4–28 from scratch, except
rotate the source symbol by 180° so that the source voltage is 25 V. Click Save
As and save as Practice P4. Run the simulation and reconcile your results with
the voltage polarity and current direction conventions discussed in this chapter
and in Chapter 2.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
NOTES...
1. PSpice is available as a free
download from Cadence Design
Systems Inc.; see Appendix A to
get your copy. (PSpice is available
as a full-featured commercial ver-
sion or as a demo version. It is
the demo version that is free, but
it is completely adequate for all
examples in this book.)
2. The icon will likely be labelled
ORCAD Capture CIS Demo on
your screen.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–29
PSpice simulation of Figure 4–27 using the bias point analysis technique.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Building Your First PSpice Circuit
You are now ready to build the circuit of Figure 4–27. It should look like
Figure 4–29 when completed. Review the PSpice Operational Notes, refer to
the icon identifications in Figure 4–29 for guidance, then proceed as follows:
• Click the Place Part tool and the Place Part box opens. In the Libraries box,
make sure the following are present: ANALOG, EVAL, SOURCE, and SPECIAL.
If any are missing, add them. (For example, to add EVAL, click the Add
Library button [which is not labelled, but looks like a dotted square to the left
of the X button], select EVAL in the library list, then click Open.)
• Ensure that all entries in the libraries box are highlighted as in Figure 4–29.
If they aren’t, click the ﬁrst entry (to highlight it, press and hold the shift key
on your keyboard, then click the last entry in the list. This should highlight
all entries as indicated in Figure 4–29. This means that all are selected.)
• If you know the name of the part you want, type it into the Part Entry box.
For example, to get the dc source, type VDC, then click the Place Part button.
• A battery symbol will appear as a “ghost” attached to your cursor. Position
it as in Figure 4–29, then click once. To end placement, move your pointer
to an empty spot, right-click, then left-click End Mode—see PSpice
Operational Notes, Note 2. This gets back your normal mouse pointer.
• Drag your mouse over entry VDC in the Parts Entry box (to highlight it), type
R then click the Place Part button. A horizontal resistor appears attached to
your pointer. Rotate it by pressing the R key on your keyboard, place it using
the left button, then end placement as per PSpice Operational Note 2.
Section 4.8 | Computer-Aided Circuit Analysis
115
NOTES...
PSpice Operational Notes
1. Unless directed otherwise, use the left mouse button for all operations.
2. To end the placement of a part, click the right mouse button, then left-click
End Mode. (Alternatively, you can press the Esc key on your keyboard twice.)
3. To select a particular component on your schematic, place the mouse
pointer on it and click. The selected component changes color.
4. To deselect a selected component, move the pointer to an empty place on
the screen and click.
5. To delete a component from your schematic, select it, then press the
Delete key.
6. To drag a component, place the pointer over it, press and hold the left
button, drag the component to where you want it, and then release.
7. To change a default value, place the pointer over the numerical value (not
the component symbol) and double-click. Change the appropriate value.
8. To rotate a component, select it, click the right button, then click Rotate.
Alternately, press the R key on your keyboard.
9. There must be no space between a value and its unit. Thus, for example,
enter 25V, not 25 V. Alternatively just enter the value without the unit as,
for instance, 25.
10. All PSpice circuits must have a ground.
11. When placing a wire, you can click at points along its path to nail it in
place, as for example, at a corner. You can click on top of another wire to
connect two wires together. To improve the looks of the circuit, reposition
wires or components as desired by dragging them.
12. Not all buttons in the workspace are explicitly labelled. Use your mouse
pointer to explore and identify unlabeled buttons.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

• Click the Place Ground tool, select either 0/CAPSYM or 0/SOURCE, click
OK, place the symbol, then end placement.
• To begin wiring, click the Place Wire tool—see Figure 4–29. The cursor
changes to a +.  Position the cursor in the little box at the bottom end of the
battery symbol, and click. This attaches a wire. Now move the cursor to the
top of the ground symbol, pulling the wire with you. Click and it attaches.
Wire the rest of the circuit in this manner, then end wire placement by right-
clicking, then left-click End Wire.
• Click the Select Tool button if necessary to get your normal mouse pointer back.
• You need to update component values. To change the resistor value, double-click
its 1k default value (not its symbol), type 12.5 into the Value box, then click OK.
Similarly, change the source voltage to 25V. (See Operational Note 9.)
• Click the New Simulation Proﬁle icon, enter your ﬁle name Figure 4–29 in the
Name box, leave None in the Inherit From box, then click Create. A Simulations
Settings box opens. (It will likely open behind your workspace screen, so you
may have to temporarily minimize your workspace screen to see it.) Click the
Analysis tab, from Analysis type, select Bias Point, then click OK.
• Enlarge your workspace screen again, then click the bias point voltage and
bias point current icons to their ON states.
• Click the Save Document icon, then the Run icon. If an Undo Warning box
opens, click Yes.
• Voltage and current values will appear on the screen as indicated in Figure 4–29.
(A grayed-out window may open. Just move it out of the way.)
• To exit from PSpice, click its Windows close button. Click Yes All to save
changes.
PSpice Voltmeters and Ammeters
As an alternative to the bias point method, you can use PSpice voltmeters and
ammeters to display results. However, the bias point method is much simpler to
use and is completely adequate for all dc problems in this book. For ac analysis
however (Chapter 15 and beyond), you will find that the bias point method does
not work—it cannot handle ac. At that point, we show how to use ac meters.
Plotting Ohm’s Law
As a final example for this chapter, use PSpice to compute and graph current
versus voltage. By varying the source voltage of Figure 4–27 and plotting I, for
example, you can obtain a plot of Ohm’s law.  Proceed as follows.
• Launch PSpice, click File/New/Project, and in the New Project Name box, type
Figure 4–31. Ensure that the Analog or Mixed A/D is selected. Use the Browse
button and navigate to the target folder (i.e., Ch 4), double-click, then click OK.  
• Click OK. This opens the Create PSpice Project box. Select Create a blank
project, then click OK.
• This opens the Schematic 1: Page 1 screen. Now rebuild the circuit of
Figure 4–27. Set R to 10 ohms. Leave the source voltage at its default value
of 0 volts.
• Click the New Simulation Proﬁle icon, type Figure 4–31 as your ﬁle name,
leave None in the Inherit From box, then click Create. A Simulations Setting
box opens. (You may have to minimize your workspace screen to see it.) Click
the Analysis tab, select DC Sweep from the Analysis Type list and Primary
Sweep from the Options list. For Sweep Variable, choose Voltage Source, and in the
Name box type the name of your voltage source. (It will be V1.) Choose
116
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Linear as the sweep type, key 0 into the Start Value box, 100 into the End
Value box, 5 into the Increment box, then click OK. (This sets PSpice up to
sweep the voltage from 0 V to 100 V in 5 V steps.)
• Click the Current Marker icon and position the marker as shown in Figure 4–30.
(It will be gray, not green.) Press Esc to get your normal mouse pointer back.
• Click the Save Document icon, then the Run icon. If an Undo Warning box
opens, click Yes.
• The Ohm’s law plot of Figure 4–31 will appear on your screen (except that
it may have a black background). You can either keep the black background
or change it as follows: Click Tools, Options, Color Settings, Background,
select white, then click OK. 
• Using the cursor (see Appendix A), read values from the graph. Verify each
reading with your calculator. 
Section 4.8 | Computer-Aided Circuit Analysis
117
10 A
5 A
0 A
0 V
20 V
I(R1)
40 V
V_V1
60 V
80 V
100 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–31
Ohm’s law plot for the circuit of Figure 4–29 with R = 10 .
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–30
Using a current marker to
display current. (The marker will be gray
when you place it, but it takes on the color
of the trace that it creates when you run
the simulation.)
Y
ou have been assigned to perform a design review and cost analysis of an
existing product. The product uses a 12-V 5% power supply. After a cata-
log search, you ﬁnd a new power supply with a speciﬁcation of 12 V 2%,
which, because of its newer technology, costs only ﬁve dollars more than the
one you are currently using. Although it provides improved performance for the
product, your supervisor won’t approve it because of the extra cost. However,
the supervisor agrees that if you can bring the cost differential down to $3.00
or less, you can use the new supply. You then look at the schematic and discover
that a number of precision 1% resistors are used because of the wide tolerance
of the old supply. (As a speciﬁc example, a 1% tolerance 220-k resistor is
used instead of a standard 5% tolerance resistor because the loose tolerance of
the original power supply results in current through the resistor that is out of
spec. Its current must be between 50 mA and 60 mA when the 12-V supply is
connected across it. Several other such instances are present in the product, a
total of 15 in all.) You begin to wonder whether you could replace the precision
resistors (which cost $0.24 each) with standard 5% resistors (which cost $0.03
each) and save enough money to satisfy your supervisor. Perform an analysis
to determine if your hunch is correct.
Putting It into Practice
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

118
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
I
E
R
V
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–32
1 A
Fuse
E
Ammeter
Green
Blue
Black


A
OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–33
Problems
4.1 Ohm’s Law
1. For the circuit of Figure 4–32, determine the current I for each of the follow-
ing. Express your answer in the most appropriate unit: amps, milliamps,
microamps, and so on.
a. E  40 V, R  20 
d. E  10 V, R  2.5 M
b. E  35 mV, R  5 m
e. E  7.5 V, R  2.5  103 
c. V  200 V, R  40 k
f. V  12 kV, R  2 M
2. Determine R for each of the following. Express your answer in the most
appropriate unit: ohms, kilohms, megohms, and so on.
a. E  50 V, I  2.5 A
c. E  2 kV, I  0.1 kA
b. E  37.5 V, I  1 mA
d. E  4 kV, I  8  104 A
3. For the circuit of Figure 4–32, compute V for each of the following:
a. 1 mA, 40 k
c. 10 mA, 4  104 
b. 10 A, 30 k
d. 12 A, 3  102 
4. A 48- hot water heater is connected to a 120-V source. What is the current
drawn?
5. When plugged into a 120-V wall outlet, an electric lamp draws 1.25 A. What
is its resistance?
6. What is the potential difference between the two ends of a 20-k resistor
when its current is 3  103 A?
7. How much voltage can be applied to a 560- resistor if its current must not
exceed 50 mA?
8. A relay with a coil resistance of 240  requires a minimum of 50 mA to
operate. What is the minimum voltage that will cause it to operate?
9. For Figure 4–32, if E  30 V and the conductance of the resistor is 0.2 S,
what is I? Hint: See Section 3.11, Chapter 3.
10. If I  36 mA when E  12 V, what is I if the 12-V source is
a. replaced by an 18-V source?
b. replaced by a 4-V source?
11. Current through a resistor is 15 mA. If the voltage drop across the resistor is
33 V, what is its color code?
12. For the circuit of Figure 4–33,
a. If E  28 V, what does the meter indicate?
b. If E  312 V, what does the meter indicate?
13. For the circuit of Figure 4–33, if the resistor is replaced with one with red,
red, black color bands, at what voltage do you expect the fuse to blow?
14. A 20-V source is applied to a resistor with color bands brown, black, red,
and silver
a. Compute the nominal current in the circuit.
b. Compute the minimum and maximum currents based on the tolerance of
the resistor.
15. An electromagnet is wound with AWG 30 copper wire. The coil has 800
turns and the average length of each turn is 3 inches. When connected to a
48-V dc source, what is the current (assuming voltage is constant)
a. at 20 C?
b. at 40 C?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16. You are to build an electromagnet with 0.643-mm diameter copper wire. To
create the required magnetic ﬁeld, the current in the coil must be 1.75 A at
20 C. The electromagnet is powered from a 9.6-V dc source. How many
meters of wire do you need to wind the coil?
17. A resistive circuit element is made from 100 m of 0.5-mm diameter 
aluminum wire. If the current at 20 C is 200 mA, what is the applied 
voltage?
18. Prepare an Ohm’s law graph similar to Figure 4–7 for a 2.5-k and a 5-k
resistor. Compute and plot points every 5 V from E  0 V to 25 V. Reading
values from the graph, ﬁnd current at E  14 V.
19. Figure 4–34 represents the I-V graph for the circuit of Figure 4–32. What 
is R?
20. For a resistive circuit, E is quadrupled and R is halved. If the new current is
24 A, what was the original current?
21. For a resistive circuit, E  100 V. If R is doubled and E is changed so 
that the new current is double the original current, what is the new value 
of E?
22. You need to measure the resistance of an electric heater element, but have
only a 12-V battery and an ammeter. Describe how you would determine its
resistance. Include a sketch.
23. If 25 m of 0.1-mm diameter Nichrome wire is connected to a 12-V battery,
what is the current at 20 C?
24. If the current is 0.5 A when a length of AWG 40 copper wire is connected to
48 V, what is the length of the wire in meters? Assume 20 C.
4.2 Voltage Polarity and Current Direction
25. For each resistor of Figure 4–35, determine voltage V and its polarity or cur-
rent I and its direction as applicable.
26. The ammeters of Figure 4–36 have autopolarity. Determine their readings,
magnitude, and polarity.
Problems
119
I (A)
0
20
40
60
80
0
5
10
15
20
V (V)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–34


V = 6 V
8 
(a)


A
OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A



V = 6 V
8 
(b)


A
OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A



V = 6 V
8 
(c)


OFF
300mV
)))
A
V
V
A
A



V = 6 V
8 
(d)


OFF
300mV
)))
A
V
V
A
A

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–36
V
I
(a) I = 3 A
V
I
(b) V  60 V


V
I
(c) I = 6 A
V
I
(d) V  105 V


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–35
All resistors are 15 .
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4.3 Power
27. A resistor dissipates 723 joules of energy in 3 minutes and 47 seconds.
Calculate the rate at which energy is being transferred to this resistor in
joules per second. What is its power dissipation in watts?
28. How long does it take for a 100-W soldering iron to dissipate 1470 J?
29. A resistor draws 3 A from a 12-V battery. How much power does the battery
deliver to the resistor?
30. A 120-V electric coffee maker is rated 960 W. Determine its resistance and
rated current.
31. A 1.2-kW electric heater has a resistance of 6 . How much current does it
draw?
32. A warning light draws 125 mA when dissipating 15 W. What is its 
resistance?
33. How many volts must be applied to a 3- resistor to result in a power dissi-
pation of 752 W?
34. What IR drop occurs when 90 W is dissipated by a 10- resistor?
35. A resistor with color bands brown, black, and orange dissipates 0.25 W.
Compute its voltage and current.
36. A 2.2-k resistor with a tolerance of 5% is connected to a 12-V dc source.
What is the possible range of power dissipated by the resistor?
37. A portable radio transmitter has an input power of 0.455 kW. How much
current does it draw from a 12-V battery?
38. For a resistive circuit, E  12 V.
a. If the load dissipates 8 W, what is the current in the circuit?
b. If the load dissipates 36 W, what is the load resistance?
39. A motor delivers 3.56 hp to a load. How many watts is this?
40. The load on a 120-V circuit consists of six 100-W lamps, a 1.2-kW elec-
tric heater, and an electric motor drawing 1500 W. If the circuit is fused 
at 30 A, what happens when a 900-W toaster is plugged in? Justify your
answer.
41. A 0.27-k resistor is rated 2 W. Compute the maximum voltage that can be
applied and the maximum current that it can carry without exceeding its
rating.
42. Determine which, if any, of the following resistors may have been damaged
by overheating. Justify your answer.
a. 560 , 1⁄2 W, with 75 V across it.
b. 3 , 20 W, with 4 A through it.
c.
1⁄4 W, with 0.25 mA through it and 40 V across it.
43. A 25- resistor is connected to a power supply whose voltage is 100 V 5%.
What is the possible range of power dissipated by the resistor?
44. A load resistance made from copper wire is connected to a 24-V dc source.
The power dissipated by the load when the wire temperature is 20 C is
192 W. What will be the power dissipated when the temperature of the wire
drops to 10 C? (Assume the voltage remains constant.)
4.4 Power Direction Convention
45. Each block of Figure 4–37 may be a source or a load. For each, determine
power and its direction.
120
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
(d)
Source
or load
8 A
30 V


(c)
Source
or load
16 A
8 V


(b)
Source
or load
2 A
15 V


(a)
Source
or load
4 A
12 V


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–37
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

46. The 12-V battery of Figure 4–38 is being “charged” by a battery charger. The
current is 4.5 A as indicated.
a. What is the direction of current?
b. What is the direction of power ﬂow?
c. What is the power to the battery?
4.5 Energy
47. A 40-W night safety light burns for 9 hours.
a. Determine the energy used in joules.
b. Determine the energy used in watthours.
c. At $0.08kWh, how much does it cost to run this light for 9 hours?
48. An indicator light on a control panel operates continuously, drawing 20 mA
from a 120-V supply. At $0.09 per kilowatthour, how much does it cost per
year to operate the light?
49. Determine the total cost of using the following at $0.11 per kWh:
a. a 900-W toaster for 5 minutes,
b. a 120-V, 8-A heater for 1.7 hours,
c. an 1100-W dishwasher for 36 minutes,
d. a 120-V, 288- soldering iron for 24 minutes.
50. An electric device with a cycle time of 1 hour operates at full power (400 W)
for 15 minutes, at half power for 30 minutes, then cuts off for the remainder
of the hour. The cycle repeats continuously. At $0.10kWh, determine the
yearly cost of operating this device.
51. While the device of Problem 50 is operating, two other loads as follows are
also operating:
a. a 4-kW heater, continuously,
b. a 3.6-kW heater, on for 12 hours per day.
Calculate the yearly cost of running all loads.
52. At $0.08 per kilowatthour, it costs $1.20 to run a heater for 50 hours from a
120-V source. How much current does the heater draw?
53. If there are 24 slices in a loaf of bread and you have a two-slice, 1100-W
toaster that takes 1 minute and 45 seconds to toast a pair of slices, at
$0.13kWh, how much does it cost to toast a loaf?
4.6 Efﬁciency
54. The power input to a motor with an efﬁciency of 85% is 690 W. What is its
power output?
a. in watts
b. in hp
55. The power output of a transformer with h  97% is 50 kW. What is its
power in?
56. For a certain device, h  94%. If losses are 18 W, what are Pin and Pout?
57. The power input to a device is 1100 W. If the power lost due to various inef-
ﬁciencies is 190 W, what is the efﬁciency of the device?
58. A 240-V, 4.5-A water heater produces heat energy at the rate of 3.6 MJ 
per hour. Compute
a. the efﬁciency of the water heater,
b. the annual cost of operation at $0.09kWh if the heater is on for 6 hday.
Problems
121
12 V
Battery
charger
4.5 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–38
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

59. A 120-V dc motor with an efﬁciency of 89% draws 15 A from the source.
What is its output horsepower?
60. A 120-V dc motor develops an output of 3.8 hp. If its efﬁciency is 87%, how
much current does it draw?
61. The power/control system of an electric car consists of a 48-V onboard battery
pack, electronic control/drive unit, and motor (Figure 4–39). If 180 A are drawn
from the batteries, how many horsepower are delivered to the drive wheels?
62. Show that the efﬁciency of n devices or systems in cascade is the product of
their individual efﬁciencies, that is, that hT  h1  h2  . . .  hn.
63. A 120-V dc motor drives a pump through a gearbox (Figure 4–24). If the
power input to the pump is 1100 W, the gearbox has an efﬁciency of 75%,
and the power input to the motor is 1600 W, determine the horsepower
output of the motor.
64. If the motor of Problem 63 is protected by a 15-A circuit breaker, will it
open? Compute the current to ﬁnd out.
65. If the overall efﬁciency of a radio transmitting station is 55% and it transmits
at 35 kW for 24 hday, compute the cost of energy used per day at $0.09kWh.
66. In a factory, two machines, each delivering 27 kW are used on an average for
8.7 hday, 320 daysyear. If the efﬁciency of the newer machine is 87% and
that of the older machine is 72%, compute the difference in cost per year of
operating them at $0.10 per kilowatthour.
4.7 Nonlinear and Dynamic Resistances
67. A voltage-dependent resistor has the I-V characteristic of Figure 4–40.
a. At V  25 V, what is I? What is Rdc?
b. At V  60 V, what is I? What is Rdc?
c. Why are the two values different?
122
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
To drive
wheels
Efficiency: 95%
Efficiency: 80%
Batteries
Power/
control
Drive
motors
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–39
FIGURE 4–40
0
10
20
30
40
50
V (V)
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
60
70
80
I (A)
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

68. For the resistor of Figure 4–40:
a. Determine Rdynamic for V between 0 and 40 V.
b. Determine Rdynamic for V greater than 40 V.
c. If V changes from 20 V to 30 V, how much does I change?
d. If V changes from 50 V to 70 V, how much does I change?
4.8 Computer-Aided Circuit Analysis
69. Set up the circuit of Figure 4–32 and solve for currents for the voltage/
resistance pairs of Problem 1a, 1c, 1d, and 1e.
70. A battery charger with a voltage of 12.9 V is used to charge a battery,
Figure 4–41(a). The internal resistance of the charger is 0.12  and the volt-
age of the partially run-down battery is 11.6 V. The equivalent circuit for 
the charger/battery combination is shown in (b). You reason that, since the two
voltages are in opposition, net voltage for the circuit will be 12.9 V 
11.6 V  1.3 V and, thus, the charging current I will be 1.3 V0.12  
10.8 A. Set up the circuit of (b) and use Multisim to verify your 
conclusion.
Problems
123
(a)
Charger
Battery
I
 11.6 V
(b) Equivalent
Charger
Battery
12.9 V
0.12 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 4–41
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
MultiSim
MultiSim
MultiSim
71. Click Place on the menu bar; click Component; from the Group list, select
Basic; scroll down and click Switch; select SPDT, then click OK. Place on
the screen, then close the Select a Component box. Double-click the switch
symbol, and when its dialog box opens, select the Value tab. In the Key for
Toggle box, select A, then click OK. (This relabels the switch as [A]. Press
the A key on the keyboard several times and note that the switch opens and
closes.) Add a second switch and label it (B). Add a 12-V dc source, ground,
and lamp. (To add the lamp, click Place/Component, and from the Group
box, select Indicators/Virtual_lamp.) Set up the circuit of Figure 2–28,
Chapter 2. Operate the switches and determine whether you have success-
fully achieved two-way control.
72. Repeat Problem 69 using PSpice.
73. Repeat Problem 70 using PSpice.
74. Using PSpice, repeat the Ohm’s law analysis (Figure 4–31) except use R 
25  and sweep the source voltage from 10 V to 	10 V in 1-V incre-
ments. On this graph, what does the negative value for current mean?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

75. The cursor may be used to read values from PSpice graphs. Get the graph
from Problem 74 on the screen and:
a. Click Trace on the menu bar, select Cursor, click Display. A display box
opens. Position the cursor on the graph, and click again. The cursor read-
ing is displayed on your screen.
b. The cursor may be positioned using the mouse or the left and right arrow
keys. Position the cursor at 2 V and read the current. Verify by Ohm’s law.
Repeat at a number of other points, both positive and negative.
124
Chapter 4 | Ohm’s Law, Power, and Energy
PSPICE
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. 25 V
2. 0 A, No
3. a. 1.25 A; b. 0.625 A; c. 12.5 A; d. 5 A
4. a. 30 V; b. 72 V; c. 90 V; d. 160 V
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

125
5 Series Circuits
6 Parallel Circuits
7 Series-Parallel Circuits
8 Methods of Analysis
9 Network Theorems
I
BASIC dc ANALYSIS
II
P
art I provided the foundation upon which proﬁcient circuit analysis is built. The
terms, units, and deﬁnitions used in the previous chapters have developed the
necessary vocabulary that is used throughout electrical and electronics technology.
In Part II, we build on this foundation, applying the concepts developed in 
Part I to initially analyze series dc circuits. Several very important rules, laws, and
theorems will be developed in the following chapters, providing additional tools
needed to extend circuit theory to the analysis of parallel and series-parallel cir-
cuits. Circuit theorems will be used to simplify the most complex circuit into an
equivalent circuit that is represented as a single source and a single resistor.
Although most circuits are much more complex than the circuits used in this text,
all circuits, even the most complex, follow the same laws.
Several different techniques are often available to analyze a given circuit. In
order to give a broad overview, this textbook uses the various methods for illustra-
tive purposes. You are encouraged to use different techniques where possible, so
that you develop the skills to become proﬁcient in circuit analysis. I
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Chassis Ground
Earth Ground
Electric Circuit
Ground
Kirchhoff’s Voltage Law
(KVL)
Loading Effect (Ammeter)
Meter Loading
Point Sources
Series Circuit
Terminal Voltage
Total Equivalent
Resistance
Voltage Divider Rule
Voltage Subscripts
I OUTLINE
Series Circuits
Kirchhoff’s Voltage Law
Resistors in Series
Voltage Sources in Series
Interchanging Series
Components
The Voltage Divider Rule
Circuit Ground
Voltage Subscripts
Internal Resistance 
of Voltage Sources
Ammeter Loading Effects
Circuit Analysis Using
Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• determine the total resistance in a series 
circuit and calculate circuit current,
• use Ohm’s law and the voltage divider rule to
solve for the voltage across all resistors in
the circuit,
• express Kirchhoff’s voltage law and use it to
analyze a given circuit,
• solve for the power dissipated by any resis-
tor in a series circuit and show that the total
power dissipated is exactly equal to the
power delivered by the voltage source,
• solve for the voltage between any two points in
a series or parallel circuit,
• calculate the loading effect of an ammeter in
a circuit,
• use computers to assist in the analysis of
simple series circuits.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5
SERIES CIRCUITS
I
n the previous chapter we examined the interrelation of current, voltage, resistance, and
power in a single resistor circuit. In this chapter we will expand on these basic concepts to
examine the behavior of circuits having several resistors in series.
We will use Ohm’s law to derive the voltage divider rule and to verify Kirchhoff’s voltage law.
A good understanding of these important principles provides an important base upon which fur-
ther circuit analysis techniques are built. Kirchhoff’s voltage law and Kirchhoff’s current law,
which will be covered in the next chapter, are fundamental in understanding all electrical and
electronic circuits.
After developing the basic framework of series circuit analysis, we will apply the ideas to
analyze and design simple voltmeters and ohmmeters. While meters are usually covered in a
separate instruments or measurements course, we examine these circuits merely as an appli-
cation of the concepts of circuit analysis.
Similarly, we will observe how circuit principles are used to explain the loading effect of an
ammeter placed in series with a circuit. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

128
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
128
Chapter 3 | Resistance
Putting It in Perspective
Gustav Robert Kirchhoff
KIRCHHOFF WAS A GERMAN PHYSICIST born on March 12, 1824, in Königsberg, Prussia. His ﬁrst
research was on the conduction of electricity, which led to his presentation of the laws of closed
electric circuits in 1845. Kirchhoff’s current law and Kirchhoff’s voltage law apply to all electrical
circuits and therefore are fundamentally important in understanding circuit operation. Kirchhoff
was the ﬁrst to verify that an electrical impulse travelled at the speed of light.
Although these discoveries have immortalized Kirchhoff’s name in electrical science, he is
better known for his work with R. W. Bunsen in which he made major contributions in the study
of spectroscopy and advanced the research into blackbody radiation.
Kirchhoff died in Berlin on October 17, 1887. I
Photo Researchers/Photo Researchers/Getty Images
An electric circuit is the combination of any number of sources and loads con-
nected in any manner that allows charge to ﬂow. The electric circuit may be
simple, such as a circuit consisting of a battery and a light bulb. Or the circuit
may be very complex, such as the circuits contained within a television set,
microwave oven, or computer. However, no matter how complicated, each cir-
cuit follows fairly simple rules in a predictable manner. Once these rules are
understood, any circuit may be analyzed to determine the operation under vari-
ous conditions.
All electric circuits obtain their energy either from a direct current (dc)
source or from an alternating current (ac) source. In the next few chapters, we
examine the operation of circuits supplied by dc sources. Although ac circuits
have fundamental differences when compared with dc circuits, the laws, theo-
rems, and rules that you learn in dc circuits apply directly to ac circuits as well.
In the previous chapter, you were introduced to a simple dc circuit con-
sisting of a single voltage source (such as a chemical battery) and a single load
resistance. The schematic representation of such a simple circuit was covered
in Chapter 4 and is shown again in Figure 5–1.
5.1 Series Circuits
V
E




R
I
Conventional flow
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

While the circuit of Figure 5–1 is useful in deriving some important con-
cepts, very few practical circuits are this simple. However, we will find that even
the most complicated dc circuits can generally be simplified to the circuit shown.
We begin by examining the most simple connection, the series connection.
In Figure 5–2, we have two resistors, R1 and R2, connected at a single point in
what is said to be a series connection.
Two elements are said to be in series if they are connected at a single point
and if there are no other current-carrying connections at this point.
A series circuit is constructed by combining various elements in series, as
shown in Figure 5–3. Current will leave the positive terminal of the voltage source,
move through the resistors, and return to the negative terminal of the source.
In the circuit of Figure 5–3, we see that the voltage source, E, is in series
with R1, R1 is in series with R2, and R2 is in series with E. By examining this
circuit, another important characteristic of a series circuit becomes evident. In
an analogy similar to water flowing in a pipe, current entering an element must
be the same as the current leaving the element. Now, since current does not
leave at any of the connections, we conclude that the following must be true:
The current is the same everywhere in a series circuit.
While the preceding statement seems self-evident, we will find that this
will help to explain many of the other characteristics of a series circuit.
Section 5.1 | Series Circuits
129
Single point of
connection
R1
R2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–2
Resistors in series.
E
R2
R1
R3
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–3
Series circuit.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
What two conditions determine whether two elements are connected in series?
The Voltage Polarity Convention Revisited
The ,  sign convention of Figure 5–4(a) has a deeper meaning than so far
considered. Voltage exists between points, and when we place a  at one point
and a  at another point, we deﬁne this to mean that we are looking at the
voltage at the point marked  with respect to the point marked . Thus, in
Figure 5–4, V  6 volts means that point a is 6 V positive with respect to point
b. Since the red lead of the meter is placed at point a and the black at point b,
the meter will indicate 6 V.
Now consider Figure 5–5(b). [Part (a) has been repeated from Figure 5–4(b)
for reference.] Here, we have placed the plus sign at point b, meaning that you are
looking at the voltage at b with respect to a. Since point b is 6 V negative with
respect to point a, V will have a value of minus 6 volts, that is, V  6 volts. Note
also that the meter indicates 6 volts since we have reversed its leads and the red
lead is now at point b and the black at point a. It is important to realize here that
the voltage across R has not changed. What has changed is how we are looking
at it and how we have connected the meter to measure it. Thus, since the actual
voltage is the same in both cases, (a) and (b) are equivalent representations.
V = 6 V
a
b





OFF
300mV
)))
V6
V
V
A
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–4
The ,  symbology means
that you are looking at the voltage at the
point marked  with respect to the point
marked .
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

130
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
V = 6 V
a
b
6 V
1
2
V
1
2
OFF
300mV
)))
V6
V
V
A
A
(a) Voltage at a with respect to b is
6 volts
(b) Voltage at b with respect to a is
−6 volts
V = 26 V
a
b
6 V
2
1
V
1
2
OFF
300mV
)))
V-6
V
V
A
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–5
Two representations of the same voltage.
EXAMPLE 5–1       
Consider Figure 5–6. In (a), I  3 A, while in (b), I  3 A. Using the voltage
polarity convention, determine the voltages across the two resistors and show
that they are equal.
Solution
In each case, place the plus sign at the tail of the current direction
arrow. Then, for (a), you are looking at the polarity of a with respect to b and you
get V  IR  (3A)(2 )  6V as expected. Now consider (b). The polarity mark-
ings mean that you are looking at the polarity of b with respect to a and you get
V  IR  (–3 A) (2 )  –6V. This means that point b is 6V negative with respect
to a, or equivalently, a is 6 V positive with respect to b. Thus, the two voltages
are equal.
V = 6 V


a
b
R = 2 
I = 3 A
(a)
V = 6 V


a
b
R = 2 
I = 3 A
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.2 | Kirchhoff’s Voltage Law
131
Next to Ohm’s law, one of the most important laws of electricity is Kirchhoff’s
voltage law (KVL), which states the following:
The summation of voltage rises and voltage drops around a closed loop is
equal to zero. Symbolically, this may be stated as follows:
 V  0
for a closed loop
(5–1)
In the preceding symbolic representation, the uppercase Greek letter sigma
() stands for summation and V stands for voltage rises and drops. A closed
loop is defined as any path that originates at a point, travels around a circuit,
and returns to the original point without retracing any segments.
An alternate way of stating Kirchhoff’s voltage law is as follows:
The summation of voltage rises is equal to the summation of voltage drops
around a closed loop.
Erises  Vdrops
for a closed loop
(5–2)
If we consider the circuit of Figure 5–7, we may begin at point a in the
lower left-hand corner. By arbitrarily following the direction of the current, I,
we move through the voltage source, which represents a rise in potential from
point a to point b. Next, in moving from point b to point c, we pass through
resistor R1, which presents a potential drop of V1. Continuing through resistors
R2 and R3, we have additional drops of V2 and V3, respectively. By applying
Kirchhoff’s voltage law around the closed loop, we arrive at the following
mathematical statement for the given circuit:
E  V1  V2  V3  0
Although we chose to follow the direction of current in writing Kirchhoff’s
voltage law equation, it would be just as correct to move around the circuit in
the opposite direction. In this case the equation would appear as follows:
V3  V2  V1  E  0
By simple manipulation, it is quite easy to show that the two equations are
identical.
5.2 Kirchhoff’s
Voltage Law
E
R2
R1
R3
I


V2
a
b
c
d

 V3


V1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–7
Kirchoff’s voltage law.
EXAMPLE 5–2        
Verify Kirchhoff’s voltage law for the circuit of Figure 5–8.
Solution
If we follow the direction of the current, we write the loop equation as
15 V  2 V  3 V  6 V  3 V  1 V  0

E = 15 V
V3 = 6 V
V1 = 2 V
V5 = 1 V
I
V4 = 3 V
V2 = 3 V









© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

132
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
Verify Kirchhoff’s voltage law for the circuit of Figure 5–9.
Answer
2 V  4 V  4 V  3.5 V  1.5 V  3 V  0
V3 = 1.5 V
I






V2 = 3.5 V
E2 = 4 V
V1 = 4 V
E1 = 2 V
E3 = 3 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–9
Deﬁne Kirchhoff’s voltage law.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Almost all complicated circuits can be simpliﬁed. We will now examine how
to simplify a circuit consisting of a voltage source in series with several resis-
tors. Consider the circuit shown in Figure 5–10.
Since the circuit is a closed loop, the voltage source will cause a current I
in the circuit. This current in turn produces a voltage drop across each resistor,
where
Vx  IRx
Applying Kirchhoff’s voltage law to the closed loop gives
E  V1  V2  . . .  Vn
 IR1  IR2  . . .  IRn
 I(R1  R2  . . .  Rn)
If we were to replace all the resistors with a total equivalent resistance,
RT, then the circuit would appear as shown in Figure 5–11.
However, applying Ohm’s law to the circuit of Figure 5–11 gives
E  IRT
(5–3)
5.3 Resistors in Series
Rn
I




R2
E
R1
Vn
V2
V1


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–10
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Since the circuit of Figure 5–11 is equivalent to the circuit of Figure 5–10,
we conclude that this can only occur if the total equivalent resistance of the n
series resistors is given as
RT  R1  R2  . . .  Rn
[ohms, ]
(5–4)
If each of the n resistors has the same value, then the total equivalent resis-
tance is determined as
RT  nR
[ohms, ]
(5–5)
Section 5.3 | Resistors in Series
133
E
RT
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–11
EXAMPLE 5–3        
Determine the total resistance for each of the networks shown in Figure 5–12.
Solution
a. RT  5   10   20   15   50.0 
b. RT  4(10 k)  40.0 k
10 
20 
15 
5 
RT
(a)
10 k
10 k
10 k
10 k
RT
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–12
Any voltage source connected to the terminals of a network of series
resistors will provide the same current as if a single resistance, having a value
of RT, were connected between the open terminals. From Ohm’s law we get
I  R
E
T

[amps, A]
(5–6)
The power dissipated by each resistor is determined as
P1  V1I  V
R
1
1
2
  I2R1
[watts, W]
P2  V2I  
V
R
2
2
2
  I2R2
[watts, W]
(5–7)

Pn  VnI  V
R
n
n
2
  I2Rn
[watts, W]
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Chapter 4, we showed that the power delivered by a voltage source to a
circuit is given as
PT  EI
[watts, W]
(5–8)
Since energy must be conserved, the power delivered by the voltage source
is equal to the total power dissipated by all the resistors. Hence
PT  P1  P2  . . .  Pn
[watts, W]
(5–9)
134
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
EXAMPLE 5–4       
For the series circuit shown in Figure 5–13, ﬁnd the following quantities:
a. Total resistance, RT.
b. Circuit current, I.
c. Voltage across each resistor.
d. Power dissipated by each resistor.
e. Power delivered to the circuit by the voltage source.
f. Verify that the power dissipated by the resistors is equal to the power
delivered to the circuit by the voltage source.
Solution
a. RT  2   6   4   12.0 
b. I  (24 V)/(12 )  2.00 A
c. V1  (2 A)(2 )  4.00 V
V2  (2 A)(6 )  12.0 V
V3  (2 A)(4 )  8.00 V
d. P1  (2 A)2(2 )  8.00 W
P2  (2 A)2(6 )  24.0 W
P3  (2 A)2(4 )  16.0 W
e. PT  (24 V)(2 A)  48.0 W
f. PT  8 W  24 W  16 W  48.0 W
E = 24 V
R1 = 2 
I






R2 = 6 
R3 = 4 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–13
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.3 | Resistors in Series
135
For the series circuit shown in Figure 5–14, ﬁnd the following quantities:
a. Total resistance, RT.
b. The direction and magnitude of the current, I.
c. Polarity and magnitude of the voltage across each resistor.
d. Power dissipated by each resistor.
e. Power delivered to the circuit by the voltage source.
f. Show that the power dissipated is equal to the power delivered.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
Answers
a. 90.0 
b. 1.33 A counterclockwise
c. V1  26.7 V, V2  53.3 V, V3  40.0 V
d. P1  35.6 W, P2  71.1 W, P3  53.3 W
e. PT  160. W
f. P1  P2  P3  160. W  PT
E = 120 V
R1 = 20 
R2 = 40 
R3 = 30 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–14
EXAMPLE 5–5        
Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) are used everywhere from ﬂashlights to backlit
television sets. Due to their simplicity and low energy requirement, these ubiq-
uitous components are being used increasingly as inexpensive light sources. In
this example you will learn how simple it is to design a circuit using an LED. 
While it is not necessary to know exactly how the devices work, there are
a few simple characteristics that help you to understand their basic operation,
which is a bit different than what you already know about other light sources.
First, it is important to know that LEDs permit current in only one direction,
namely that conventional current is from anode to cathode, as indicated by the
direction of the arrow of the device symbol. When this is done, the LED is said
to be forward biased. Voltage sources should not be connected against the direc-
tion of the arrow, since doing so may damage the LED. Such a diode would be
said to be reverse biased. (Refer to Section 3.10 for a more detailed description
of diode operation.)
Next, there are two important electrical characteristics that are used in the
design of an LED circuit. The typical forward current of the device is given as
IF, while the nominal voltage drop across the LED when it is forward biased is
given as VF. While the actual values depend on several physical properties of the
LED, the latter two values will normally be between 10 mA and 100 mA and
3–5 V, respectively.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

136
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
Given that a white LED has a forward current, IF  20 mA, and a forward
voltage, VF  3.6 V, determine the series resistor R that is required to meet the
given conditions.
Solution
Since the voltage across the LED is given as VF  3.6 V, we can
apply Kirchhoff’s Voltage Law to determine that the voltage across the resistor
must be
VR  9.0 V  3.6 V  5.4 V
Now, since we have a series circuit, the current through the resistor must be the
same as the current through the LED, namely IF  20 mA. This means that the
value of the series resistor must be
R =
=
5 4
20
270
.
V
mA
Ω
E = 9 V
R
LED
Anode
Cathode
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–15
Three resistors, R1, R2, and R3, are in series. Determine the value of each resistor
if RT  42 k, R2  3R1, and R3  2R2.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
If a circuit has more than one voltage source in series, then the voltage sources
may effectively be replaced by a single source having a value that is the sum
or difference of the individual sources. Since the sources may have different
polarities, it is necessary to consider polarities in determining the resulting
magnitude and polarity of the equivalent voltage source.
If the polarities of all the voltage sources are such that the sources appear
as voltage rises in a given direction, then the resultant source is determined by
simple addition, as shown in Figure 5–16.
If the polarities of the voltage sources do not result in voltage rises in the
same direction, then we must compare the rises in one direction to the rises 
in the other direction. The magnitude of the resultant source will be the sum of
the rises in one direction minus the sum of the rises in the opposite direction.
The polarity of the equivalent voltage source will be the same as the polarity of
whichever direction has the greater rise. Consider the voltage sources shown
in Figure 5–17.
5.4 Voltage Sources 
in Series
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If the rises in one direction were equal to the rises in the opposite direc-
tion, then the resultant voltage source would be equal to zero.
Section 5.5 | Interchanging Series Components
137
E1 = 2 V
E2 = 3 V
E3 = 6 V
E4 = 4 V
ET = 15 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–16
2 V  4 V = 6 V
3 V  6 V = 9 V
ET = 3 V
E1 = 2 V
E2 = 3 V
E3 = 6 V
E4 = 4 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–17
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
A typical lead-acid automobile battery consists of six cells connected in series. If
the voltage between the battery terminals is measured to be 13.06 V, what is the
average voltage of each cell within the battery?
The order of series components may be changed without affecting the opera-
tion of the circuit.
The two circuits in Figure 5–18 are equivalent.
Very often, once the circuits have been redrawn it becomes easier to visu-
alize the circuit operation. Therefore, we will regularly use the technique of
interchanging components to simplify circuits before we analyze them.
5.5 Interchanging
Series Components
E1 = 15 V
R2 = 3 k
R1 = 2 k
R3 = 4 k
I
E2 = 3 V
(a)
E2 = 3 V
R2 = 3 k
R1 = 2 k
R3 = 4 k
I
E1 = 15 V
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–18
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

138
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
EXAMPLE 5–6       
Simplify the circuit of Figure 5–19 into a single source in series with the four
resistors. Determine the direction and magnitude of the current in the resulting
circuit.
Solution
We may redraw the circuit by the two steps shown in Figure 5–20. It
is necessary to ensure that the voltage sources are correctly moved since it is
quite easy to assign the wrong polarity. Perhaps the easiest way is to imagine
that we slide the voltage source around the circuit to the new location.
The current in the resulting circuit will be in a counterclockwise direction
around the circuit and will have a magnitude determined as
I  E
R
T
T
 
 
1
5
0
V

  0.500 A
Because the circuits are in fact equivalent, the current direction determined in
Figure 5–20 also represents the direction for the current in the circuit of Figure 5–19.
6 V  1 V  2 V

2   4   3   1 
E3 = 1 V
E2 = 6 V
E1 = 2 V
R1
R2
R3
R4
(a)
2 
4 
3 
1 
(b)
ET = 5 V
RT
10 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–20
E1 = 2 V
R2 = 4 
R4 = 1 
R3 = 3 
E2 = 6 V
E3 = 1 V
R1 = 2 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–19
The voltage dropped across any series resistor is proportional to the magnitude
of the resistor. The total voltage dropped across all resistors must equal the
applied voltage source(s) by Kirchhoff’s Voltage Law.
Consider the circuit of Figure 5–21.
We see that the total resistance RT  10 k results in a circuit current of 
I  1 mA. From Ohm’s law, R1 has a voltage drop of V1  2.0 V, while R2, which
is four times as large as R1, has four times as much voltage drop, V2  8.0 V.
We also see that the summation of the voltage drops across the resistors is
exactly equal to the voltage rise of the source, namely,
E  10 V  2 V  8 V
The voltage divider rule allows us to determine the voltage across any
series resistance in a single step, without first calculating the current. We have
5.6 The Voltage
Divider Rule
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

seen that for any number of resistors in series the current in the circuit is deter-
mined by Ohm’s law as
I  R
E
T

[Amps, A]
(5–10)
where the two resistors in Figure 5–21 result in a total resistance of
RT  R1  R2
By again applying Ohm’s law, the voltage drop across any resistor in the
series circuit is calculated as
Vx  IRx
Now, by substituting Equation 5–4 into the preceding equation we write
the voltage divider rule for two resistors as a simple equation:
Vx  R
R
T
x E  
R1
R

x
R2
E
In general, for any number of resistors the voltage drop across any resistor
may be found as
Vx  R
R
T
xE
(5–11)
Section 5.6 | The Voltage Divider Rule
139
E = 10 V
R1 = 2 k
R2 = 8 k
I




V1 = 2 V
V2 = 8 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–21
EXAMPLE 5–7        
Use the voltage divider rule to determine the voltage across each of the resistors
in the circuit shown in Figure 5–22. Show that the summation of voltage drops
is equal to the applied voltage rise in the circuit.
Solution
RT  6   12   7   25.0 
V1 
2
6
5


(18 V)  4.32 V
V2 
1
2
2
5


(18 V)  8.64 V
V3 
2
7
5


(18 V)  5.04 V
The total voltage drop is the summation
VT  4.32 V  8.64 V  5.04 V  18.0 V  E
E = 18 V
R2
R1
R3
6 
12 
7 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–22
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The previous example illustrates two important points that occur regu-
larly in electronic circuits. If a single series resistance is very large in com-
parison with the other series resistances, then the voltage across that resistor
will be essentially the total applied voltage. On the other hand, if a single
resistance is very small in comparison with the other series resistances, then
the voltage drop across the small resistor will be essentially zero. As a gen-
eral rule, if a series resistor is more than 100 times larger than another series
resistor, then the effect of the smaller resistor(s) may be effectively
neglected.
140
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
EXAMPLE 5–8       
Using the voltage divider rule, determine the voltage across each of the resistors
of the circuit shown in Figure 5–23.
Solution
RT  2   1 000 000   1 000 002 
V1 
1 00
2
0

002 
(20 V)  40 V
V2 
1.00
1
0
.0
0
M
02

M
(20 V)  19.999 86 V
 20.0 V
E = 20 V
R1
1 M
2 
R2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–23
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
For the circuits shown in Figure 5–24, determine the approximate voltage drop
across each resistor without using a calculator. Compare your approximations to
the actual values obtained with a calculator.
Answers
a. V10-  0
V5-M  5.00 V
V10-M  15.0 V
V10-  10.0 	V
V5-M  5.00 V
V10-M  15.0 V
b. V5-  0
V10-  0
V1-M  60.0 V
V5-  0.300 mV
V10-  0.600 mV
V1-M  60.0 V
E = 20 V
10 
5 M
15 M
(a)
E = 60 V
5 
10 
1 M
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–24
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.7 | Circuit Ground
141
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 5
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
The voltage drops across three resistors are measured to be 10.0 V, 15.0 V, and 25.0 V.
If the largest resistor is 47.0 k, determine the sizes of the other two resistors.
Perhaps one of the most misunderstood concepts in electronics is that of
ground. This misunderstanding leads to many problems when circuits are
designed and analyzed. The standard symbol for circuit ground is shown in
Figure 5–25(a), while the symbol for chassis ground is shown in Figure 5–25(b).
In its most simple definition, ground is simply an “arbitrary electrical
point of reference” or “common point” in a circuit. Using the ground symbol
in this manner usually allows the circuit to be sketched more simply. When the
ground symbol is used arbitrarily to designate a point of reference, it would be
just as correct to redraw the circuit schematic showing all the ground points
connected together or indeed to redraw the circuit using an entirely different
point of reference. The circuits shown in Figure 5–26 are exactly equivalent
circuits even though the circuits of Figure 5–26(a) and 5–26(c) use different
points of reference.
5.7 Circuit Ground
(a) Circuit ground or reference
(b) Chassis ground
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–25
E = 2 V
R2 = 40 
R1 = 10 
(a)
E = 2 V
R2 = 40 
R1 = 10 
(b)
R2 = 40 
E = 2 V
R1 = 10 
(c)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–26
Neutral
Line
Ground
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–27
Ground connection in a
typical 120-Vac outlet.
While the ground symbol is used to designate a common point of reference
within a circuit, it usually has a greater meaning to the technologist or engineer.
Very often, the metal chassis of an appliance is connected to the circuit ground.
Such a connection is referred to as a chassis ground and is usually designated
as shown in Figure 5–25(b).
In order to help prevent electrocution, the chassis ground is usually further
connected to the earth ground through a connection provided at the electrical
outlet box. In the event of a failure within the circuit, the chassis would redi-
rect current to ground (tripping a breaker or fuse), rather than presenting a
hazard to an unsuspecting operator.
As the name implies, the earth ground is a connection that is bonded to the
earth, either through water pipes or by a connection to ground rods. Everyone
is familiar with the typical 120-Vac electrical outlet shown in Figure 5–27. The
rounded terminal of the outlet is always the ground terminal and is used not
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

142
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
If you measure the resistance between the ground terminal of the 120-Vac plug
and the metal chassis of a microwave oven to be zero ohms, what does this tell
you about the chassis of the oven?
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 6
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Double Subscripts
As you have already seen, voltages are always expressed as the potential dif-
ference between two points. In a 9-V battery, there is a 9-volt rise in poten-
tial from the negative terminal to the positive terminal. Current through a
resistor results in a voltage drop across the resistor such that the terminal
from which charge leaves is at a lower potential than the terminal into which
charge enters. We now examine how voltages within any circuit may be
easily described as the voltage between two points. If we wish to express the
voltage between two points (say points a and b in a circuit), then we express
such a voltage in a subscripted form (e.g., Vab), where the first term in the
voltage subscript is the point of interest and the second term is the point of
reference.
Consider the series circuit of Figure 5–28.
If we label the points within the circuit a, b, c, and d, we see that point b
is at a higher potential than point a by an amount equal to the supply voltage.
We may write this mathematically as Vba  50 V. Although the plus sign is
redundant, we show it here to indicate that point b is at a higher potential than
point a. If we examine the voltage at point a with respect to point b, we see that
a is at a lower potential than b. This may be written mathematically as 
Vab  50 V.
5.8 Voltage Subscripts
E = 50 V
R2 = 250 
R1 = 100 
R3 = 150 
I


25 V
a
b
c
d


15 V


10 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–28
only in ac circuits but may also be used to provide a common point for dc cir-
cuits. When a circuit is bonded to the earth through the ground terminal the
ground symbol no longer represents an arbitrary connection, but rather repre-
sents a very specific type of connection.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

From the preceding illustration, we make the following general statement:
Vab  Vba
for any two points a and b within a circuit.
Current through the circuit results in voltage drops across the resistors
as shown in Figure 5–28. If we determine the voltage drops on all resistors
and show the correct polarities, then we see that the following must also
apply:
Vbc  10 V
Vcb  10 V
Vcd  25 V
Vdc  25 V
Vda  15 V
Vad  15 V
If we wish to determine the voltage between any other two points within
the circuit, it is a simple matter of adding all the voltages between the two
points, taking into account the polarities of the voltages. The voltage between
points b and d would be determined as follows:
Vbd  Vbc  Vcd  10 V  25 V  35 V
Similarly, the voltage between points b and a could be determined by using
the voltage drops of the resistors:
Vba  Vbc  Vcd  Vda  10 V  25 V  15 V  50 V
Notice that this result is precisely the same as when we determined Vba
using only the voltage source. This result indicates that the voltage between
two points is not dependent upon the path taken.
Section 5.8 | Voltage Subscripts
143
EXAMPLE 5–9        
For the circuit of Figure 5–29, ﬁnd the voltages Vac, Vad, Vcf, and Veb.
Solution
First, we determine that the equivalent supply voltage for the circuit is
ET  3 V  4 V  2 V  5.0 V
with a polarity such that current will move in a counterclockwise direction
within the circuit.
Next, we determine the voltages on all resistors by using the voltage divider
rule and assigning polarities based on the direction of the current.
V1  R
R
T
1ET

(5.0 V)  0.625 V
V2  R
R
T
2ET

(5.0 V)  1.875 V
V3  R
R
T
3ET

(5.0 V)  2.50 V
40 

10   30   40 
30 

10   30   40 
10 

10   30   40 
E1 = 2 V
R2 = 30 
R1 = 10 
a
b
c
e
f
d
E2 = 3 V
E3 = 4 V
R3 = 40 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–29
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

144
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
The voltages appearing across the resistors are as shown in Figure 5–30.
Finally, we solve for the voltages between the indicated points:
Vac  2.0 V  0.625 V  2.625 V
Vad  2.0 V  0.625 V  3.0 V  0.375 V
Vcf  3.0 V  1.875 V  4.0 V  5.125 V
Veb  1.875 V  3.0 V  0.625 V  0.500 V
Or, selecting the opposite path, we get
Veb  4.0 V  2.5 V  2.0 V  0.500 V
E1 = 2 V
R2 = 30 
R1 = 10 
a
b
c
e
f
d
E2 = 3 V
E3 = 4 V
R3 = 40 






0.625 V
1.875 V
2.5 V
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–30
PRACTICAL NOTES...
Since most students initially ﬁnd it difﬁcult to determine the correct polarity for
the voltage between two points, we present a simpliﬁed method to correctly
determine the polarity and voltage between any two points within a circuit.
1. Determine the circuit current. Calculate the voltage drop across all components.
2. Polarize all resistors based upon the direction of the current. The terminal
at which the current enters is assigned to be positive, while the terminal at
which the current leaves is assigned to be negative.
3. In order to determine the voltage at point a with respect to point b, start at
point b. Refer to Figure 5–31. Now, imagine that you walk around the circuit
to point a.
4. As you “walk” around the circuit, add the voltage drops and rises as you
get to them. The assigned polarity of the voltage at any component
(whether it is a source or a resistor) is positive if the voltage rises as you
“walk” through the component and is negative if the voltage decreases as
you pass through the component.
5. The resulting voltage, Vab, is the numerical sum of all the voltages between
a and b.
For Figure 5–31, the voltage Vab is determined as
Vab  6 V  3 V  5 V  8 V
a
1
2
5 V
2
1
3 V
I
2
1
6 V
Vab =   1  6 V  2  3 V  1   5 V = 1 8 V   
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–31
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.8 | Voltage Subscripts
145
Find the voltage Vab in the circuit of Figure 5–32.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
Answer
Vab  8.00 V
E = 20 V
R4 = 200 
R1 = 100 
a
b
R3 = 150 
R2 = 50 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–32
Single Subscripts
In a circuit which has a reference point (or ground point), most voltages will
be expressed with respect to the reference point. In such a case it is no longer
necessary to express a voltage using a dual subscript. Rather if we wish to
express the voltage at point a with respect to ground, we simply refer to this as
Va. Similarly, the voltage at point b would be referred to as Vb. Therefore, any
voltage that has only a single subscript is always referenced to the ground point
of the circuit.
EXAMPLE 5–10        
For the circuit of Figure 5–33, determine the voltages Va, Vb, Vc, and Vd.
Solution
Applying the voltage divider rule, we determine the voltage across
each resistor as follows:
V1 
(20 V)  4.00 V
V2 
(20 V)  6.00 V
V3 
(20 V)  10.00 V
Now we solve for the voltage at each of the points as follows:
Va  4 V  6 V  10 V  20 V  E
Vb  6 V  10 V  16.0 V
Vc  10.0 V
Vd  0 V
5 k

2 k  3 k  5 k
3 k

2 k  3 k  5 k
2 k

2 k  3 k  5 k
E = 20V
R1 = 2 k
d
b


V1
I

V3


V2

R3 = 5 k
R2 = 3 k
c
a
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–33
CircuitSim 05-1 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If the voltage at various points in a circuit is known with respect to ground,
then the voltage between the points may be easily determined as follows:
Vab  Va  Vb
[volts, V]
(5–12)
146
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
EXAMPLE 5–11       
For the circuit of Figure 5–34, determine the voltages Vab and Vcb given that 
Va  5 V, Vb  3 V, and Vc  8 V.
Solution
Vab  5 V  (3 V)  2 V
Vcb  8 V  (3 V)  11 V
a
b
c
R2
R1
Va = 15 V
Vb = 13 V
Vc = 28 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–34
EXAMPLE 5–12       
Determine the current and direction in the circuit of Figure 5–36.
Solution
The circuit may be redrawn showing the reference point and con-
verting the voltage point sources into the more common schematic representa-
tion. The resulting circuit is shown in Figure 5–37.
Now, we easily calculate the current in the circuit as
I  E
R
T
1
  
5 V
52

k
8 V
  0.250 mA
Point Sources
The idea of voltages with respect to ground is easily extended to include volt-
age sources. When a voltage source is given with respect to ground, it may be
simplified in the circuit as a point source as shown in Figure 5–35.
Point sources are often used to simplify the representation of circuits. We
need to remember that in all such cases the corresponding points always rep-
resent voltages with respect to ground (even if ground is not shown).
E
R1
R1
E = 10 V
10 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–35
E1 = 5 V
E2 = 8 V
R1 = 52 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
E2 = 8 V
I
E1 = 5 V
R1 = 52 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–37
FIGURE 5–36
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.9 | Internal Resistance of Voltage Sources
147
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 7
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Voltage measurements are taken at three locations in a circuit. They are Va 
5.00 V, Vb  2.50 V, and Vc  5.00 V. Determine the voltages Vab, Vca,
and Vbc.
So far we have worked only with ideal voltage sources, which maintain con-
stant voltages regardless of the loads connected across the terminals. Consider
a typical lead-acid automobile battery, which has a voltage of approximately
12 V. Similarly, four C-cell batteries, when connected in series, have a com-
bined voltage of 12 V. Why then can we not use four C-cell batteries to oper-
ate the car? The answer, in part, is because the lead-acid battery has a much
lower internal resistance than the low-energy C-cells. In practice, all voltage
sources contain some internal resistance that will reduce the efﬁciency of the
voltage source. We may symbolize any voltage source schematically as an
ideal voltage source in series with an internal resistance. Figure 5–38 shows
both an ideal voltage source and a practical or actual voltage source.
The voltage that appears between the positive and negative terminals is
called the terminal voltage. In an ideal voltage source, the terminal voltage
will remain constant regardless of the load connected. An ideal voltage source
will be able to provide as much current as the circuit demands. However, in a
real voltage source, the terminal voltage is dependent upon the value of the
load connected across the voltage source. As expected, the real voltage source
sometimes is not able to provide as much current as the load demands. Rather
the current in the circuit is limited by the combination of the internal resistance
and the load resistance.
Under a no-load condition (RL  
 ), there is no current in the circuit,
and so the terminal voltage will be equal to the voltage appearing across the
ideal voltage source. If the output terminals are shorted together (RL  0 ),
the current in the circuit will be a maximum and the terminal voltage will be
equal to approximately zero. In such a situation, the voltage dropped across the
internal resistance will be equal to the voltage of the ideal source.
The following example helps to illustrate the preceding principles.
5.9 Internal
Resistance of
Voltage Sources
(b) Real voltage source
Eideal


RL
Terminal
voltage
Rint
© Cengage Learning 2013
Eideal


RL
Terminal
voltage
(a) Ideal voltage source
FIGURE 5–38
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

This simple example helps to illustrate why a 12-V automobile battery
(which is actually 14.4 V) is able to start a car while eight 1.5-V flashlight
batteries connected in series will have virtually no measurable effect when
connected to the same circuit.
148
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
EXAMPLE 5–13       
Two batteries having an open-terminal voltage of 12 V are used to provide cur-
rent to the starter of a car having a resistance of 0.10 . If one battery has an
internal resistance of 0.02  and the second battery has an internal resistance of
100 , calculate the current through the load and the resulting terminal voltage
for each of the batteries.
Solution
The circuit for each of the batteries is shown in Figure 5–39.
Rint  0.02 :
I 
0.02 
12

V
0.10 
  100. A
Vab  (100 A)(0.10 )  10.0 V
Rint  100 :
I 
100 
1

2 V
0.10 
  0.120 A
Vab  (0.120 A)(0.10 )  0.0120 V
(a) Low internal resistance
E = 12 V
RL = 0.10 V
Rint = 0.02 V
a
b
I
1
2
(b) High internal resistance
E = 12 V
RL = 0.10 V
Rint = 100 V
a
b
I
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–39
As you have already learned, ammeters are instruments which measure the cur-
rent in a circuit. In order to use an ammeter, the circuit must be disconnected
and the ammeter placed in series with the branch for which the current is to be
determined. Since an ammeter uses the current in the circuit to provide a read-
ing, it will affect the circuit under measurement. This effect is referred to as
meter loading. All instruments, regardless of type, will load the circuit to some
degree. The amount of loading is dependent upon both the instrument and the
circuit being measured. For any meter, we deﬁne the loading effect as follows:
loading effect 
 100%
(5–13)
theoretical value  measured value

theoretical value
5.10 Ammeter
Loading Effects
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.10 | Ammeter Loading Effects
149
EXAMPLE 5–14        
For the series circuits of Figure 5–40, determine the current in each circuit. If an
ammeter having an internal resistance of 250  is used to measure the current
in the circuits, determine the current through the ammeter and calculate the
loading effect for each circuit.
Solution
Circuit No. 1: The current in the circuit is
I1  
2
1
0
0
k
V

  0.500 mA
Now, by placing the ammeter into the circuit as shown in Figure 5–41(a) the
resistance of the ammeter will slightly affect the operation of the circuit.
The resulting current in the circuit will be reduced to
I1 
20 k
1

0 V
0.25 k
  0.494 mA
Circuit No. 1: We see that by placing the ammeter into Circuit No. 1, the resis-
tance of the meter slightly affects the operation of the circuit. Applying
Equation 5–16 gives the loading effect as
loading effect 
 100%
 1.23%
0.500 mA  0.494 mA

0.500 mA
E1
R1 = 20 k
I1
10 V
(a) Circuit #1
E2
R2 = 100 
I2
50 mV
(b) Circuit #2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–40
(a) Circuit #1
E1
I1
R1 = 20 k
10 V



OFF
300mV
)))
mA
0.494
250 
V
V
A
A
(b) Circuit #2
E2
I2
R2 = 100 
50 mV



OFF
300mV
)))
mA
0.143
250 
V
V
A
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–41
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

150
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
Circuit No. 2: The current in the circuit is also found as
I2  
5
1
0
00
m

V
  0.500 mA
Now, by placing the ammeter into the circuit as shown in Figure 5–41(b), the
resistance of the ammeter will greatly affect the operation of the circuit.
The resulting current in the circuit will be reduced to
I2  
100 
50

mV
250 
  0.143 mA
We see that by placing the ammeter into Circuit No. 2, the resistance of the meter
will adversely load the circuit. The loading effect will be
loading effect 
 100%
 71.4%
The results of this example indicate that an ammeter, which usually has fairly
low resistance, will not signiﬁcantly load a circuit having a resistance of
several thousand ohms. However, if the same meter is used to measure current
in a circuit having low values of resistance, then the loading effect will be
substantial.
0.500 mA  0.143 mA

0.500 mA
We now examine how both Multisim and PSpice are used to determine the volt-
age and current in a series circuit. Although the methods are different, we will
ﬁnd that the results for both software packages are equivalent.
Multisim
The following example will build upon the skills that you learned in the previous
chapter. Just as in the lab, you will measure voltage by connecting voltmeters
across the component(s) under test. Current is measured by placing an ammeter
in series with the component(s) through which you would like to find the current.
5.11 Circuit Analysis
Using Computers
EXAMPLE 5–15       
Use Multisim to solve for the circuit current and the voltage across each of the
resistors in Figure 5–42.
R1
R3
E
R2
 24 V
6 
2 
4 
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–42
MultiSim
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 5.11 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
151
Solution
Open Multisim and construct the circuit in Figure 5–42. If necessary,
review the steps as outlined in the previous chapter. Remember that your circuit
will need to have a circuit ground—found by clicking on the Power Source
Family button. Open a new subfolder in your Multisim folder and title the project
as Figure 5–42. Once your circuit resembles the circuit shown in Figure 5–42,
insert the ammeters and the voltmeters into the circuit as shown in Figure 5–43.
Create a new subfolder titled Ch 5 within your Multisim folder. Save this ﬁle as
Example 5–15 or some other suitable name in this subfolder.
Notice that an extra ammeter is placed into the circuit. The only reason for this
is to show that the current is the same everywhere in a series circuit.
Once all ammeters and voltmeters are inserted with the correct polarities,
you may run the simulator by moving the toggle switch to the ON position. Your
indicators should show the same readings as the values shown in Figure 5–43.
If any of the values indicated by the meters are negative, you will need to dis-
connect the meter(s) and reverse the terminals by using the Ctrl-R function.
Although this example is very simple, it illustrates some very important
points that you will ﬁnd useful when simulating circuit operation.
1. All voltmeters are connected across the components for which we are
trying to measure the voltage drop.
2. All ammeters are connected in series with the components through which
we are trying to ﬁnd the current.
3. A ground symbol (or reference point) is required by all circuits that are to
be simulated by Multisim.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–43
CircuitSim 05-2 
PSpice
While PSpice has some differences compared to Multisim, we find that there are
also many similarities. The following example shows how to use PSpice to ana-
lyze the previous circuit. If necessary, refer to Appendix A to find the Voltage
Level marker (which indicates voltage with respect to ground) and the Current
Into Pin marker.
PSPICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

152
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
EXAMPLE 5–16       
Use PSpice to solve for the circuit current and the voltage across each of the
resistors in Figure 5–42.
Solution
This example lists some of the more important steps that you will
need to follow. For more detail, refer to Appendix A and the PSpice example in
Chapter 4.
• Open the CIS Demo software.
• Once you are in the Capture session frame, click on the menu item File,
select New, and then click on Project.
• In the New Project box, type Ch 5 PSpice 1 in the Name text box. Ensure
that the Analog or Mixed-Signal Circuit Wizard is activated.
• You will need to add libraries for your project. Select the breakout.olb and
eval.olb libraries. Click Finish.
• You should now be in the Capture schematic editor page. Click anywhere
to activate it. Build the circuit as shown in Figure 5–44. Remember to
rotate the components to provide for the correct node assignments. Change
the component values as required. 
• Click the New Simulation Proﬁle icon and enter a name (e.g., Figure 5–44)
in the Name text box. You will need to enter the appropriate settings for this
project in the Simulation Setting box. Click the Analysis tab, and select Bias
Point from the Analysis type list. Click OK and save the document.
• Click on the Run icon. You will observe the A/D Demo screen. When you
close this screen, you will observe the bias voltages and currents. From
these results, we have the following:
V1  24 V  20 V  4 V
V2  20 V  8 V  12 V
V3  8 V 
For the supply voltage of 24 V, the current is 2.00 A. Clearly, these results
are consistent with the theoretical calculations and the results obtained
using Electronics Workbench.
• Save your project and exit from PSpice.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–44
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
153
Y
ou are part of a research team in the electrical metering department of
a chemical processing plant. As part of your work, you regularly mea-
sure voltages between 200 V and 600 V. The only voltmeter available to
you today has voltage ranges of 20 V, 50 V, and 100 V. Clearly, you cannot
safely use the voltmeter to measure the expected voltages. However, you
recall from your electrical course that you can use a voltage divider net-
work to predictably reduce voltages. In order to keep current levels to safe
values, you decide to use resistors in the megohm range. Without chang-
ing any internal circuitry of the voltmeter, show how you can use large-
value resistors to change the 100-V range of the voltmeter to effectively
measure a maximum of 1000 V. (Naturally, you would take extra precau-
tions when measuring these voltages.) Show the schematic of the design,
including the location of your voltmeter.
Putting It into Practice
5.1
Series Circuits
1. The voltmeters of Figure 5–45 have autopolarity. Determine the reading of
each meter, giving the correct magnitude and sign.
2. The voltmeters of Figure 5–46 have autopolarity. Determine the reading of
each meter, giving the correct magnitude and sign.
Problems
(a) R = 10 
(b) R = 15 
I = 3 A



OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A
I = 6 A



OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–46
(b) R = 40 
(a) R = 36 
I = 4 A



OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A
I = 2 A



OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–45
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3. All resistors in Figure 5–47 are 15 . For each case, determine the magni-
tude and polarity of voltage V.
4. The ammeters of Figure 5–48 have autopolarity. Determine their readings,
giving the correct magnitude and sign.
154
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
V
I
(a) I = 3 A
V
(b) I  −4 A


V
(c) I = 6 A
V
(d) I = −7 A






I
I
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–47
All resistors are 15 .
(a)


V = 18 V
2.4 k


A
OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

(b)


V = 24 V
10 k 


A
OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–48
5.2
Kirchhoff’s Voltage Law
5. Determine the unknown voltages in the networks of Figure 5–49.
(a)


10 V
V1






33 V
16 V


3 V
3 A
P = 12 W
V2






V1
6 V
9 V
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–49
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7. Solve for the unknown voltages in the circuit of Figure 5–51.
8. Solve for the unknown voltages in the circuit of Figure 5–52.
Problems
155
6. Determine the unknown voltages in the networks of Figure 5–50.
(a)


V1
V2






V3
2 V
2 A
R = 2 


16 V
(b)


2 V


V2
4 A
P = 40 W
V1




V3


6 V
4 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–50
E = 24 V
R1
R2
R3





 V3
P3 = 36 W
V2
10 V
3 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
E = 100 V
R1
30 V






R3 = 1.5 k
V3
V1
40 mA
R2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–51
FIGURE 5–52
5.3
Resistors in Series
9. Determine the total resistance of the networks shown in Figure 5–53.
(a)
2 k
5 k
R1 = 3 k
RT
R2
R3
(b)
580 k
2 M
R1 = 360 k
RT
R2
R3
(c)
R1
R2
R4
R3
R5
R6
RT
Each resistor band code is
orange, white, red
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–53
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10. Determine the unknown resistance in each of the networks in Figure 5–54.
156
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
(a)
R2 = 22 
R4 = 15 
R1 = 10 
R3 = 47 
RT
RT
R1
R2
R3
(b) Each resistor band code is
brown, red, orange
(c)
R1 = 2 R2
R2
RT = 36 
R3 = 3 R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–54
11. For the circuits shown in Figure 5–55, determine the total resistance, RT, and
the current, I.
(a) Circuit 1
R2 = 400 
R3 = 1 k
R1 = 200 
R4 = 50 
E = 10 V
I
(b) Circuit 2
E = 300 V
2.2 k
R1 = 1.2 k
R4
R2
R3
3.3 k
820 
R5
R6
R7
4.7 k
330 
5.6 k
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–55
12. The circuits of Figure 5–56 have the total resistance, RT, as shown. For each
of the circuits ﬁnd the following:
a. The magnitude of current in the circuit.
b. The total power delivered by the voltage source.
c. The direction of current through each resistor in the circuit.
d. The value of the unknown resistance, R.
e. The voltage drop across each resistor.
f. The power dissipated by each resistor. Verify that the summation of
powers dissipated by the resistors is equal to the power delivered by the
voltage source.
E = 90 V
RT = 12 k
1 k
4 k
R
3 k
(a) Circuit 1
E = 25 V
RT = 800 
100 
300 
150 
R
(b) Circuit 2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–56
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13. For the circuit of Figure 5–57, ﬁnd the following quantities:
a. The circuit current.
b. The total resistance of the circuit.
c. The value of the unknown resistance, R.
d. The voltage drop across all resistors in the circuit.
e. The power dissipated by all resistors.
14. The circuit of Figure 5–58 has a current of 2.5 mA. Find the following
quantities:
a. The total resistance of the circuit.
b. The value of the unknown resistance, R2.
c. The voltage drop across each resistor in the circuit.
d. The power dissipated by each resistor in the circuit.
Problems
157
E = 130 V
3 k
4 k
R
1 k
P = 100 mW
© Cengage Learning 2013
E = 45 V
R2
R1 = 3.3 k
R3 = 5.6 k
I = 2.5 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–57
FIGURE 5–58
15. For the circuit of Figure 5–59, ﬁnd the following quantities:
a. The current, I.
b. The voltage drop across each resistor.
c. The voltage across the open terminals a and b.
16. Refer to the circuit of Figure 5–60:
a. Use Kirchhoff’s voltage law to ﬁnd the voltage drops across R2 and R3.
b. Determine the magnitude of the current, I.
c. Solve for the unknown resistance, R1.
R2 = 100 
R1 = 300 
R3 = 250 
V



 4 V
I
b
a
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
E = 3.6 V
R2 = 40 


2.2 V
I
R3
30 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–59
FIGURE 5–60
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

17. Repeat Problem 16 for the circuit of Figure 5–61.
18. Refer to the circuit of Figure 5–62:
a. Find RT.
b. Solve for the current, I.
c. Determine the voltage drop across each resistor.
d. Verify Kirchhoff’s voltage law around the closed loop.
e. Find the power dissipated by each resistor.
f. Determine the minimum power rating of each resistor, if resistors are
available with the following power ratings: 1⁄8 W, 1⁄4 W, 1⁄2 W, 1 W, and 2 W.
g. Show that the power delivered by the voltage source is equal to the sum-
mation of the powers dissipated by the resistors.
19. Repeat Problem 18 for the circuit of Figure 5–63.
158
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
E = 16 V
R2 = 4.7 k
R1
R3 = 3.6 k






V2
7.5 V
V3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–61
 3.3 k
 10 k
R1
8.2 k
180 V
R2
R3
R4
1.8 k
RT
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–62
36 V
R2
R1 = 120 
R3
I
R4
RT
220 
78 
39 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–63
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20. Refer to the circuit of Figure 5–64.
a. Calculate the voltage across each resistor.
b. Determine the values of the resistors R1 and R2.
c. Solve for the power dissipated by each of the resistors.
5.5
Interchanging Series Components
21. Refer to Figure 5–15. Determine the value of the series resistance given the
following circuit parameters:
E  24 V
IF  10 mA
VF  3.8 V
22. Repeat Problem 21 given the following circuit parameters:
E  12 V
IF  15 mA
VF  4.2 V
23. Redraw the circuits of Figure 5–65, showing a single voltage source for each
circuit. Solve for the current in each circuit.
24. Use the information given to determine the polarity and magnitude of the
unknown voltage source in each of the circuits of Figure 5–66.
Problems
159
E = 72 V
R2
R1
R3
3 mA


36 V
8 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
10 
43 
27 
4 V
10 V
6 V
(a) Circuit 1
(b) Circuit 2
170 V
4.3 k
9.1 k
7.8 k
2.7 k
50 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–65
FIGURE 5–64
(a)
12 k
14 V
6 k
3 k
?
I = 2 mA
(b)
85 
3.3 V
1.9 V
25 
150 
?
P = 135 mW
I
(c)
6 V
120 k
330 k
?
4 V
390 k


3.3 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–66
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5.6
The Voltage Divider Rule
25. Use the voltage divider rule to determine the voltage across each resistor in
the circuits of Figure 5–67. Use your results to verify Kirchhoff’s voltage law
for each circuit.
26. Repeat Problem 23 for the circuits of Figure 5–68.
27. Refer to the circuits of Figure 5–69:
a. Find the values of the unknown resistors.
b. Calculate the voltage across each resistor.
c. Determine the power dissipated by each resistor.
160
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
(a) Circuit 1
24 V
6 
3 
2 
8 
5 
(b) Circuit 2
170 V
4.3 k
9.1 k
7.8 k
2.7 k
50 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–67
14.2 V
R1: brown, red, orange
R2: yellow, 
violet, orange
R3: blue, green, red
(a) Circuit 1
62 V
100 
1.36 
430 
(b) Circuit 2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–68
24 V
R2 = 3.5 R1
R1
R3 = 2 R2
I = 20 mA
c
a
b
(a) Circuit 1
50 V
R2
R1 = 4 R2
R3 = 3 R2
c
a
b
P2 = 160 mW
(b) Circuit 2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–69
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

28. Refer to the circuits of Figure 5–70:
a. Find the values of the unknown resistors using the voltage divider rule.
b. Calculate the voltage across R1 and R3.
c. Determine the power dissipated by each resistor.
29. A string of 24 series light bulbs is connected to a 120-V supply as shown in
Figure 5–71.
a. Solve for the current in the circuit.
b. Use the voltage divider rule to ﬁnd the voltage across each light bulb.
c. Calculate the power dissipated by each bulb.
d. If a single light bulb were to become an open circuit, the entire string
would stop working. To prevent this from occurring, each light bulb has a
small metal strip which shorts the light bulb when the ﬁlament fails. If
two bulbs in the string were to burn out, repeat Steps (a) through (c).
e. Based on your calculations of Step (d), what do you think would happen
to the life expectancy of the remaining light bulbs if the two faulty bulbs
were not replaced?
30. Repeat Problem 29 for a string consisting of 36 light bulbs.
5.8
Voltage Subscripts
31. Solve for the voltages Vab and Vbc in the circuits of Figure 5–69.
32. Repeat Problem 31 for the circuits of Figure 5–70.
33. For the circuits of Figure 5–72, determine the voltage across each resistor
and calculate the voltage Va.
34. Given the circuits of Figure 5–73:
a. Determine the voltage across each resistor.
b. Find the magnitude and direction of the current in the 180-k resistor.
c. Solve for the voltage Va.
5.9
Internal Resistance of Voltage Sources
35. A battery is measured to have an open-terminal voltage of 14.2 V. When this
voltage is connected to a 100- load, the voltage measured between the
terminals of the battery drops to 6.8 V.
a. Determine the internal resistance of the battery.
b. If the 100- load were replaced with a 200- load, what voltage would
be measured across the terminals of the battery?
Problems
161
(a)
100 V
25 k
R1
R4
c
b
a
R3 = 4 R1
R2
27 V




36 V
(b)
R1
R3 = 1.5 R2
13.5 V
R2
a
b
c
2 V

6.2 V
2 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–70
E = 120 V
No. 1
No. 2
No. 24
No. 23
R = 25 V/light bulb
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–71
54 V
9 k
6 k
a
3 k
(a)
670 
330 
3 V
6 V
a
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–72
(a)
220 k
10 V
c
b
a
180 k
Vb = 2 V
Vc = 6 V
FIGURE 5–73
(b)
180 k
330 k
6 V
a
2 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36. The voltage source shown in Figure 5–74 is measured to have an open-circuit
voltage of 24 V. When a 10- load is connected across the terminals, the
voltage measured with a voltmeter drops to 22.8 V.
a. Determine the internal resistance of the voltage source.
b. If the source had only half the resistance determined in (a), what 
voltage would be measured across the terminals with the 10- resistor
connected?
162
Chapter 5 | Series Circuits
(a)
Eideal
Rint




V
24.0
OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

(b)
Eideal
Rint


RL = 10 


V
22.8
OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–74
15 V
12 k
10 k
18 k
(a) Circuit 1
0.15 V
120 
100 
180 
(b) Circuit 2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–75
5.10
Ammeter Loading Effects
37. For the series circuits of Figure 5–75, determine the current in each circuit. If
an ammeter having an internal resistance of 50  is used to measure the cur-
rent in the circuits, determine the current through the ammeter and calculate
the loading effect for each circuit.
38. Repeat Problem 37 if the ammeter has a resistance of 10 .
5.11
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
39. Refer to the circuits of Figure 5–67. Use Multisim to ﬁnd the following:
a. The current in each circuit.
b. The voltage across each resistor in the circuit.
MultiSim
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40. Given the circuit of Figure 5–76, use Multisim to determine the following:
a. The current through the voltage source, I.
b. The voltage across each resistor.
c. The voltage between terminals a and b.
d. The voltage, with respect to ground, at terminal c.
Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
163
36 V
470 
R1
a
c
b
R2
R3
180 
390 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 5–76
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. Two elements are connected at only one node.
2. No current-carrying element is connected to the
common node.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
The summation of voltage drops and rises around any closed
loop is equal to zero; or the summation of voltage rises is
equal to the summation of voltage drops around a closed
loop.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
R1  4.2 k
R2  12.6 k
R3  25.2 k
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
ECELL  2.18 V
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 5
R1  18.8 k
R2  28.21 k
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 6
The chassis of the oven is grounded when it is connected to
the electrical outlet.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 7
Vab  7.50 V
Vca  10.0 V
Vbc  2.5 V
MultiSim
MultiSim
41. Refer to the circuit of Figure 5–63. Use PSpice to ﬁnd the following:
a. The current in the circuit.
b. The voltage across each resistor in the circuit.
42. Refer to the circuit of Figure 5–62. Use PSpice to ﬁnd the following:
a. The current in the circuit.
b. The voltage across each resistor in the circuit.
PSPICE
PSPICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Current Divider Rule (CDR)
Kirchhoff’s Current Law
Loading Effect (Voltmeter)
Nodes
Parallel (Or Shunt)
Circuits
Total Conductance
Total Equivalent
Resistance
I OUTLINE
Parallel Circuits
Kirchhoff’s Current Law
Resistors in Parallel
Voltage Sources in
Parallel
Current Divider Rule
Analysis of Parallel
Circuits
Voltmeter Loading Effects
Computer Analysis
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter you will be able to
• recognize which elements and branches in a
given circuit are connected in parallel and
which are connected in series,
• calculate the total resistance and conduc-
tance of a network of parallel resistances,
• determine the current in any resistor in a
parallel circuit,
• solve for the voltage across any parallel
combinations of resistors,
• apply Kirchhoff’s current law to solve for
unknown currents in a circuit,
• explain why voltage sources of different
magnitudes must never be connected in 
parallel,
• use the current divider rule to solve for the
current through any resistor of a parallel
combination,
• identify and calculate the loading effects of
a voltmeter connected into a circuit,
• use Multisim to observe loading effects of a
voltmeter,
• use PSpice to evaluate voltage and current in
a parallel circuit.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6
PARALLEL CIRCUITS
T
wo fundamental circuits form the basis of all electrical circuits. They are the series circuit and
the parallel circuit. The previous chapter examined the principles and rules that apply to
series circuits. In this chapter we study the parallel (or shunt) circuit and examine the rules gov-
erning the operation of these circuits.
Figure 6–1 illustrates a simple example of several light bulbs connected in parallel with one
another and a battery supplying voltage to the bulbs.
This illustration shows one of the important differences between the series circuit and the
parallel circuit. The parallel circuit will continue to operate even though one of the light bulbs
may have a defective (open) ﬁlament. Only the defective light bulb will no longer glow. If a cir-
cuit were made up of several light bulbs in series, however, the defective light bulb would 
prevent any current in the circuit, and so all the light bulbs would be off. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
FIGURE 6–1
Simple parallel circuit.
I
1
2
Jolt
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

166
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
Putting It in Perspective
Luigi Galvani and the Discovery of Nerve Excitation
LUIGI GALVANI WAS BORN IN BOLOGNA, Italy, on September 9, 1737. 
Galvani’s main expertise was in anatomy, a subject in which
he was appointed lecturer at the university in Bologna.
Galvani discovered that when the nerves of frogs were con-
nected to sources of electricity, the muscles twitched. Although
he was unable to determine where the electrical pulses origi-
nated within the animal, Galvani’s work was signiﬁcant and
helped to open further discoveries in nerve impulses.
Galvani’s name has been adopted for the instrument called the
galvanometer, which is used for detecting very small currents.
Luigi Galvani died in Bologna on December 4, 1798. Although
he made many contributions to science, Galvani died poor,
shrouded in controversy due to his refusal to swear allegiance
to Napolean. I
Figure 6–1 shows that one terminal of each light bulb is connected to the pos-
itive terminal of the battery and that the other terminal of the light bulb is 
connected to the negative terminal of the battery. These points of connection
are often referred to as nodes.
Elements or branches are said to be in a parallel connection when they
have exactly two nodes in common. Additionally, these parallel elements or
branches will have the same voltage across them.
Figure 6–2 shows several different ways of sketching parallel elements.
The elements between the nodes may be any two-terminal devices such as
voltage sources, resistors, light bulbs, and the like.
6.1 Parallel Circuits
SCIENCE SOURCE/Photo Researchers/Getty Images
(b)
(d)
(c)
D
C
B
A
E
Node a
Node b
(a)
A
B
Node a
Node b
B
Node a
Node b
C
A
B
A
Node a
Node b
C
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–2
Parallel elements.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.2 | Kirchhoff’s Current Law
167
In Figure 6–2, notice that every element has two terminals and that each of
the terminals is connected to one of the two nodes.
Very often, circuits contain a combination of series and parallel compo-
nents. Although we will study these circuits in greater depth in later chapters,
it is important at this point to be able to recognize the various connections in a
given network. Consider the networks shown in Figure 6–3.
When analyzing a particular circuit, it is usually easiest to first designate
the nodes (we will use lowercase letters) and then to identify the types of con-
nections. Figure 6–4 shows the nodes for the networks of Figure 6–3.
In the circuit of Figure 6–4(a), we see that element B is in parallel with
element C since they each have nodes b and c in common. This parallel com-
bination is now seen to be in series with element A.
In the circuit of Figure 6–4(b), element B is in series with element C since
these elements have a single common node: node b. The branch consisting of
the series combination of elements B and C is then determined to be in parallel
with element A.
(b)
A
C
B
Parallel
Series
(a)
B
C
A
Parallel
Series
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–3
Series-parallel combinations.
(a)
B
C
A
Node a
Node b
Node c
(b)
A
C
B
Node a
Node c
Node b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–4
Recall that Kirchhoff’s voltage law was extremely useful in understanding the
operation of the series circuit. In a similar manner, Kirchhoff’s current law 
is the underlying principle that is used to explain the operation of a parallel 
circuit. Kirchhoff’s current law states the following:
The summation of currents entering a node is equal to the summation of
currents leaving the node.
An analogy that helps us understand the principle of Kirchhoff’s current
law is the flow of water. When water flows in a closed pipe, the amount of
water entering a particular point in the pipe is exactly equal to the amount 
6.2 Kirchhoff’s Current
Law
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

168
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
EXAMPLE 6–1       
Determine the magnitude and correct direction of the currents I3 and I5 for the
network of Figure 6–7.
Solution
Although points a and b are in fact the same node, we treat the points
as two separate nodes with 0  resistance between them.
Since Kirchhoff’s current law must be valid at point a, we have the follow-
ing expression for this node:
I1  I2  I3
I5 = 3 A
I1 = 5 A
I2 = 2 A
I3 = 4 A
I4 = 2 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–5
Kirchhoff’s current law.
of water leaving, since there is no loss. In mathematical form, Kirchhoff’s cur-
rent law is stated as follows:
 Ientering node   Ileaving node
(6–1)
Figure 6–5 is an illustration of Kirchhoff’s current law. Here we see that the
node has two currents entering, I1  5 A and I5  3 A, and three currents
leaving, I2  2 A, I3  4 A, and I4  2 A. Now we can see that Equation 6–1
applies in the illustration, namely,
 Iin   Iout
5 A  3 A  2 A  4 A  8 A
8 A  8 A (checks!)
Verify that Kirchhoff’s current law applies at the node shown in Figure 6–6.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
2 mA
3 mA
4 mA
6 mA
1 mA
4 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–6
Answer
3 mA  6 mA  1 mA  2 mA  4 mA  4 mA
Quite often, when we analyze a given circuit, we are unsure of the direc-
tion of current through a particular element within the circuit. In such cases, we
assume a reference direction and base further calculations on this assumption.
If our assumption is incorrect, calculations will show that the current has a neg-
ative sign. The negative sign simply indicates that the current is in fact oppo-
site to the direction selected as the reference. The following example illustrates
this very important concept.
I1 = 2 A
I2 = 3 A
I4 = 6 A
I3
I5 
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–7
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.2 | Kirchhoff’s Current Law
169
and so
I3  I1  I2
 2 A  3 A  1 A
Notice that the reference direction of current I3 was taken to be from a to b,
while the negative sign indicates that the current is in fact from b to a.
Similarly, using Kirchhoff’s current law at point b gives
I3  I4  I5
which gives current I5 as
I5  I3  I4
 1 A  6 A  7 A
The negative sign indicates that the current I5 is actually toward node b rather
than away from the node. The actual directions and magnitudes of the currents
are illustrated in Figure 6–8.
I1 = 2 A
I2 = 3 A
I4 = 6 A
1 A
7A 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–8
EXAMPLE 6–2        
Find the magnitudes of the unknown currents for the circuit of Figure 6–9.
I3
I6 = 2 A
I5 = 3 A
I7 = 10 A
I1 
I2 = 3 A
a
b
c
I4
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–9
Solution
If we consider point a, we see that there are two unknown currents,
I1 and I3. Since there is no way to solve for these values, we examine the cur-
rents at point b, where we again have two unknown currents, I3 and I4. Finally,
we observe that at point c there is only one unknown, I4. Using Kirchhoff’s cur-
rent law we solve for the unknown current as follows:
I4  3 A  2 A  10 A
Therefore,
I4  10 A  3 A  2 A  5 A
Now we can see that at point b the current entering is
I3  5 A  3 A  2 A  10 A
And ﬁnally, by applying Kirchhoff’s current law at point a, we determine that
the current I1 is
I1  10 A  3 A  7 A
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

170
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
EXAMPLE 6–3       
Determine the unknown currents in the network of Figure 6–10.
I1 = 24 A
I2 = 11 A
I6 = 6 A
I5
I4
I3
I7
(a)
I7
(b)
Node d
I1 = 24 A
I2 = 11 A
I6 = 6 A
I5
I4
I3
Node a
Node b
Node c
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–10
Solution
We ﬁrst assume reference directions for the unknown currents in the
network.
Since we may use the analogy of water moving through conduits, we can
easily assign directions for the currents I3, I5, and I7. However, the direction for
the current I4 is not as easily determined, so we arbitrarily assume that its direc-
tion is to the right. Figure 6–10(b) shows the various nodes and the assumed 
current directions.
By examining the network, we see that there is only a single source of cur-
rent I1  24 A. Using the analogy of water pipes, we conclude that the current
leaving the network is I7  I1  24 A.
Now, applying Kirchhoff’s current law to node a, we calculate the current
I3 as follows:
I1  I2  I3
Therefore,
I3  I1  I2  24 A  11 A  13 A
Similarly, at node c, we have
I3  I4  I6
Therefore,
I4  I6  I3  6 A  13 A  7 A
Although the current I4 is opposite to the assumed reference direction, we do not
change its direction for further calculations. We use the original direction together
with the negative sign; otherwise the calculations would be needlessly complicated.
Applying Kirchhoff’s current law at node b, we get
I2  I4  I5
which gives
I5  I2  I4  11 A  (7 A)  18 A
Finally, applying Kirchhoff’s current law at node d gives
I5  I6  I7
resulting in
I7  I5  I6  18 A  6 A  24 A
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.3 | Resistors in Parallel
171
IT
R2 
RN
a
In
R1 
I2 
I1 
RT 
E
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–12
Determine the unknown currents in the network of Figure 6–11.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
I2
I1 = 500 mA
I4
I3 = 200 mA
I = 0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–11
Answers
I2  500 A, I4  700 A
A simple parallel circuit is constructed by combining a voltage source with
several resistors as shown in Figure 6–12.
The voltage source will result in current from the positive terminal of the
source toward node a. At this point the current will split between the various
resistors and then recombine at node b before continuing to the negative 
terminal of the voltage source.
6.3 Resistors in
Parallel
This circuit illustrates a very important concept of parallel circuits. If we
were to apply Kirchhoff’s voltage law around each closed loop in the parallel
circuit of Figure 6–12, we would find that the voltage across all parallel resis-
tors is exactly equal, namely VR1  VR2  VR3  E. Therefore, by applying
Kirchhoff’s voltage law, we make the following statement:
The voltage across all parallel elements in a circuit will be the same.
This principle allows us to determine the equivalent resistance, RT, of any
number of resistors connected in parallel. The equivalent resistance, RT, is the
effective resistance “seen” by the source and determines the total current, IT,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

172
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
provided to the circuit. Applying Kirchhoff’s current law to the circuit of
Figure 6–11, we have the following expression:
IT  I1  I2  …  In
However, since Kirchhoff’s voltage law also applies to the parallel circuit,
the voltage across each resistor must be equal to the supply voltage, E. The
total current in the circuit, which is determined by the supply voltage and the
equivalent resistance, may now be written as
R
E
T
  R
E
1
  R
E
2
  …  R
E
n

Simplifying the preceding expression gives us the general expression for
total resistance of a parallel circuit as
R
1
T
  R
1
1
  R
1
2
  …  R
1
n

(siemens, S)
(6–2)
Since conductance was defined as the reciprocal of resistance, we may
write the preceding equation in terms of conductance, namely,
GT  G1  G2  …  Gn
(S)
(6–3)
Whereas series resistors had a total resistance determined by the summation
of the particular resistances, we see that any number of parallel resistors have a
total conductance determined by the summation of the individual conductances.
The total equivalent resistance of n parallel resistors may be determined
in one step as follows:
RT 
()
(6–4)
An important effect of combining parallel resistors is that the resultant
resistance will always be smaller than the smallest resistor in the combination.
1

R
1
1
  R
1
2
  …  R
1
n

EXAMPLE 6–4       
Solve for the total conductance and total equivalent resistance of the circuit
shown in Figure 6–13.
Solution
The total conductance is
GT  G1  G2  4
1

  1
1

  1.25 S
The total equivalent resistance of the circuit is
RT  G
1
T
  
1.2
1
5 S
  0.800 
Notice that the equivalent resistance of the parallel resistors is indeed less than
the value of each resistor.
R2 
R1 
RT
GT
4 V
1 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–13
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.3 | Resistors in Parallel
173
EXAMPLE 6–5        
Determine the conductance and resistance of the network of Figure 6–14.
R3 
R2 
RT
GT
9 
6 
R1
18 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–14
Solution
The total conductance is
GT  G1  G2  G3
 
18
1

  9
1

  6
1


 0.05 S  0.11 S  0.16 S
 0.33 S
where the overbar indicates that the number under it is repeated inﬁnitely to the
right.
The total resistance is
RT  
0.3
1
3 S
  3.00 
For the parallel network of resistors shown in Figure 6–15, ﬁnd the total con-
ductance GT and the total resistance RT.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
R4 
R3 
RT
GT
80 V
10 V
R2
400 V
100 V
R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–15
Answers
GT  0.125 S, RT  8.00 
n Equal Resistors in Parallel
If we have n equal resistors in parallel, each resistor, R, has the same conduc-
tance, G. By applying Equation 6–3, the total conductance is found:
GT  nG
Calculator Hint: A simpliﬁed
method that may be used to
solve for resistors in parallel is
by using the x1 key that is avail-
able on all scientiﬁc calculators.
For some calculators, it may be
necessary to use the function
(Shift) key and a second key.
Locate the x1 key for your par-
ticular calculator. To solve for the
equivalent resistance of the net-
work in Figure 6–14, perform
the following operations:
18
x1
x1
x1
x1



9
6
Depending on your calculator,
your display will appear similar to
the following:
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The total resistance is now easily determined as
RT  G
1
T
  n
1
G
  R
n

(6–5)
174
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
EXAMPLE 6–7       
Determine the total resistance of the resistor combinations of Figure 6–17.
R2 
R1 
RT
3 M
1 M
(a)
R2 
R1 
RT
36 
24 
(b)
R2 
R1 
RT
98 k
2  k
(c)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–17
EXAMPLE 6–6       
For the networks of Figure 6–16, calculate the total resistance.
FIGURE 6–16
(a)
R3 
RT
18 k
18 k
R2
R1
18 k
R4 
RT
200 
200 
R3
R2 
200 
200 
R1
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
Solution
a. RT  
18
3
k
  6 k
b. RT  
200
4

  50 
Two Resistors in Parallel
Very often circuits have only two resistors in parallel. In such a case, the total
resistance of the combination may be determined without the necessity of
determining the conductance.
For two resistors, Equation 6–4 is written as
RT 
By cross multiplying the terms in the denominator, the expression becomes
RT 
Thus, for two resistors in parallel we have the following expression:
RT  
R1
R

1R2
R2

(6–6)
For two resistors connected in parallel, the equivalent resistance is found by the
product of the two values divided by the sum.
1


R1
R

1R2
R2

1

R
1
1
  R
1
2

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.3 | Resistors in Parallel
175
Solution
a. RT  
3
(3
M
M



)(1
1
M
M


)
  0.75 M  750 k
b. RT  
3
(3
6
6



)(2
2
4
4


)
  14.4 
c. RT  
9
(9
8
8
k
k



)(2
2
k
k


)
  1.96 k
Although Equation 6–6 is intended primarily to solve for two resistors in
parallel, the approach may also be used to solve for any number of resistors by
examining only two resistors at a time.
EXAMPLE 6–8       
Calculate the total resistance of the resistor combination of Figure 6–18.
Solution
By grouping the resistors into combinations of two, the circuit may
be simpliﬁed as shown in Figure 6–19.
R4 
R3 
RT
60 V
60 V
R2
90 V
180 V
R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–18
RT
60 V
60 V
90 V
180 V
RB
RA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–19
The equivalent resistance of each of the indicated combinations is determined as
follows:
RA 
1
(1
8
8
0
0



)(9
9
0
0


)
  60 
RB 
6
(6
0
0



)(6
6
0
0


)
  30 
The circuit can be further simpliﬁed as a combination of two resistors
shown in Figure 6–20.
The resultant equivalent resistance is
RT 
6
(6
0
0



)(3
3
0
0


)
  20 
RB 
RT
30 V
60 V
RA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–20
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

176
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
Find the total equivalent resistance for each network in Figure 6–21.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
Three Resistors in Parallel
Using an approach similar to the derivation of Equation 6–6, we may arrive at
an equation that solves for three resistors in parallel. Indeed, it is possible to
write a general equation to solve for four resistors, five resistors, and more.
Although such an equation is certainly useful, students are discouraged from
memorizing such lengthy expressions. You will generally find that it is much
more efficient to remember the principles upon which the equation is con-
structed. Consequently, the derivation of Equation 6–7 is left up to the student.
RT 
(6–7)
R1R2R3

R1R2  R1R3  R2R3
FIGURE 6–21
(a)
R3 
RT
90 
90 
R2
R1
90 
R4 
20 
(b)
R6 
RT
4200 
700 
R5
R4 
1 k
R3
1 k
R2 
3 k
R1
6 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
Answers
a. 12 ; b. 240 
If the circuit of Figure 6–21(a) is connected to a 24-V voltage source, determine
the following quantities:
a. The total current provided by the voltage source.
b. The current through each resistor of the network.
c. Verify Kirchhoff’s current law at one of the voltage source terminals.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Voltage sources of different potentials should never be connected in parallel,
since to do so would contradict Kirchhoff’s voltage law. However, when two
equal potential sources are connected in parallel, each source will deliver half
the required circuit current. For this reason automobile batteries are sometimes
connected in parallel to assist in starting a car with a “weak” battery. Figure 6–22
illustrates this principle.
6.4 Voltage Sources 
in Parallel
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.5 | Current Divider Rule
177
2 I
RL
E1 
I
12 V
I
12 V
E2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–22
Voltage sources in parallel.
E1 
12 V
6 V
E2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–23
Voltage sources of different
voltages must never be placed in parallel.
Figure 6–23 shows that if voltage sources of two different potentials are
placed in parallel, Kirchhoff’s voltage law will be violated around the closed
loop. In practice, if voltage sources of different potentials are placed in paral-
lel, the resulting closed loop can have a very large current. The current will
occur even though there may not be a load connected across the sources.
Example 6–9 illustrates the large currents that can occur when two parallel bat-
teries of different potential are connected.
EXAMPLE 6–9        
A 12-V battery and a 6-V battery (each having an internal resistance of 0.05 V)
are inadvertently placed in parallel as shown in Figure 6–24. Determine the cur-
rent through the batteries.
Solution
From Ohm’s law,
I  E
R
T
T
 
0.0
1
5
2

V


0
6
.0
V
5 
  60 A
This example illustrates why batteries of different potential must never be con-
nected in parallel. Tremendous currents will occur within the sources, resulting
in the possibility of a ﬁre or explosion.
E1 
12 V
6 V
E2
R1 
R2 
0.05 V
0.05 V
I 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–24
When we examined series circuits we determined that the current in the
series circuit was the same everywhere in the circuit, whereas the voltages
across the series elements were typically different. The voltage divider rule
(VDR) was used to determine the voltage across all resistors within a series
network.
In parallel networks, the voltage across all parallel elements is the same.
However, the currents through the various elements are typically different. The
current divider rule (CDR) is used to determine how current entering a node
is split between the various parallel resistors connected to the node.
Consider the network of parallel resistors shown in Figure 6–25.
If this network of resistors is supplied by a voltage source, the total current
in the circuit is
IT  R
E
T

(6–8)
6.5 Current Divider
Rule
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Since each of the n parallel resistors has the same voltage, E, across its ter-
minals, the current through any resistor in the network is given as
Ix  R
E
x

(6–9)
By rewriting Equation 6–8 as E  ITRT and then substituting this into
Equation 6–9, we obtain the current divider rule as follows:
Ix  R
R
T
x
 IT
(6–10)
An alternate way of writing the current divider rule is to express it in terms
of conductance. Equation 6–10 may be modified as follows:
Ix  G
G
T
x IT
(6–11)
The current divider rule allows us to calculate the current in any resistor
of a parallel network if we know the total current entering the network. Notice
the similarity between the voltage divider rule (for series components) and the
current divider rule (for parallel components). The main difference is that the
current divider rule of Equation 6–11 uses circuit conductance rather than
resistance. While this equation is useful, it is generally easier to use resistance
to calculate current.
If the network consists of only two parallel resistors, then the current
through each resistor may be found in a slightly different way. Recall that for
two resistors in parallel, the total parallel resistance is given as
RT  
R1
R

1R2
R2

Now, by substituting this expression for total resistance into Equation 6–10,
we obtain
I1  
IT
R
R
1
T


which simplifies to
I1  
R1
R

2
R2
 IT
(6–12)
IT
R1
R

1R2
R2


R1
178
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
IT
IT
R2 
Rn
In
R1 
I2 
I1
E
RT
Rx
Ix
Ix = Rx
RT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–25
Current divider rule.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.5 | Current Divider Rule
179
Similarly,
I2  
R1
R

1
R2
 IT
(6–13)
Several other important characteristics of parallel networks become evident.
If current enters a parallel network consisting of any number of equal
resistors, then the current entering the network will split equally between all of
the resistors.
If current enters a parallel network consisting of several values of resis-
tance, then the smallest value of resistor in the network will have the largest
amount of current. Inversely, the largest value of resistance will have the small-
est amount of current.
This characteristic may be simplified by saying that most of the current
will follow the path of least resistance.
EXAMPLE 6–10       
For the network of Figure 6–26, determine the currents I1, I2, and I3.
Solution
First, we calculate the total conductance of the network.
GT  1
1

  2
1

  4
1

  1.75 S
Now the currents may be evaluated as follows:
I1  G
G
T
1 IT 
1.
1
75
S
S
14 A  8.00 A
I2  G
G
T
2 IT 
1
0
.
.
7
5
5
S
S
14 A  4.00 A
I3  G
G
T
3 IT 
0
1
.
.
2
7
5
5
S
S
14 A  2.00 A
An alternate approach is to use circuit resistance, rather than conductance.
RT  G
1
T
  
1.7
1
5 S
  0.571 
I1  R
R
T
1
 IT 
0.5
1
7

1 
14 A  8.00 A
I2  R
R
T
2
 IT 
0.5
2
7

1 
14 A  4.00 A
I3  R
R
T
3
 IT 
0.5
5
7

1 
14 A  2.00 A
R3 
R2 
R1
I3
I2
I1
2 V
1 V
4 V
14 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–26
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

180
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
EXAMPLE 6–11       
For the network of Figure 6–27, determine the currents I1, I2, and I3.
Solution
Since all the resistors have the same value, the incoming current will
split equally between the resistances. Therefore,
I1  I2  I3  
12
3
mA
  4.00 mA
R3 
R2 
R1
I3
I2
I1
6 kV
6 kV
6 kV
IT = 12 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–27
EXAMPLE 6–12       
Determine the currents I1 and I2 in the network of Figure 6–28.
Solution
Because we have only two resistors in the given network, we use
Equations 6–12 and 6–13:
I1  
R1
R

2
R2
 IT 
300 
20

0 
200 
(20 mA)  8.00 mA
I2  
R1
R

1
R2
 IT 
300 
30

0 
200 
(20 mA)  12.0 mA
R2 
R1
I2
I1
300 V
200 V
20 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–28
EXAMPLE 6–13       
Determine the resistance R1 so that current will divide as shown in the network
of Figure 6–29.
Solution
There are several methods that may be used to solve this problem.
We will examine only two of the possibilities.
Method I: Since we have two resistors in parallel, we may use Equation 6–13
to solve for the unknown resistor:
I2  
R1
R

1
R2
 IT
5 A 
R1 
R
3
1
0 
(25 A)
R2 
R1
30 V
25 A
I2 = 5 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–29
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.5 | Current Divider Rule
181
Using algebra, we get
(5 A)R1  (5 A)(30 )  (25 A)R1
(20 A)R1  150 V
R1  
1
2
5
0
0
A
V
  7.50 
Method II: By applying Kirchhoff’s current law, we see that the current in R1
must be
I1  25 A  5 A  20 A
Now, since elements in parallel must have the same voltage across their termi-
nals, the voltage across R1 must be exactly the same as the voltage across R2. By
Ohm’s law, the voltage across R2 is
V2  (5 A)(30 )  150 V
And so
R1  
1
2
5
0
0
A
V
  7.50 
As expected, the results are identical. This example illustrates that there is usually
more than one method for solving a given problem. Although the methods are
equally correct, we see that the second method in this example is less involved.
Use the current divider rule to calculate the unknown currents for the networks
of Figure 6–30.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
(a) Network 1
R2 
R1 
60 
I1 
I2
250 mA
40 
(b) Network 2
R2 
I2 
R3 = 12 
I1 
R1 = 24 
I3 
8 
27 A
(c) Network 3
R2 
R1 
RT
60 k
I1 
I2 = 2 mA
I
36 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–30
Answers
Network 1: I1  100 mA,
I2  150 mA
Network 2: I1  4.50 A,
I2  13.5 A,
I3  9.00 A
Network 3: I1  3.00 mA,
I  5.00 mA
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

182
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
Four resistors are connected in parallel. The values of the resistors are 1 , 3 ,
4 , and 5 .
a. Using only a pencil and a piece of paper (no calculator), determine the current
through each resistor if the current through the 5- resistor is 6 A.
b. Again, without a calculator, solve for the total current applied to the parallel
combination.
c. Use a calculator to determine the total parallel resistance of the four resistors.
Use the current divider rule and the total current obtained in part (b) to
calculate the current through each resistor.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
We will now examine how to use the principles developed in this chapter when
analyzing parallel circuits. In the examples to follow, we ﬁnd that the laws of
conservation of energy apply equally well to parallel circuits as to series circuits.
Although we choose to analyze circuits a certain way, remember that there is usu-
ally more than one way to arrive at the correct answer. As you become more pro-
ﬁcient at circuit analysis you will generally use the most efﬁcient method. For
now, however, use the method with which you feel most comfortable.
6.6 Analysis of
Parallel Circuits
EXAMPLE 6–14       
For the circuit of Figure 6–31, determine the following quantities:
a. RT
b. IT
c. Power delivered by the voltage source
d. I1 and I2 using the current divider rule
e. Power dissipated by the resistors
Solution
a. RT  
R1
R

1R2
R2
  
2
(2
k
k



)(8
8
k
k


)
  1.6 k
b. IT  R
E
T
  
1
3
.6
6
k
V

  22.5 mA
c. PT  EIT  (36 V)(22.5 mA)  810 mW
d. I2  
R1
R

1
R2
 IT 
2 k
2

k
8 k
(22.5 mA)  4.5 mA
I1  
R1
R

2
R2
 IT 
2 k
8

k
8 k
(22.5 mA)  18.0 mA
e. Since we know the voltage across each of the parallel resistors must be 
36 V, we use this voltage to determine the power dissipated by each resis-
tor. It would be equally correct to use the current through each resistor to
IT
I2 
R1 
2 k
RT 
E
36 V
I1
R2 
8 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–31
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.6 | Analysis of Parallel Circuits
183
calculate the power. However, it is generally best to use given information
rather than calculated values to perform further calculations since it is
then less likely that an error is carried through.
P1  E
R
2
1
  
(3
2
6
k
V

)2
  648 mW
P2  E
R
2
2
  
(3
8
6
k
V

)2
  162 mW
Notice that the power delivered by the voltage source is exactly equal to
the total power dissipated by the resistors, namely PT  P1  P2.
EXAMPLE 6–15        
Refer to the circuit of Figure 6–32:
IT = 2.2 A
I3 
R2 
P3 = 144 W  
300 V
I2
R3 
I1
R1 
E = 120 V 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–32
a. Solve for the total power delivered by the voltage source.
b. Find the currents I1, I2, and I3.
c. Determine the values of the unknown resistors R2 and R3.
d. Calculate the power dissipated by each resistor.
e. Verify that the power dissipated is equal to the power delivered by the
voltage source.
Solution
a. PT  EIT  (120 V)(2.2 A)  264 W
b. Since the three resistors of the circuit are in parallel, we know that the
voltage across all resistors must be equal to E  120 V.
I1  V
R
1
1
  
3
1
0
2
0
0

V
  0.4 A
I3  P
V
3
3
  
1
1
4
2
4
0
W
V
  1.2 A
Because KCL must be maintained at each node, we determine the current I2 as
I2  IT  I1  I3
 2.2 A  0.4 A  1.2 A  0.6 A
c. R2  V
I2
2  
1
0
2
.6
0
A
V
  200 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

184
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
Although we could use the calculated current I3 to determine the resistance, it is
best to use the given data in calculations rather than calculated values.
R3  V
P
3
3
2
  
(1
1
2
4
0
4
V
W
)2
  100 
d. P1  V
R
1
1
2
  
(1
3
2
0
0
0
V

)2
  48 W
P2  I2E2  (0.6 A)(120 V)  72 W
e. Pin  Pout
264 W  P1  P2  P3
264 W  48 W  72 W  144 W
264 W  264 W
(checks!)
In the previous chapter, we observed that a voltmeter is essentially a meter
display in series with a current-limiting resistance. When a voltmeter is placed
across two terminals to provide a voltage reading, the circuit is affected in the
same manner as if a resistance were placed across the two terminals. The effect
is shown in Figure 6–33.
If the resistance of the voltmeter is very large in comparison with the
resistance across which the voltage is to be measured, the meter will indicate
essentially the same voltage as that present before the meter was connected.
On the other hand, if the meter has an internal resistance which is near in value
to the resistance across which the measurement is taken, then the meter will
adversely load the circuit, resulting in an erroneous reading. Generally, if the
meter resistance is more than ten times larger than the resistance across which
the voltage is taken, then the voltmeter loading effect is considered negligi-
ble and may be ignored.
In the circuit of Figure 6–34, there is no current in the circuit since the ter-
minals a and b are open circuited. The voltage appearing between the open 
terminals must be Vab  10 V. Now, if we place a voltmeter having an internal
resistance of 200 k between the terminals, the circuit is closed, resulting in a
small current. The complete circuit appears as shown in Figure 6–35.
The reading indicated on the face of the meter is the voltage that occurs
across the internal resistance of the meter. Applying Kirchhoff’s voltage law to
the circuit, this voltage is
Vab 
200 k
2

00

k
100 
 (10 V)  9.995 V
Clearly, the reading on the face of the meter is essentially equal to the
expected value of 10 V. Recall from the previous chapter that we defined the
loading effect of a meter as follows:
loading effect 
 100%
For the circuit of Figure 6–35, the voltmeter has a loading effect of
loading effect 
10 V 
10
9
V
.995 V
  100%  0.05%
actual value  reading

actual value
6.7 Voltmeter Loading
Effects
R2
1
2
1
2
V
I
OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A
V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–33
E = 10 V
R = 100 V
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–34
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.7 | Voltmeter Loading Effects
185
This loading error is virtually undetectable for the circuit given. The same
would not be true if we had a circuit as shown in Figure 6–36 and used the
same voltmeter to provide a reading.
Again, if the circuit were left open circuited, we would expect that 
Vab  10 V.
By connecting the 200-k voltmeter between the terminals, as shown in
Figure 6–37, we see that the voltage detected between terminals a and b will
no longer be the desired voltage; rather,
Vab 
200 k
2

00

k
1 M
 (10 V)  1.667 V
The loading effect of the meter in this circuit is
loading effect 
10 V 
10
1
V
.667 V
  100%  83.33%
The previous illustration is an example of a problem that can occur when
taking measurements in electronic circuits. When an inexperienced technician
or technologist obtains an unforeseen result, he or she assumes that something
is wrong with either the circuit or the instrument. In fact, both the circuit and
the instrument are behaving in a perfectly predictable manner. The tech merely
forgot to take into account the meter’s loading effect. All instruments have lim-
itations, and we must always be aware of these limitations.
R = 100 V
1
2
E = 10 V  
1
2
V
200 kV
a
b
9.99
OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A
V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–35
R = 1 MV
E
10 V
b
a
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–36
R = 1 MV
E = 10 V
1
2
I
b
a
1
2
V
200 kV
1.667
OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A
V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–37
EXAMPLE 6–16        
A digital voltmeter having an internal resistance of 5 M is used to measure the
voltage across terminals a and b in the circuit of Figure 6–37.
a. Determine the reading on the meter.
b. Calculate the loading effect of the meter.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

186
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
Solution
a. The voltage applied to the meter terminals is
Vab 
1 M
5 M


5 M
(10 V)  8.33 V
b. The loading effect is
loading error 
10 V
1

0 V
8.33 V
  100%  16.7%
All instruments have a loading effect on the circuit in which a measurement is
taken. If you were given two voltmeters, one with an internal resistance of
200 k and another with an internal resistance of 1 M, which meter would load
a circuit more? Explain.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
As you have already seen, computer simulation is useful in providing a visual-
ization of the skills you have learned. We will use both Multisim and PSpice to
“measure” voltage and current in parallel circuits. One of the most useful fea-
tures of Multisim is the program’s ability to accurately simulate the operation
of a real circuit. In this section, you will learn how to change the settings of the
multimeter to observe meter loading in a circuit.
Multisim
6.8 Circuit Analysis
Using Computers
EXAMPLE 6–17       
Use Multisim to determine the currents IT, I1, and I2 in the circuit of Figure 6–38.
This circuit was analyzed previously in Example 6–14.
Solution
After opening the Circuit window:
• Select the components for the circuit from the Parts bin toolbars. You need
to select the battery and ground symbol from the Sources toolbar. The
resistors are obtained from the Basic toolbar.
• Once the circuit is completely wired, place an ammeter into the circuit to
measure the current provided by the voltage source. Place Measurement
Probes (found in the Instruments toolbar) to measure current in each
branch.
• Simulate the circuit by clicking on the power switch. You should see results
similar to those shown in Figure 6–39.
R1
2 kV
I T
I1
E
36 V
R2
8 kV
I2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–38
MultiSim
PSPICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.8 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
187
FIGURE 6–39
E
36 V
R1
2 kΩ
R2
8 kΩ
TP1
TP2
V: 36.0 V
I: 18.0 mA
V: 36.0 V
I: 22.5 mA
V: 36.0 V
I: 4.50 mA
TP3
XMM1
+
–
© Cengage Learning 2013
Notice that these results are consistent with those found in Example 6–14.
EXAMPLE 6–18       
Use Multisim to demonstrate the loading effect of the voltmeter used in
Figure 6–37. The voltmeter is to have internal resistance of 200 k.
Solution
After opening the Circuit window:
• Construct the circuit by placing the battery, resistor, and ground as shown
in Figure 6–37.
• Select the multimeter from the Instruments toolbar.
• Enlarge the multimeter by double-clicking on the symbol.
• Click on the Settings button on the multimeter face.
• Change the voltmeter resistance to 200 k. Accept the new value by
clicking on OK.
• Run the simulation by clicking on the power switch. The resulting display
is shown in Figure 6–40.
XMM1
R1
E
10 V
+
–
1 MΩ
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–40
CircuitSim 06-1 
CircuitSim 06-2 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PSpice
In previous PSpice examples, we used the bias point analysis to obtain the dc
current in a circuit. In this chapter we will again use the same analysis tech-
nique to examine parallel circuits.
188
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
EXAMPLE 6–19       
Use PSpice to determine the currents in the circuit of Figure 6–41.
Solution
• Open the CIS Demo software and construct the circuit as illustrated in
Figure 6–42.
IT
I1
R1
300 V
600 V
900 V
R2
R3
27 V
I2
I3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–41
FIGURE 6–42
• Click on the New Simulation Proﬁle and select Bias Point analysis.
• After running the project, you will observe a display of the circuit currents
and voltages. You can also opt to show the power for each component in the
circuit by enabling Bias Power Display (W) on the PSpice toolbar. When the
powers are displayed, you will observe that power dissipated by resistors 
is positive, while power delivered by the voltage source is negative. 
© Cengage Learning 2013
27 Vdc
0
O V
R1
300
R2
600
R3
900
810.0 mW
1.215 W
2.430 W
165.0 mA
–4.455 W
27.00 V
90.00 mA
45.00 mA
30.00 mA
V1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 6.8 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
189
The currents are I(R1)  90 mA, I(R2)  45 mA, I(R3)  30 mA, and
I(V1)  165 mA. Notice that the power delivered by the voltage source is
4.455 W, which is exactly equal to the summation of power dissipated by
all the resistors.
Use Multisim to determine the current in each resistor of the circuit of
Figure 6–21(a) if a 24-V voltage source is connected across the terminals
of the resistor network.
Answers
I1  I2  I3  0.267 A, I4  1.20 A
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
Use PSpice to determine the current in each resistor of the circuit shown in 
Figure 6–43.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 7
IT
I1
R1
20 V
50 V
125 V
R2
250 V
I2
I3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–43
Answers
I1  12.5 A, I2  5.00 A, I3  2.00 A, IT  19.5 A
Y
ou have been hired as a consultant to a heating company. One of your jobs
is to determine the number of 1000-W heaters that can be safely handled by
an electrical circuit. All of the heaters in any circuit are connected in parallel.
Each circuit operates at a voltage of 240 V and is rated for a maximum of 
20 A. The normal operating current of the circuit should not exceed 80% of
the maximum rated current. How many heaters can be safely installed in each
circuit? If a room requires 5000 W of heaters to provide adequate heat during
the coldest weather, how many circuits must be installed in this room?
Putting It into Practice
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

190
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
Problems
6.1
Parallel Circuits
1. Indicate which of the elements in Figure 6–44 are connected in parallel and
which elements are connected in series.
(a)
A
B
C
F
D
E
(b)
A
C
B
D
(c)
C
D
B
A
F
E
(d)
A
D
C
B
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–44
2. For the networks of Figure 6–45, indicate which resistors are connected in
series and which resistors are connected in parallel.
(a)
R3
R4
R1
R2
(b)
R3
R5
R6
R4
R2
R1
R7
(c)
R1
R6
R2
R5
R4
R3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–45
3. Without changing the component positions, show at least one way of con-
necting all the elements of Figure 6–46 in parallel.
4. Repeat Problem 3 for the elements shown in Figure 6–47.
A
C
D
B
© Cengage Learning 2013
A
E
D
C
B
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–46
FIGURE 6–47
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
191
6.2
Kirchhoff’s Current Law
5. Use Kirchhoff’s current law to determine the magnitudes and directions of
the indicated currents in each of the networks shown in Figure 6–48.
(a)
I2
I1
R2
R1
4 A
5 A
2 A
(b)
R1
R2
I1
I2
6 A
1 A
4 A
I3
3 A
2 A
(c)
6 mA
R1
15 mA
I2
I1
2 mA
7 mA
5 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–48
6. For the circuit of Figure 6–49, determine the magnitude and direction of each
of the indicated currents.
7. Consider the network of Figure 6–50:
a. Calculate the currents I1, I2, I3, and I4.
b. Determine the value of the resistance R3.
R3
R1
2.5 kV
5 kV
R2
4 kV
I3
I1  
I2 = 4 mA
5 V
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
R3
R1 = 40 V
I1
I3
I2
I4
50 V
1
2
R2 = 60 V
5 V
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–49
FIGURE 6–50
8. Find each of the unknown currents in the networks of Figure 6–51.
(a)
I2
I4
I1
I3
10 mA
2 mA
1 mA
(b)
I2
I1
6 A
I3
1 A
2 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–51
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9. Refer to the network of Figure 6–52:
a. Use Kirchhoff’s current law to solve for the unknown currents, I1, I2, I3,
and I4.
b. Calculate the voltage, V, across the network.
c. Determine the values of the unknown resistors, R1, R3, and R4.
10. Refer to the network of Figure 6–53:
a. Use Kirchhoff’s current law to solve for the unknown currents.
b. Calculate the voltage, V, across the network.
c. Determine the required value of the voltage source, E. (Hint: Use
Kirchhoff’s voltage law.)
192
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
R1
25 V
R2
100 mA
500 mA
I1
I2
I4
R3 R4
50 mA
200 mA
I3
V
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–52
I5
I4
6 V
5 V
2 V
3 V
I1
3 A
1 A
2 A
6 A
V
E
I3
I2
1
2
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–53
6.3
Resistors in Parallel
11. Calculate the total conductance and total resistance of each of the networks
shown in Figure 6–54.
(a)
6 
4 
GT
RT
(b)
480 k
240 k
40 k
GT
RT
(c)
GT
RT
Gray
Red
Red
Gold
Brown
Black
Orange
Gold
Orange
White
Orange
Gold
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–54
12. For the networks of Figure 6–55, determine the value of the unknown resis-
tance(s) to result in the given total conductance.
(a)
60 
R
GT = 25 mS
(b)
4 k
R1
GT = 500 S
2
R1
R2 = 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–55
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13. For the networks of Figure 6–56, determine the value of the unknown resis-
tance(s) to result in the total resistances given.
Problems
193
(a)
R
500 k
RT = 400 k
FIGURE 6–56
14. Determine the value of each unknown resistor in the network of Figure 6–57,
so that the total resistance is 100 k.
15. Refer to the network of Figure 6–58:
a. Calculate the values of R1, R2, and R3 so that the total resistance of the
network is 200 .
b. If R3 has a current of 2 A, determine the current through each of the other
resistors.
c. How much current must be applied to the entire network?
16. Refer to the network of Figure 6–59:
a. Calculate the values of R1, R2, R3, and R4 so that the total resistance of the
network is 100 k.
b. If R4 has a current of 2 mA, determine the current through each of the
other resistors.
c. How much current must be applied to the entire network?
RT = 
100 k
R1
R2
2 R1
R3
3 R1
R4
4 R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–57
R2
R1
R3
4 R1
RT = 
200 V
5
R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–58
RT = 
100 k
R1
R2
2 R1
R3
3 R1
R4
3 R2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–59
450 V
200 V
R1
R2
I2
I1 = 2 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
2 A
R1
10 V
I2
R2
40 V
I3
R3
100 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–60
FIGURE 6–61
17. Refer to the network of Figure 6–60:
a. Find the voltages across R1 and R2.
b. Determine the current I2.
18. Refer to the network of Figure 6–61:
a. Find the voltages across R1, R2, and R3.
b. Calculate the current I2.
c. Calculate the current I3.
(b)
90 
50 
R
RT = 30 
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

19. Determine the total resistance of each network of Figure 6–62.
194
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
600 
(a)
800 
800 
RT
27 k
(b)
33 k
56 k
47 k
RT
(c)
9 k
9 k
6 k
9 k
3 k
RT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–62
20. Determine the total resistance of each network of Figure 6–63.
1.2 M
4.7 M
(a)
RT
(b)
120 
360 
240 
150 
RT
1100 
900 
RT
(c)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–63
21. Determine the values of the resistors in the circuit of Figure 6–64, given the
indicated conditions.
22. Given the indicated conditions, calculate all currents and determine all resis-
tor values for the circuit of Figure 6–65.
I1
E = 32 V
R1
I2
I3
RT
= 3I1
= 1.5I2
= 16 kV
I2
R2
I3
R3
RT
© Cengage Learning 2013
I1
E = 54 V
R1
RT
I3
R2
= 36 V
= 500 mA
= 4R1
I2
R2
I3
R3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–64
FIGURE 6–65
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23. Without using a pencil, paper, or a calculator, determine the resistance of
each network of Figure 6–66.
Problems
195
50 k
(a)
50 k
25 k
RT
220 
(b)
220 
RT
(c)
600 
300 
600 
600 
600 
300 
RT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–66
24. Without using a pencil, paper, or calculator, determine the approximate resis-
tance of the network of Figure 6–67.
25. Without using a pencil, paper, or a calculator, approximate the total resis-
tance of the network of Figure 6–68.
RT
30 V
30 V
100 kV
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–68
26. Derive Equation 6–7, which is used to calculate the total resistance of three
parallel resistors.
6.4
Voltage Sources in Parallel
27. Two 20-V batteries are connected in parallel to provide current to a 100-V
load as shown in Figure 6–69. Determine the current in the load and the
current in each battery.
1 kV
1 MV
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–67
E1
20 V
E2
20 V
RL = 100 V
I
I1
I2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–69
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

28. Two lead-acid automobile batteries are connected in parallel, as shown in
Figure 6–70, to provide additional starting current. One of the batteries is
fully charged at 14.2 V and the other battery has discharged to 9 V. If the
internal resistance of each battery is 0.01 , determine the current in the
batteries. If each battery is intended to provide a maximum current of 150 A,
should this method be used to start a car?
6.5
Current Divider Rule
29. Use the current divider rule to ﬁnd the currents I1 and I2 in the networks of
Figure 6–71.
196
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
R1
0.01 V
E1
14.2 V
Battery No. 1
Battery No. 2
R2
0.01 V
E2
9 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–70
8 
(a)
R1
2 
R2
10 A
I1
I2
(b)
I2
R1 = 3 k
2 k
R2 = 1 k
16 mA
I1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–71
30. Repeat Problem 29 for the networks of Figure 6–72.
(a)
R1 = 1 k
R2 = 1 M
2 mA
I1
I2
(b)
80 
16 
I1
4 mA
I2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–72
31. Use the current divider rule to determine all unknown currents for the
networks of Figure 6–73.
3.3 k
(a)
R2
1.0 k
R3
60 mA
I2
4.7 k
R1
I1
I3
2.2 k
R4
I4
200 
(b)
R1
600 
R3
400 
R2
150 mA
I1
I3
I5
I2
300 
R4
I4
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–73
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

32. Repeat Problem 31 for the networks of Figure 6–74.
Problems
197
R1
24 k
(a)
R2
72 k
R3
36 k
R4
24 k
24 mA
I5
I3
I1
I2
I4
I6
(b)
R3 = 480 
R2
R1
120 
144 
I3
I2
I1
18 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–74
24 V
60 mA
R1
R
90 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–75
33. Use the current divider rule to determine the unknown resistance in the
network of Figure 6–75.
34. Use the current divider rule to determine the unknown resistance in the
network of Figure 6–76.
35. Refer to the circuit of Figure 6–77:
a. Determine the equivalent resistance, RT, of the circuit.
b. Solve for the current I.
c. Use the current divider rule to determine the current in each resistor.
d. Verify Kirchhoff’s current law at node a.
R1 = 300 kV
36 mA
48 mA
R
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–76
I1
I
12 V
RT
R1
Node a
24 V
I2
R2
48 V
I3
R3
16 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–77
36. Repeat Problem 35 for the circuit of Figure 6–78.
48 V
I
R1 = 2 kV
RT
Node a
R2 = 8 kV
R3 = 4 kV
R4 = 6 kV
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–78
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6.6
Analysis of Parallel Circuits
37. Refer to the circuit of Figure 6–79:
a. Find the total resistance, RT, and solve for the current, I, through the volt-
age source.
b. Find all of the unknown currents in the circuit.
c. Verify Kirchhoff’s current law at node a.
d. Determine the power dissipated by each resistor. Verify that the total
power dissipated by the resistors is equal to the power delivered by the
voltage source.
198
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
Node a
I1
I
240 V
I4
R1
60 V
I2
R2
100 V
I3
R3
75 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–79
5.6 kV
3.9 kV
4.3 kV
2.7 kV
I4
I5
I1
I2
I3
Node a
I6
270 V
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–80
38. Repeat Problem 37 for the circuit of Figure 6–80.
39. Refer to the circuit of Figure 6–81:
a. Calculate the current through each resistor in the circuit.
b. Determine the total current supplied by the voltage source.
c. Find the power dissipated by each resistor.
R2
10 
R1
20 
20 V
R3
 4 
R5
 5 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–81
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40. Refer to the circuit of Figure 6–82.
a. Solve for the indicated currents.
b. Find the power dissipated by each resistor.
c. Verify that the power delivered by the voltage source is equal to the total
power dissipated by the resistors.
Problems
199
R3 = 1.8 kV
R1
R2
2 kV
230 V
3 kV
I2
I4
I3
I1
I5
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–82
20 V
Red
Violet
Red
Orange
White
Red
Red
Black
Brown
Orange
Orange
Brown
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–84
R1
R2
R3
R4
I1
I2
48 V
50 mA
12 mA
30 mA
P1 = 1.152 W
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–83
41. Given the circuit of Figure 6–83:
a. Determine the values of all resistors.
b. Calculate the currents through R1, R2, and R4.
c. Find the currents I1 and I2.
d. Find the power dissipated by resistors R2, R3, and R4.
42. A circuit consists of four resistors connected in parallel and connected to a
20-V source as shown in Figure 6–84. Determine the minimum power rating
of each resistor if resistors are available with the following power ratings:
1⁄8 W, 1⁄4 W, 1⁄2 W, 1 W, and 2 W.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

200
Chapter 6 | Parallel Circuits
1 MV
E
b
a
DC
Volts
DC
MA
250
100
20
10
2
120
12
0.6
0.06
250
100
20
10
2
3 1
3 10
3 1000
3 100000
AC
Volts
Ohms
0   
     
     
     
     
    
50 
     
     
     
     
     
100
     
     
     
      
   1
50 
     
     
     
     
    
200
     
     
     
     
    
250
 
0   
     
     
     
     
   2
0   
     
     
     
     
  4
0   
     
     
     
     
  6
0   
     
     
     
     
   8
0   
     
     
     
     
100
 
0   
    
    
     
    
    
  4
    
    
    
    
     
    
 8 
    
    
    
    
    
   1
2   
    
    
    
    
    
 16
    
    
    
    
    
    
20 
0  
    
    
    
    
20
    
    
    
    
40
    
    
    
   
60
     
    
    
   
80
    
    
    
   
10
0  
    
    
    
 12
0 
0  
    
    
    
   
1  
    
    
    
   
2  
    
    
    
  3 
    
    
    
   
4  
    
    
    
   
5  
    
    
    
    
6  
20
   
  1
0  
   
4 
  2
   
0  
  2
   
   
 4
   
   
   
  
6  
   
   
   
   
8  
   
   
   
   
10
 
DC
AC
MA
DC
DC
AC
MA
DC
dB
V
V
2
1
COM
VVA
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–87
500 kV
30 V
1
2
b
a
1
2
V
1 MV
OFF
300mV
)))
V
V
A
A
V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–86
I1
120 V
15-A fuse
P1 = 1000 W
I4
IT
R1
I2
R2
24 V
I3
R3
48 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 6–85
6.7
Voltmeter Loading Effects
45. A voltmeter having a 1-M internal resistance is used to measure the
indicated voltage in the circuit shown in Figure 6–86.
a. Determine the voltage reading which will be indicated by the meter.
b. Calculate the voltmeter’s loading effect when used to measure the
indicated voltage.
46. Repeat Problem 45 if the 500-k resistor of Figure 6–86 is replaced with a 
2-M resistor.
47. An inexpensive analog voltmeter is used to measure the voltage across ter-
minals a and b of the circuit shown in Figure 6–87. If the voltmeter indicates
that the voltage Vab  1.2 V, what is the actual voltage of the source if the
resistance of the meter is 50 k?
48. What would be the reading if a digital meter having an internal resistance of
10 M is used instead of the analog meter of Problem 47?
43. For the circuit of Figure 6–85, determine each of the indicated currents. If the
circuit has a 15-A fuse as shown, is the current enough to cause the fuse to open?
44. a. For the circuit of Figure 6–85, calculate the value of R3 that will result in
a circuit current of exactly IT  15 A.
b. If the value of R3 is increased above the value found in part (a), what will
happen to the circuit current, IT?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
201
6.8
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
49. Use Multisim to solve for the current through each resistor in the circuit of
Figure 6–79.
50. Use Multisim to solve for the current through each resistor in the circuit of
Figure 6–80.
51. Use Multisim to simulate a voltmeter with an internal resistance of 1 M
used to measure voltage as shown in Figure 6–86.
52. Use Multisim to simulate a voltmeter with an internal resistance of 500 k
used to measure voltage as shown in Figure 6–86.
53. Use PSpice to solve for the current through each resistor in the circuit of
Figure 6–79.
54. Use PSpice to solve for the current through each resistor in the circuit of
Figure 6–80.
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
a. I  2.00 A
b. I1  I2  I3  0.267 A, I4  1.200 A
c. 3(0.267 A)  1.200 A  2.00 A (as required)
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
a. I1  30.0 A, I3  10.0 A, I4  7.50 A
b. IT  53.5 A
c. RT  0.561 . [The currents are the same as those determined in part (a).]
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
The voltmeter with the smaller internal resistance would load the circuit more,
since more of the circuit current would enter the instrument.
MultiSim
PSPICE
MultiSim
MultiSim
MultiSim
PSPICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Branch
Branch Currents
Bridge Circuit
Loaded Output
Loading Effect
Parallel Branches
Series-Parallel Circuits
Transistor
Transistor Bias
Universal Bias
Unloaded Output
Voltage Regulation
Zener Diode
I OUTLINE
The Series-Parallel
Network
Analysis of Series-Parallel
Circuits
Applications of Series-
Parallel Circuits
Potentiometers
Loading Effects 
of Instruments
Circuit Analysis Using
Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• ﬁnd the total resistance of a network
consisting of resistors connected in various
series-parallel conﬁgurations,
• solve for the current through any branch or
component of a series-parallel circuit,
• determine the difference in potential
between any two points in a series-parallel
circuit,
• calculate the voltage drop across a resistor
connected to a potentiometer,
• analyze how the size of a load resistor
connected to a potentiometer affects the
output voltage,
• calculate the loading effects of a voltmeter
or ammeter when used to measure the
voltage or current in any circuit,
• use PSpice to solve for voltages and currents
in series-parallel circuits,
• use Multisim to solve for voltages and
currents in series-parallel circuits.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7
SERIES-PARALLEL CIRCUITS
M
ost circuits encountered in electronics are neither simple series circuits nor simple
parallel circuits, but rather a combination of the two. Although series-parallel circuits
appear to be more complicated than either of the previous types of circuits analyzed to this
point, we ﬁnd that the same principles apply.
This chapter examines how Kirchhoff’s voltage and current laws are applied to the analysis
of series-parallel circuits. We will also observe that voltage and current divider rules apply to the
more complex circuits. In the analysis of series-parallel circuits, we often simplify the given circuit
to enable us to more clearly see how the rules and laws of circuit analysis apply. Students are
encouraged to redraw circuits whenever the solution of a problem is not immediately apparent.
This technique is used by even the most experienced engineers, technologists, and technicians.
In this chapter, we begin by examining simple resistor circuits. The principles of analysis
are then applied to more practical circuits such as those containing zener diodes and transis-
tors. The same principles are then applied to determine the loading effects of voltmeters and
ammeters in more complex circuits.
After analyzing a complex circuit, we want to know whether the solutions are in fact correct.
As you have already seen, electrical circuits usually may be studied in more than one way to
arrive at a solution. Once currents and voltages for a circuit have been found, it is very easy to
determine whether the resultant solution veriﬁes the law of conservation of energy, Kirchhoff’s
current law, and Kirchhoff’s voltage law. If there is any discrepancy (other than rounding error),
there is an error in the calculation! I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

204
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
In electric circuits, we deﬁne a branch as any portion of a circuit that can be
simpliﬁed as having two terminals. The components between the two terminals
may be any combination of resistors, voltage sources, or other elements. Many
complex circuits may be separated into a combination of both series and/or par-
allel elements, while other circuits consist of even more elaborate combinations
that are neither series nor parallel.
In order to analyze a complicated circuit, it is important to be able to rec-
ognize which elements are in series and which elements or branches are in
parallel. Consider the network of resistors shown in Figure 7–1.
We immediately recognize that the resistors R2, R3, and R4 are in parallel.
This parallel combination is in series with the resistors R1 and R5. The total
resistance may now be written as follows:
RT  R1  (R2R3R4)  R5
7.1 The Series-Parallel
Network
Putting It in Perspective
Benjamin Franklin
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN WAS BORN IN BOSTON, Massachusetts, in
1706. Although Franklin is best known as a great states-
man and diplomat, he also furthered the cause of science
with his experiments in electricity. This particularly includes
his work with the Leyden jar, which was used to store elec-
tric charge. In his famous experiment of 1752, he used a
kite to demonstrate that lightning is an electrical event. It
was Franklin who postulated that positive and negative
electricity are in fact a single “ﬂuid.”
Although Franklin’s major accomplishments came as a
result of his work in achieving independence of the
Thirteen Colonies, he was nonetheless a notable scientist.
Benjamin Franklin died in his Philadelphia home on
February 12, 1790, at the age of eighty-four. I
Superstock/Getty Images
R2
R5
R1
R3
R4
RT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–1
EXAMPLE 7–1       
For the network of Figure 7–2, determine which resistors and branches are in
series and which are in parallel. Write an expression for the total equivalent
resistance, RT.
Solution
First, we recognize that the resistors R3 and R4 are in parallel: (R3R4).
Next, we see that this combination is in series with the resistor R2: [R2 
(R3R4)].
Finally, the entire combination is in parallel with the resistor R1. The total
resistance of the circuit may now be written as follows:
RT  R1  [R2  (R3R4)]
R1
R2
R3
R4
RT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Series-parallel networks are often difficult to analyze because they initially
appear confusing. However, the analysis of even the most complex circuit is
simplified by following some fairly basic steps. By practicing (not memorizing)
the techniques outlined in this section, you will find that most circuits can be
reduced to groupings of series and parallel combinations. In analyzing such
circuits, it is imperative to remember that the rules for analyzing series and par-
allel elements still apply.
The same current occurs through all series elements.
The same voltage occurs across all parallel elements.
In addition, remember that Kirchhoff’s voltage law and Kirchhoff’s current
law apply for all circuits regardless of whether the circuits are series, parallel,
or series-parallel. The following steps will help to simplify the analysis of
series-parallel circuits:
1. Whenever necessary, redraw complicated circuits showing the source con-
nection at the left-hand side. All nodes should be labelled to ensure that the
new circuit is equivalent to the original circuit. You will ﬁnd that as you
become more experienced at analyzing circuits, this step will no longer be
as important and may therefore be omitted.
2. Examine the circuit to determine the strategy that will work best in analyzing
the circuit for the required quantities. You will usually ﬁnd it best to begin the
analysis of the circuit at the components most distant from the source.
3. Simplify recognizable combinations of components wherever possible,
redrawing the resulting circuit as often as necessary. Keep the same labels
for corresponding nodes.
4. Determine the equivalent circuit resistance, RT.
5. Solve for the total circuit current. Indicate the directions of all currents and
label the correct polarities of the voltage drops on all components.
6. Calculate how currents and voltages split between the elements of the circuit.
7. Since there are usually several possible ways at arriving at solutions, verify
the answers by using a different approach. The extra time taken in this step
will usually ensure that the correct answer has been found.
Section 7.2 | Analysis of Series-Parallel Circuits
205
For the network of Figure 7–3, determine which resistors and branches are in
series and which are in parallel. Write an expression for the total resistance, RT.
Answer
RT  R1  R2  [(R3R5)  (R4R6)]
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
7.2 Analysis of 
Series-Parallel
Circuits
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
R6
RT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

206
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
EXAMPLE 7–2       
Consider the circuit of Figure 7–4.
R2
RT
10 k
R1
12 k
a
b
c
R3
40 k
I2
E
48 V
I3
V1


V2


I1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–4
a. Find RT.
b. Calculate I1, I2, and I3.
c. Determine the voltages V1 and V2.
Solution
By examining the circuit of Figure 7–4, we see that resistors R2 and
R3 are in parallel. This parallel combination is in series with the resistor R1.
The combination of resistors may be represented by a simple series network
shown in Figure 7–5. Notice that the nodes have been labelled using the same
notation.
RT
R1
12 k
a
b
c
R2 || R3
8 k
E
48 V
V1


V2


IT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–5
a. The total resistance of the circuit may be determined from the combination
RT  R1  R2R3
RT  12 k 
1
(1
0
0
k
k



)(4
4
0
0
k
k


)

 12 k  8 k  20 k
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.2 | Analysis of Series-Parallel Circuits
207
b. From Ohm’s law, the total current is
IT  I1  
2
4
0
8
k
V

  2.4 mA
The current I1 will enter node b and then split between the two resistors
R2 and R3. This current divider may be simpliﬁed as shown in the partial
circuit of Figure 7–6. Applying the current divider rule to these two
resistors gives
I2 
(
1
4
0
0
k
k

)

(2.
4
4
0
m
k
A

)
  1.92 mA
I3 
(
1
1
0
0
k
k

)

(2.
4
4
0
m
k
A

)
  0.48 A
c. Using the preceding currents and Ohm’s law, we determine the voltages:
V1  (2.4 mA)(12 k)  28.8 V
V3  (0.48 mA)(40 k)  19.2 V  V2
In order to check the answers, we may simply apply Kirchhoff’s voltage
law around any closed loop which includes the voltage source:
 V  E  V1  V3
 48 V  28.8 V  19.2 V
 0 V (checks!)
The solution may be veriﬁed by ensuring that the power delivered by the
voltage source is equal to the summation of powers dissipated by 
the resistors.
c
b
R3
40 k
R2
10 k
IT = 2.4 mA
I3
I2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–6
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Use the results of Example 7–2 to verify that the law of conservation of energy
applies to the circuit of Figure 7–4 by showing that the voltage source delivers
the same power as the total power dissipated by all resistors.
EXAMPLE 7–3        
Find the voltage Vab for the circuit of Figure 7–7.
Solution
We begin by redrawing the circuit in a more simple representation
as shown in Figure 7–8. From Figure 7–8, we see that the original circuit con-
sists of two parallel branches, where each branch is a series combination of
two resistors.
If we take a moment to examine the circuit, we see that the voltage Vab
may be determined from the combination of voltages across R1 and R2.
Alternatively, the voltage may be found from the combination of voltages
across R3 and R4.
As usual, several methods of analysis are possible. Because the two branches
are in parallel, the voltage across each branch must be 40 V. Using the voltage
R1
b
a
R4
300 
R3
200 
100 
R2
50 
E
40 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–7
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

208
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
divider rules allows us to quickly calculate the voltage across each resistor.
Although equally correct, other methods of calculating the voltages would be
more lengthy.
V2  
R2
R

2
R3
E

50 
5

0 
200 
(40 V)  8.0 V
V1  
R1
R

1
R4
E

100 
10

0 
300 
(40 V)  10.0 V
As shown in Figure 7–9, we apply Kirchhoff’s voltage law to determine the
voltage between terminals a and b.
Vab  10.0 V  8.0 V  2.0 V
R2
50 
R3
200 
R4
300 
E
40 V


a
b
Vab
V2
R1
100 


V1


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–8
a
b
R2
R1
V1 = 10 V
1
2
V2 = 8 V
Vab
1
1
2 2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–9
EXAMPLE 7–4       
Consider the circuit of Figure 7–10:
a. Find the total resistance RT “seen” by the source E.
b. Calculate IT, I1, and I2.
c. Determine the voltages V2 and V4.
Solution
We begin the analysis by redrawing the circuit. Since we generally
like to see the source on the left-hand side, one possible way of redrawing the
resultant circuit is shown in Figure 7–11. Notice that the polarities of voltages
across all resistors have been shown.
a. From the redrawn circuit, the total resistance of the circuit is
RT  R3  [(R1  R2)R4]
 3 k 
 3 k  6 k  9.00 k
(4 k  6 k)(15 k)

(4 k  6 k)  15 k
FIGURE 7–10
R2 = 4 kV
c
d
a
b
R1
6 kV
R4
15 kV
R3
3 kV
IT
E = 45 V
V4
1
2
I2
I1
V2
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
CircuitSim 07-1 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.1 | Analysis of Series-Parallel Circuits
209
b. The current supplied by the voltage source is
IT  R
E
T
  
9
45
k
V
  5.00 mA
We see that the supply current divides between the parallel branches as
shown in Figure 7–12.
Applying the current divider rule, we calculate the branch currents as
I1  IT
(R1
R

T
R2)
 
(
4
5
k
m

A

)(6
6
k
k


)
  3.00 mA
I2  ITR
R

4
T 
(5 m
1
A
5
)
k
(6

k)
  2.00 mA
Notice: When determining the branch currents, the resistance RT is
used in the calculations rather than the total circuit resistance. This is
because the current IT  5 mA splits between the two branches of RT
and the split is not affected by the value of R3.
c. The voltages V2 and V4 are now easily calculated by using Ohm’s law:
V2  I1R2  (3 mA)(4 k)  12.0 V
V4  I2R4  (2 mA)(15 k)  30.0 V
FIGURE 7–12
R3
b
a
c
d
R2
4 k
R4
15 k
R1
6 k
RT = (4 k + 6 k) || (15 k)
       = 6 k
3 k
I1
E
45 V
I2
V2






V4


IT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–11
R4
15 kV
R2
4 kV
RT = 6 kV
R1
6 kV
IT = 5 mA
I2
I1
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 7–5        
For the circuit of Figure 7–13, ﬁnd the indicated currents and voltages.
R1
a
b
10 
R2
10 
R4
30 
R3
50 
I3
E1
 12 V
E2
6 V
I2
I1
Vab


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–13
CircuitSim 07-2 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

210
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
Solution
Because the preceding circuit contains voltage point sources, it is
easier to analyze if we redraw the circuit to help us to visualize the operation.
The point sources are voltages with respect to ground, and so we begin by
drawing a circuit with the reference point as shown in Figure 7–14.
Now, we can see that the circuit may be further simpliﬁed by combining the
voltage sources (E  E1  E2) and by showing the resistors in a more suitable
location. The simpliﬁed circuit is shown in Figure 7–15.
The total resistance “seen” by the equivalent voltage source is
RT  R1  [R4(R2  R3)]
 10  
 30.0 
And so the total current provided into the circuit is
I1  R
E
T
  
3
1
0
8

V
  0.600 A
At node b this current divides between the two branches as follows:
I3 
R
(
4
R

2 
R2
R

3)I
R
1
3
 
 0.400 A
I2 
R4 
R
R
4I
2
1
 R3
 
 0.200 A
The voltage Vab has the same magnitude as the voltage across the resistor R2, but
with a negative polarity (since b is at a higher potential than a):
Vab  I2R2  (0.200 A)(10 )  2.0 V
(30 )(0.600 A)

30   10   50 
(60 )(0.600 A)

30   10   50 
(30 )(10   50 )

30   (10   50 )
R4
b
a
30 
R1
Vab
I1
10 
R2
10 
R3
50 
E1
12 V
E2
6 V
I2
I3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–14
E
18 V
a
b
R2
10 


R3
50 


R4
R1
30 
10 




I3
I2
I1
E = E1  E2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–15
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We now examine how the methods developed in the ﬁrst two sections of this
chapter are applied when analyzing practical circuits. You may ﬁnd that some
of the circuits introduce you to unfamiliar devices. For now, you do not need
to know precisely how these devices operate, simply that the voltages and
currents in the circuits follow the same rules and laws that you have used up
to now.
Section 7.3 | Applications of Series-Parallel Circuits
211
Consider the circuit of Figure 7–16:
a. Find the total circuit resistance, RT.
b. Determine the current IT through the voltage sources.
c. Solve for the currents I1 and I2.
d. Calculate the voltage Vab.
Answers
a. RT  7.20 k; b. IT  1.11 mA; c. I1  0.133 mA, I2  0.444 mA;
d. Vab  0.800 V
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
a
b
2 kV
3 kV
4 kV
22 V
210 V
3 kV
6 kV
1 kV
I1
I2
IT
© Cengage Learning 2013
7.3 Applications of
Series-Parallel
Circuits
EXAMPLE 7–6        
The circuit of Figure 7–17 is referred to as a bridge circuit and is used exten-
sively in electronic and scientiﬁc instruments.
FIGURE 7–16
FIGURE 7–17
5 k
50 
200 
a
b
10 V
E
Rx
R1
R2
R3
Vab


I
© Cengage Learning 2013
Calculate the current I and the voltage Vab when
a. Rx  0  (short circuit)
b. Rx  15 k
c. Rx   (open circuit)
CircuitSim 07-3 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

212
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
Solution
a. Rx  0 :
The circuit is redrawn as shown in Figure 7–18.
Rx = 0 
R1
50 
R3
V3
V1
V2
200 
R2
5 k
E
10 V
I
RT






a
b
Vab
 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–18
The voltage source “sees” a total resistance of
RT  (R1  R3)R2  250 5000   238 
resulting in a source current of
I  
2
1
3
0
8
V

  0.042 A  42.2 mA
The voltage Vab may be determined by solving for voltage across R1
and R2.
The voltage across R1 will be constant regardless of the value of the
variable resistor Rx. Hence
V1 
50 
5

0 
200 
(10 V)  2.00 V
Now, since the variable resistor is a short circuit, the entire source voltage
will appear across the resistor R2, giving
V2  10.0 V
And so
Vab  V1  V2  2.00 V  10.0 V  8.00 V
b. Rx  15 k:
The circuit is redrawn in Figure 7–19.
Rx = 15 k
R1
50 
R3
200 
R2
5 k
E
10 V
I
RT








a
b
Vab
 
V1
V3
V2
Vx
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–19
The voltage source “sees” a circuit resistance of
RT  (R1  R3)(R2  Rx)
 250 20 k  247 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The previous example illustrates how voltages and currents within a circuit
are affected by changes elsewhere in the circuit. In the example, we saw that
the voltage Vab varied from 2 V to 8 V, while the total circuit current varied
from a minimum value of 40 mA to a maximum value of 42 mA. These
changes occurred even though the resistor Rx varied from 0  to .
A transistor is a three-terminal device that may be used to amplify small
signals. In order for the transistor to operate as an ampliﬁer, however, certain dc
conditions must be met. These conditions set the “bias point” of the transistor.
The bias current of a transistor circuit—the transistor bias—is determined by
a dc voltage source and several resistors. Although the operation of the transis-
tor is outside the scope of this chapter, we can analyze the bias circuit of a tran-
sistor using elementary circuit theory.
Section 7.3 | Applications of Series-Parallel Circuits
213
which results in a source current of
I  
2
1
4
0
7
V

  0.0405 A  40.5 mA
The voltages across R1 and R2 are
V1  2.00 V
(as before)
V2  
R2
R

2
Rx
E

5 k
5

k
15 k
(10 V)  2.50 V
Now the voltage between terminals a and b is found as
Vab  V1  V2
 2.0 V  2.5 V  0.500 V
c. Rx  :
The circuit is redrawn in Figure 7–20. Because the second branch is an
open circuit due to the resistor Rx, the total resistance “seen” by the
source is
RT  R1  R3  250 
resulting in a source current of
I  
2
1
5
0
0
V

  0.040 A  40.0 mA
The voltages across R1 and R2 are
V1  2.00 V
(as before)
V2  0 V
(since the branch is open)
And so the resulting voltage between terminals a and b is
Vab  V1  V2
 2.0 V  0 V  2.00 V
Rx = 
R1
50 
R3
200 
R2
5 k
E
10 V
I
RT
a
b
Vab
 
(open)
I2 = 0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–20
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

214
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
EXAMPLE 7–7       
Use the given conditions to determine IC, IE, VCE, and VB for the transistor circuit
of Figure 7–21.
C
E
B
RC
4 k
RE
1 k
VCE



VBE

IE
IB
VBB = 
5 V
Let: IC = 100 IB
IC  IE
VBE = 0.7 V
200 k
RB
IC
VCC = +20V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–21
Solution
In order to simplify the work, the circuit of Figure 7–21 is separated
into two circuits: one circuit containing the known voltage VBE and the other
containing the unknown voltage VCE.
Since we always start with the given information, we redraw the circuit con-
taining the known voltage VBE as illustrated in Figure 7–22.
Although the circuit of Figure 7–22 initially appears to be a series circuit, we see
that this cannot be the case, since we are given that IE  IC  100IB.We know that
the current everywhere in a series circuit must be the same. However, Kirchhoff’s
voltage law still applies around the closed loop, resulting in the following:
VBB  RBIB  VBE  REIE
The previous expression contains two unknowns, IB and IE (VBE is given). From
the given information we have the current IE  100IB, which allows us to write
VBB  RBIB  VBE  RE(100IB)
Solving for the unknown current IB, we have
5.0 V  (200 k)IB  0.7 V  (1 k)(100IB)
(300 k)IB  5.0 V  0.7 V  4.3 V
IB  
3
4
0
.
0
3
k
V

  14.3 A
The current IE  IC  100IB  1.43 mA.
As mentioned previously, the circuit can be redrawn as two separate circuits.
The circuit containing the unknown voltage VCE is illustrated in Figure 7–23.
Notice that the resistor RE appears in both Figure 7–22 and Figure 7–23. Applying
Kirchhoff’s voltage law around the closed loop of Figure 7–23, we have the
following:
VRC  VCE  VRE  VCC
C
E
B
RE
1 k




0.7 V

IE
IB
VBB  
5 V
200 k
RB
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–22
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.3 | Applications of Series-Parallel Circuits
215
The voltage VCE is found as
VCE  VCC  VRC  VRE
 VCC  RCIC  REIE
 20.0 V  (4 k)(1.43 mA)  (1 k)(1.43 mA)
 20.0 V  5.73 V  1.43 V  12.8 V
Finally, applying Kirchhoff’s voltage law from B to ground, we have
VB  VBE  VRE
 0.7 V  1.43 V
 2.13 V
C
E
B
RC
4 kV
RE
1 kV
VCC = 20 V
1
2
1
2
VCE
0.7 V
1
1
2
VB
1
2
2
IE
IC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–23
Use the given information to ﬁnd VG, ID, and VDS for the circuit of Figure 7–24.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
Answers
VG  0, ID  3.00 mA, VDS  6.00 V
D
S
G
RD
2 k
RS
1 k
VDS



VGS
IS
IG = 0
Given: VGS = 3.0 V
   ID = IS
   IG = 0
1 M
RG
VDD = 15 V
ID
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–24
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A zener diode is a two-terminal device similar to a varistor (refer to
Chapter 3). When the voltage across the zener diode attempts to go above the rated
voltage for the device, the zener diode provides a low-resistance path for the extra
current. Due to this action, a relatively constant voltage, VZ, is maintained across
the zener diode. This characteristic is referred to as voltage regulation and has
many applications in electronic and electrical circuits. Once again, although the
theory of operation of the zener diode is outside the scope of this chapter, we can
apply simple circuit theory to examine how the circuit operates.
The universal bias circuit is one of the most common transistor circuits
used in ampliﬁers. We will now examine how to use circuit analysis principles
to analyze this important circuit.
216
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
EXAMPLE 7–8       
Determine the IC and VCE for the circuit of Figure 7–25.
Solution
If we examine Figure 7–25, we see that since IB  0, we may assume
that R1 and R2 are effectively in series. This assumption would be incorrect if the
current IB were not very small compared to the currents through R1 and R2. We use
the voltage divider rule to solve for the voltage, VB. (For this reason, the universal
bias circuit is often referred to as voltage divider bias.)
VB  
R1
R

2
R2
VCC

80 k
10

k
10 k
(20 V)
 2.22 V
Next, we use the value for VB and Kirchhoff’s voltage law to determine the voltage
across RE.
VRE  2.22 V  0.7 V  1.52 V
Applying Ohm’s law, we now determine the current IE.
IE  
1
1
.5
k
2

V
  1.52 mA  IC
Finally, applying Kirchhoff’s voltage law and Ohm’s law, we determine VCE
as follows:
VCC  VRC  VCE  VRE
VCE  VCC  VRC  VRE
 20 V  (1.52 mA)(4 k)  (1.52 mA)(1 k)
 12.4 V
 80 kV
 10 kV
 4 kV
1 kV
VCC = 20 V
IB  0
Given:
IB  0
IC  IE
VBE = 0.7 V
RC
R1
R2
RE
IC
C
B
E
IE
VCE 
+
−
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–25
EXAMPLE 7–9       
For the voltage regulator circuit of Figure 7–26, calculate IZ, I1, I2, and PZ.
Solution
If we take a moment to examine the circuit, we see that the zener
diode is placed in parallel with the resistor R2. This parallel combination is in
series with the resistor R1 and the voltage source, E.
In order for the zener diode to operate as a regulator, the voltage across the
diode would have to be above the zener voltage without the diode present. If we
removed the zener diode, the circuit would appear as shown in Figure 7–27.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.4 | Potentiometers
217
From Figure 7–27, we may determine the voltage V2 which would be pre-
sent without the zener diode in the circuit. Since the circuit is a simple series circuit,
the voltage divider rule may be used to determine V2:
V2  
R1
R

2
R2
E 
5 k
10

k
1

0 k
(15 V)  10.0 V
When the zener diode is placed across the resistor R2 the device will operate to
limit the voltage to VZ  5 V.
Because the zener diode is operating as a voltage regulator, the voltage
across both the diode and the resistor R2 must be the same, namely 5 V. The par-
allel combination of DZ and R2 is in series with the resistor R1, and so the volt-
age across R1 is easily determined from Kirchhoff’s voltage law as
V1  E  VZ  15 V  5 V  10 V
Now, from Ohm’s law, the currents I1 and I2 are easily found to be
I2  V
R
2
2
  
10
5
k
V

  0.5 mA
I1  V
R
1
1
  
5
10
k
V
  2.0 mA
Applying Kirchoff’s current law at node a, we get the zener diode current as
IZ  I1  I2  2.0 mA  0.5 mA  1.5 mA
Finally, the power dissipated by the zener diode must be
PZ  VZIZ  (5 V)(1.5 mA)  7.5 mW
R2
PZ
DZ
10 kV
R1 = 5 kV
VZ
5 V
1
2
15 V
b
a
E
I1
IZ
I2
V1
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–26
b
a
R2
10 k
R1
5 k
E
V2


15 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–27
Use the results of Example 7–9 to show that the power delivered to the circuit by
the voltage source of Figure 7–26, is equal to the total power dissipated by the
resistors and the zener diode.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
1. Determine I1, IZ, and I2 for the circuit of Figure 7–26 if the resistor R1 is
increased to 10 k.
2. Repeat Problem 1 if R1 is increased to 30 k.
Answers
1. I1  1.00 mA, I2  0.500 mA, IZ  0.500 mA
2. I1  I2  0.375 mA, IZ  0 mA. (The voltage across the zener diode is not sufﬁ-
cient for the device to come on.)
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
As mentioned in Chapter 3, variable resistors may be used as potentiometers as
shown in Figure 7–28 to control voltage into another circuit.
The volume control on a receiver or ampliﬁer is an example of a variable
resistor used as a potentiometer. When the movable terminal is at the uppermost
7.4 Potentiometers
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

position, the voltage appearing between terminals b and c is simply calculated
by using the voltage divider rule as
Vbc 
50 k
50

k
50 k
(120 V)  60 V
Alternatively, when the movable terminal is at the lowermost position, the
voltage between terminals b and c is Vbc  0 V, since the two terminals are
effectively shorted and the voltage across a short circuit is always zero.
The circuit of Figure 7–28 represents a potentiometer having an output
voltage which is adjustable between 0 V and 60 V. This output is referred to as
the unloaded output, since there is no load resistance connected between the
terminals b and c. If a load resistance were connected between these terminals,
the output voltage, called the loaded output, would no longer be the same. The
following example is an illustration of circuit loading.
218
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
R2 = 50 k
a
b
c
R1
50 k
E
120 V
Vbc


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–28
EXAMPLE 7–10       
For the circuit of Figure 7–29, determine the range of the voltage Vbc as the
potentiometer varies between its minimum and maximum values.
Solution
The minimum voltage between terminals b and c will occur when the
movable contact is at the lowermost contact of the variable resistor. In this posi-
tion, the voltage Vbc = 0 V, since the terminals b and c are shorted.
The maximum voltage Vbc occurs when the movable contact is at the upper-
most contact of the variable resistor. In this position, the circuit may be repre-
sented as shown in Figure 7–30.
In Figure 7–30, we see that the resistance R2 is in parallel with the load
resistor RL. The voltage between terminals b and c is easily determined from the
voltage divider rule, as follows:
Vbc  
(R2
R
R
2
L

)
R

L
R1
E

25 k
25

k
50 k
(120 V)  40 V
We conclude that the voltage at the output of the potentiometer is adjustable
from 0 V to 40 V for a load resistance of RL  50 k.
By inspection, we see that an unloaded potentiometer in the circuit of
Figure 7–29 would have an output voltage of 0 V to 60 V.
a
b
c
RL
R2
R1
50 kV
50 kV
50 kV potentiometer
E
120 V
Vbc
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–29
a
b
c
RL
R1
50 k
50 k
50 k
E
120 V
Vbc


R2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–30
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Chapters 5 and 6 we examined how ammeters and voltmeters affect the
operation of simple series circuits. The degree to which the circuits are affected
is called the loading effect of the instrument. Recall that, in order for an instru-
ment to provide an accurate indication of how a circuit operates, the loading
effect should ideally be zero. In practice, it is impossible for any instrument to
have zero loading effect, since all instruments absorb some energy from the cir-
cuit under test, thereby affecting circuit operation.
In this section, we will determine how instrument loading affects more
complex circuits.
Section 7.5 | Loading Effects of Instruments
219
Refer to the circuit of Figure 7–29.
a. Determine the output voltage range of the potentiometer if the load
resistor is RL  5 k.
b. Repeat (a) if the load resistor is RL  500 k.
c. What conclusion may be made about the output voltage of a potentiometer
when the load resistance is large in comparison with the potentiometer
resistance?
Answers
a. 0 V to 10 V
b. 0 V to 57.1 V
c. When RL is large in comparison to the potentiometer resistance, the output voltage
will better approximate the unloaded voltage. (In this example, the unloaded voltage
is 0 V to 60 V.)
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
A 20-k potentiometer is connected across a voltage source with a 2-k load
resistor connected between the wiper (center terminal) and the negative terminal
of the voltage source.
a. What percentage of the source voltage will appear across the load when the
wiper is one-fourth of the way from the bottom?
b. Determine the percentage of the source voltage which appears across 
the load when the wiper is one-half and three-fourths of the way from the
bottom.
c. Repeat the calculations of (a) and (b) for a load resistor of 200 k.
d. From the preceding results, what conclusion can you make about the effect
of placing a large load across a potentiometer?
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
7.5 Loading Effects 
of Instruments
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

220
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
EXAMPLE 7–11       
Calculate the loading effects if a digital multimeter, having an internal resis-
tance of 10 M, is used to measure V1 and V2 in the circuit of Figure 7–31.
Solution
In order to determine the loading effect for a particular reading, we
need to calculate both the unloaded voltage and the loaded voltage.
For the circuit given in Figure 7–31, the unloaded voltage across each
resistor is
V1 
5 M
5

M
1

0 M
(27 V)  9.0 V
V2 
5 M
10

M
1

0 M
(27 V)  18.0 V
When the voltmeter is used to measure V1, the result is equivalent to connecting
a 10-M resistor across resistor R1, as shown in Figure 7–32.
The voltage appearing across the parallel combination of R1 and resistance of
the voltmeter is calculated as
V1 
(27 V)

3
1
.
3
3
.
3
3
M
M


(27 V)
 6.75 V
Notice that the measured voltage is signiﬁcantly less than the 9 V that we had
expected to measure.
With the voltmeter connected across resistor R2, the circuit appears as shown
in Figure 7–33.
The voltage appearing across the parallel combination of R2 and resistance
of the voltmeter is calculated as
V2 
(27 V)

1
5
0
.0
.0
M
M


(27 V)
 13.5 V
Again, we notice that the measured voltage is quite a bit less than the 18 V that
we had expected.
Now the loading effects are calculated as follows:
When measuring V1:
loading effect 
9.0 V
9

.0 V
6.75 V
 	 100%
 25%
When measuring V2:
loading effect 
18.0 V
18

.0 V
13.5 V
 	 100%
 25%
10 M10 M

5 M  (10 M10 M)
5 M10 M

(5 M10 M)  10 M
R2
10 M
R1 = 5 M
E
27 V
V1


V2


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–31
CircuitSim 07-4
R2
R1
10 MV
5 MV
E
27 V
V
1
2
OFF
300mV
)))
V
6.75
10 MV
V
A
V
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–32
R2
R1
10 MV
5 MV
E
27 V
V
1
2
OFF
300mV
)))
V
13.50
10 MV
V
V
A
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–33
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

This example clearly illustrates a problem that novices often make when
they are taking voltage measurements in high-resistance circuits. If the mea-
sured voltages V1  6.75 V and V2  13.50 V are used to verify Kirchhoff’s
voltage law, the novice would say that this represents a contradiction of the law
(since 6.75 V  13.50 V 
 27.0 V). In fact, we see that the circuit is behaving
exactly as predicted by circuit theory. The problem occurs when instrument
limitations are not considered.
Section 7.5 | Loading Effects of Instruments
221
PRACTICAL NOTES...
Whenever an instrument is used to
measure a quantity, the operator
must always consider the loading
effects of the instrument.
Calculate the loading effects if an analog voltmeter, having an internal resistance
of 200 k, is used to measure V1 and V2 in the circuit of Figure 7–31.
Answers
V1: loading effect  94.3%
V2: loading effect  94.3%
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
EXAMPLE 7–12        
For the circuit of Figure 7–34, calculate the loading effect if a 5.00- ammeter
is used to measure the currents IT, I1, and I2.
Solution
We begin by determining the unloaded currents in the circuit. Using
Ohm’s law, we solve for the currents I1 and I2:
I1  
10
2
0
5
m

V
  4.0 mA
I2  
10
5
0

mV
  20.0 mA
Now, by Kirchhoff’s current law,
IT  4.0 mA  20.0 mA  24.0 mA
If we were to insert the ammeter into the branch with resistor R1, the circuit
would appear as shown in Figure 7–35.
The current through the ammeter would be
I1  
25
1

00

mV
5 
  3.33 mA
If we were to insert the ammeter into the branch with resistor R2, the circuit
would appear as shown in Figure 7–36.
The current through the ammeter would be
I2  
5
1

00

m
5
V

  10.0 mA
If the ammeter were inserted into the circuit to measure the current IT, the equiv-
alent circuit would appear as shown in Figure 7–37.
The total resistance of the circuit would be
RT  5   25 5   9.17 
I1
E
100 mV
IT
I2
R2
5 V
R1
25 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–34
E
100 mV
Circuit must be broken in 
order to measure current.
I1
R2
5 V
R1
25 V
1
2
V
1
2
OFF
300mV
)))
mA
3.33
5 V
V
V
A
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–35
CircuitSim 07-5 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

222
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
This would result in a current IT determined by Ohm’s law as
IT  
1
9
0
.1
0
7
m

V

 10.9 mA
The loading effects for the various current measurements are as follows: When
measuring I1,
loading effect 
	 100%
 16.7%
When measuring I2,
loading effect 
20 mA
20

mA
10 mA
 	 100%
 50%
When measuring IT,
loading effect 
24 mA
24

m
1
A
0.9 mA
 	 100%
 54.5%
Notice that the loading effect for an ammeter is most pronounced when it is used
to measure current in a branch having a resistance in the same order of magni-
tude as the meter.
You will also notice that if this ammeter were used in a circuit to verify the
correctness of Kirchhoff’s current law (KCL), the loading effect of the meter
would produce an apparent contradiction. From KCL,
IT  I1  I2
By substituting the measured values of current into the preceding equation, we
have
10.91 mA  3.33 mA  10.0 mA
10.91 mA 
 13.33 mA (contradiction)
This example illustrates that the loading effect of a meter may severely affect the
current in a circuit, giving results that seem to contradict the laws of circuit
theory. Therefore, whenever an instrument is used to measure a particular quantity,
we must always take into account the limitations of the instrument and question
the validity of a resulting reading.
4.0 mA  3.33 mA

4.0 mA
E
100 mV
I2
R2
5 V
R1
25 V
1
2
V
1
2
OFF
300mV
)))
mA
10.00
5 V
V
V
A
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–36
E
100 mV
IT
R2
5 V
R1
25 V
1
2
V
1
2
OFF
300mV
)))
mA
10.91
5 V
V
V
A
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–37
Calculate the readings and the loading error if an ammeter having an internal
resistance of 1  is used to measure the currents in the circuit of Figure 7–34.
Answers
IT(RDG)  19.4 mA; loading error  19.4%
I1(RDG)  3.85 mA; loading error  3.85%
IT(RDG)  16.7 mA; loading error  16.7%
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 7
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Multisim
The analysis of series-parallel circuits using Multisim is almost identical to the
methods used in analyzing series and parallel circuits in previous chapters. The
following example illustrates that Multisim produces the same solutions as
those obtained in Example 7–4.
Section 7.6 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
223
7.6 Circuit Analysis
Using Computers
EXAMPLE 7–13        
Given the circuit of Figure 7–38, use Multisim to ﬁnd the following quantities:
a. Total resistance, RT
b. Voltages V2 and V4
c. Currents IT, I1, and I2
Solution
a. We begin by constructing the circuit as shown in Figure 7–39. This cir-
cuit is identical to that shown in Figure 7–38, except that the voltage
source has been omitted and a multimeter (from the Instruments button
on the Parts bin toolbar) inserted in its place. The ohmmeter function is
then selected and the power switch turned on. The resistance is found to
be RT  9.00 k.
R2 = 4 k
c
d
a
b
R1
6 k
R4
15 k
R3
3 k
IT
E = 45 V
V4


I2
I1
V2


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–38
R2
R3
3 kΩ
R4
15 kΩ
R4
6 kΩ
4 kΩ
XMM1
+
–
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–39
PSPICE
MultiSim
CircuitSim 07-6 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The following example uses Multisim to determine the voltage across a
bridge circuit. The example uses a potentiometer to provide a variable resis-
tance in the circuit. Multisim can provide a display of voltage (on a multimeter)
as the resistance is changed.
224
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
b. Next, we remove the multimeter and insert the 45-V source. Ammeters
and voltmeters are inserted, as shown in Figure 7–40.
From the results we have IT  5.00 mA, I1  3.00 mA, I2  2.00 mA.
c. The required voltages are V2  12.0 V and V4  30.0 V. These results are
consistent with those obtained in Example 7–4.
V1
45 V
R2
U4
U3
R3
3 kΩ
U5
+
–
V
+
–
A
+
–
A
–
+
–
V
+
A
U2
R4
15 kΩ
U1
4 kΩ
R1
6 kΩ
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–40
EXAMPLE 7–14       
Given the circuit of Figure 7–41, use Multisim to determine the values of I and
Vab when Rx  0 , 15 k, and 50 k.
Solution
1. We begin by constructing the circuit as shown in Figure 7–42. The poten-
tiometer is selected from the Basic Family group on the Virtual
Components toolbar. Ensure that the potentiometer is inserted as illustrated.
5 k
50 
200 
a
b
10 V
E
Rx = 0 → 50 k 
R1
R2
R3
Vab


I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–41
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PSpice
PSpice is somewhat different from Multisim in the way it handles potentiome-
ters. In order to place a variable resistor into a circuit, we must set the parame-
ters of the circuit to sweep through a range of values. The following example
illustrates the method used to provide a graphical display of output voltage and
source current for a range of resistance. Although the method is different, the
results are consistent with those of the previous example.
Section 7.6 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
225
2. Double-click on the potentiometer symbol and change its value to 50 k.
Notice that the increment value is set for 5%. Adjust this value so that it is
at 10%. We will use this in a following step.
3. Once the circuit is completely built, the power switch is turned on. Notice
that the resistor value is at 50%. This means that the potentiometer is
adjusted so that its value is 25 k. The following step will change the value
of the potentiometer to 0 .
4. The value of the potentiometer is now easily changed by either Shift-A (to
incrementally decrease the value) or A (to incrementally increase the value).
As you change the value of the potentiometer, you should observe that the
voltage displayed on the multimeter is also changing. It takes a few sec-
onds for the display to stabilize. As shown in Figure 7–42, you should
observe that I  42.0 mA and Vab  8.00 V when Rx  0 .
5. Finally, after adjusting the value of the potentiometer, we obtain the fol-
lowing readings:
Rx  15 k (30%):
I  40.5 mA and Vab  0.500 V
Rx  50 k (100%):
I  40.18 mA and Vab  1.091 V
V1
10 V
a
R1
50 Ω
R3
5 kΩ
XMM2
+
–
XMM1
+
–
R2
200 Ω
50 kΩ
b
R4
0%
Key = A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–42
CircuitSim 07-7 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

226
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
EXAMPLE 7–15       
Use PSpice to provide a graphical display of voltage Vab and current I as Rx is
varied from 0 to 50 k in the circuit of Figure 7–41.
Solution
PSpice uses global parameters to represent numeric values by name.
This will permit us to set up an analysis that sweeps a variable (in this case a
resistor) through a range of values.
• Open the CIS Demo software and start a new project. (As in previous
examples, it is a good idea to place PSpice projects for this chapter into a
new folder, e.g., Ch 7. Remember that this is done in the Location box.)
You may wish to name your project Ch 7 PSpice 1. Make sure that the
Analog or Mixed A/D wizard is selected. When prompted, opt to Create a
blank project.
• Build the circuit as shown in Figure 7–43. Remember to rotate the com-
ponents to provide for the correct node assignments. In order to determine
whether you have the correct node assignments, place the cursor at the top
of resistor R3. You should notice it labelled as R3/1. If it is not, then rotate
the component twice. Repeat this process for resistor R4. (This step
becomes important when we try to get the trace of the output voltage.)
Change all component values (except R4) as required.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–43
• Double-click on the component value for R4. Enter {Rx} in the Value text
box of the Display Properties for this resistor. The curly braces tell PSpice
to evaluate the parameter and use its value.
• Click on the Place part tool. Select the Special library and click on the
PARAM part. Place the PARAM part adjacent to resistor R4.
• Double-click on PARAMETERS. Click on the New Column button. A
dialog box will appear. Enter Rx as the name of the new column and assign
a value of 50k as the default value of this resistor. Click on Apply. Since
we are adding only one column to this parameter, exit by clicking on
Cancel. Highlight the column that you just created, click on the Display
button, and activate the Name and Value option in the Display properties.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 7.6 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
227
Exit the Property Editor. You should observe the circuit as it appears in
Figure 7–43.
• Click on the New Simulation icon and give the simulation a name such as 
Figure 7–43.
• In the Simulation Settings, select the Analysis Tab. The Analysis type is
DC Sweep. Select Primary Sweep from the Options listing. In the
Sweep variable box select Global Parameter. Type Rx in the Parameter
name text box. Select the Sweep type to be linear and set the limits as
follows:
Start value: 100
End value: 50k
Increment: 100.
These settings will change the resistor value from 100  to 50 k in 100-
increments. Click OK.
• Click on the Run icon. You will see a blank screen with the abscissa
(horizontal axis) showing Rx scaled from 0 to 50 k.
• PSpice is able to plot most circuit variables as a function of Rx. In order to
request a plot of Vab, click on Add Trace. Enter V(R3:1) – V(R4:1) in the
Trace Expression text box. The voltage Vab is the voltage between node 1
of R3 and node 1 of R4. Click OK.
• Finally, to obtain a plot of the circuit current I (current through the volt-
age source), we need to ﬁrst add an extra axis. Click on Plot and then
click Add Y Axis. To obtain a plot of the current, click on Trace and Add
Trace. Select I(V1). The resulting display on the monitor is shown in
Figure 7–44.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–44
Notice that the current shown is negative. This is because PSpice sets the ref-
erence direction through a voltage source from the positive terminal to the
negative terminal. One way of removing the negative sign is to request the
current as I(V1).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

228
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
Given the circuit of Figure 7–45, use Multisim to solve for Vab, I, and IL when
RL  100 , 500 , and 1000 .
Answers
RL  100 : I  169 mA, Vab  6.93 V, IL  53.3 mA
RL  500 : I  143 mA, Vab  7.71 V, IL  14.5 mA
RL  1000 : I  138 mA, Vab  7.85 V, IL  7.62 mA
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 8
b
a
60 
30 
RL
100      1000 
30 
I
24 V
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–45
Use PSpice to input a ﬁle for the circuit of Figure 7–45. The output shall dis-
play the source current, I, the load current, IL, and the voltage Vab as the resis-
tor RL is varied in 100- increments between 100  and 1000 .
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 9
V
ery often manufacturers provide schematics showing the dc voltages that
one would expect to measure if the circuit were functioning properly. The
following figure shows part of a schematic for an amplifier circuit.
Putting It into Practice
 27 k
 200 
 1 k
 10 k
 144 k
 4 k
 5 k
 54 k
+11.6 V
I1
+ 20 V
I = 0
I2
I4
13
C2
C1
I5
+2.7 V
+3.1 V
+2 V
+10 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
229
Even though a schematic may include components with which the reader
is not familiar, the dc voltages provided on the schematic enable us to deter-
mine voltages and current in various parts of the circuit. If the circuit is
faulty, measured voltages and currents will be different from the theoretical,
allowing the experienced troubleshooter to locate the fault.
Examine the circuit shown. Use the voltage information on the schematic
to determine the theoretical values of the currents I1, I2, I3, I4, and I5. Find the
magnitude and correct polarity of the voltage across the device labelled as C2.
(It is a capacitor, and it will be examined in detail in Chapter 10.)
R5
R1
R2
R3
R4
RT
(a)
RT
R3
R4
R1
R2
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–46
R3
RT
R4
R5
R6
R6
R4
R2
R3
R5
R1
R1
R2
RT
(b)
(a)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–47
Problems
7.1
The Series-Parallel Network
1. For the networks of Figure 7–46, determine which resistors and branches are in
series and which are in parallel. Write an expression for the total resistance, RT.
2. For each of the networks of Figure 7–47, write an expression for the total
resistance, RT.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3. Write an expression for both RT1 and RT2 for the networks of Figure 7–48.
4. Write an expression for both RT1 and RT2 for the networks of Figure 7–49.
230
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
R2
R3
R4
R5
R1
RT1
RT2
(a)
RT1
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
RT2
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–48
(a)
RT1
RT2
R3
R2
R4
R1
R4
R2
R3
R1
(b)
R5
RT1
RT2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–49
5. Resistor networks have total resistances as given below. Sketch a circuit that
corresponds to each expression.
a. RT  (R1R2R3)  (R4R5)
b. RT  R1  (R2R3)  [R4(R5  R6)]
6. Resistor networks have total resistances as given below. Sketch a circuit that
corresponds to each expression.
a. RT  [(R1R2)  (R3R4)]R5
b. RT  (R1R2)  R3  [(R4  R5)R6]
7.2
Analysis of Series-Parallel Circuits
7. Determine the total resistance of each network in Figure 7–50.
4 k
300 
400 
300 
200 
500 
(a)
RT
(b)
4.7 k
5.1 k
1.2 k
5.6 k
3.3 k
RT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–50
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8. Determine the total resistance of each network in Figure 7–51.
9. Calculate the resistances Rab and Rcd in the circuit of Figure 7–52.
10. Calculate the resistances Rab and Rbc in the circuit of Figure 7–53.
11. Refer to the circuit of Figure 7–54.
Find the following quantities:
a. RT
b. IT, I1, I2, I3, I4
c. Vab, Vbc
12. Refer to the circuit of Figure 7–55.
Find the following quantities:
a. RT (equivalent resistance “seen” by the voltage source)
b. IT, I1, I2, I3, I4
c. Vab, Vbc, Vcd
13. Refer to the circuit of Figure 7–56.
a. Find the currents I1, I2, I3, I4, I5, and I6.
b. Solve for the voltages Vab and Vcd.
c. Verify that the power delivered to the circuit is equal to the summation of
powers dissipated by the resistors.
Problems
231
All resistors are 1 k.
(a)
RT
All resistors are 1 k.
(b)
RT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–51
FIGURE 7–54
FIGURE 7–53
FIGURE 7–52
Rab
Rcd
b
d
c
a
80 
40 
10 
60 
60 
30 
20 
© Cengage Learning 2013
c
b
a
50 
30 
20 
40 
50 
160 
100 
© Cengage Learning 2013
100 
20 V
560 
220 
150 
910 
390 
180 
a
c
b
IT
I1
I2
I4
I3
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14. Refer to the circuit of Figure 7–57:
a. Find the currents I1, I2, I3, I4, and I5.
b. Solve for the voltages Vab and Vbc.
c. Verify that the power delivered to the circuit is equal to the summation 
of powers dissipated by the resistors.
232
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
FIGURE 7–56
FIGURE 7–58
FIGURE 7–57
FIGURE 7–55
b
d
a
c
3 k
4 k
2 k
5 k
8 k
9 k
I2
I3
IT
I4
I1
36 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
a
c
b
R9 = 20 
R5 = 30 
R1 = 40 
R2 = 12 
R3 = 10 
R7 = 20 
R4 = 5 
R6 = 15 
R8 = 10 
120 V
IT
I5
I1
I3
I2
I4
© Cengage Learning 2013
a
b
6 k
18 V
3 k
2 k
4 k
I3
I1
I2
(a)
b
a
(b)
5 
16 
6 
10 
4 
12 V
 3 V
8 
I2
I3
I4
I1
© Cengage Learning 2013
a
5 k
R1 = 1 k
R7 = 2 k
I1
I4
28 V
6 k
R3 = 3 k
I3
b
c
6 k
R2 = 1 k
I2
I5
I6
d
R4
R5
R6
© Cengage Learning 2013
15. Refer to the circuits of Figure 7–58:
a. Find the indicated currents.
b. Solve for the voltage Vab.
c. Verify that the power delivered to the circuit is equal to the summation of
powers dissipated by the resistors.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
233
FIGURE 7–60
FIGURE 7–61
I1
1 k
50 
100 
a
b
400 
10 V
I3
I2
Rx = 0        5 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–59
16. Refer to the circuit of Figure 7–59:
a. Solve for the currents I1, I2, and I3 when Rx  0  and when Rx  5 k.
b. Calculate the voltage Vab when Rx  0  and when Rx  5 k.
7.3
Applications of Series-Parallel Circuits
17. Solve for all currents and voltage drops in the circuit of Figure 7–60. Verify
that the power delivered by the voltage source is equal to the power dissi-
pated by the resistors and the zener diode.
18. Refer to the circuit of Figure 7–61:
a. Determine the power dissipated by the 6.2-V zener diode. If the zener
diode is rated for a maximum power of 1⁄4 W, is it likely to be destroyed?
b. Repeat part (a) if the resistance R1 is doubled.
19. Given the circuit of Figure 7–62, determine the range of R (maximum and
minimum values) that will ensure that the output voltage VL  5.6 V while
the maximum power rating of the zener diode is not exceeded.
20. Given the circuit of Figure 7–63, determine the range of R (maximum and
minimum values) that will ensure that the output voltage VL  5.6 V while
the maximum power rating of the zener diode is not exceeded.
R3
150 
R1
150 
R2
39 
VZ = 
10 V


24 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
80 
R2
140 
R1
30 V
VZ
6.2 V


© Cengage Learning 2013
R
VZ
= 5.6 V
80 
R1
20 V
VL
5.6 V


1 W
© Cengage Learning 2013
R
VZ
= 5.6 V
80 
R1
20 V
VL
5.6 V


1 W
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–62
FIGURE 7–63
C
E
B
RC
3.9 k
RE
750 
IE
IB
VBB = 
−2.0 V
Given:   IC = 100 IB ≅ IE 
VBE = 0.6 V
7.5 k
RB
VCC  = 16 V
IC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–64
21. Given the circuit of Figure 7–64, determine VB, IC, and VCE.
22. Repeat Problem 21 if RB is increased to 10 k. (All other quantities remain
unchanged.)
23. Consider the circuit of Figure 7–65 and the indicated values:
a. Determine ID.
b. Calculate the required value for RS.
c. Solve for VDS.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7.4
Potentiometers
27. Refer to the circuit of Figure 7–69:
a. Determine the range of voltages that will appear across RL as the poten-
tiometer is varied between its minimum and maximum values.
b. If R2 is adjusted to be 2.5 k, what will be the voltage VL? If the load resis-
tor is now removed, what voltage would appear between terminals a and b?
28. Repeat Problem 27 using the load resistor RL  30 k.
234
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
24. Consider the circuit of Figure 7–66 and the indicated values:
a. Determine ID and VG.
b. Design the required values for RS and RD.
25. Calculate IC and VCE for the circuit of Figure 7–67.
26. Calculate IC and VCE for the circuit of Figure 7–68.
FIGURE 7–66
FIGURE 7–65
D
S
G
1.5 k
RS
VDS



VGS
IS
IG = 0
1 M
15 V
ID
Given: 
VGS = 2.0 V
IS = ID
IG = 0
ID = (10 mA) [ 1   VGS    ]
2
5 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
D
S
G
RS
VDS = 6.0 V



VGS
IS
IG = 0
1 M
VDD 15 V
ID
Given:
VGS = 2.5 V 
IS = ID
IG = 0
ID = (10 mA) [ 1   VGS    ]
2
5 V
RG
VDS = 6.0 V
RD
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–69
FIGURE 7–68
FIGURE 7–67
 32 k
 4 k
 2400 
400 
VCC = +18 V
IB  0
Given:
IB  0
IC  IE
VBE = 0.7 V
RC
R1
R2
RE
IC
C
B
E
IE
© Cengage Learning 2013
 20 k
 20 k
2 k
VCC = +16 V
IB  0
Given:
IB  0
IC  IE
VBE = 0.7 V
RC
R1
R2
RE
IC
C
B
E
IE
© Cengage Learning 2013
a
b
c
RL
R1
R2
10 k
20 k
10 k potentiometer
36 V
VL


© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

29. If the potentiometer of Figure 7–70 is adjusted so that R2  200 , deter-
mine the voltages Vab and Vbc.
30. Calculate the values of R1 and R2 required in the potentiometer of Figure 7–70
if the voltage VL across the 50- load resistor is to be 6.0 V.
31. Refer to the circuit of Figure 7–71:
a. Determine the range of output voltage (minimum to maximum) that can
be expected as the potentiometer is adjusted from minimum to maximum.
b. Calculate R2 when Vout  20 V.
32. In the circuit of Figure 7–71, what value of R2 results in an output voltage 
of 40 V?
33. Given the circuit of Figure 7–72, calculate the output voltage Vout when 
RL  0 , 250 , and 500 .
34. Given the circuit of Figure 7–73, calculate the output voltage Vout when 
RL  0 , 500 , and 1000 .
7.5
Loading Effects of Instruments
35. A voltmeter having a sensitivity S  20 k/V is used on the 10-V range
(200-k total internal resistance) to measure voltage across the 750-k
resistor of Figure 7–74. The voltage indicated by the meter is 5.00 V.
a. Determine the value of the supply voltage, E.
b. What voltage will be present across the 750-k resistor when the 
voltmeter is removed from the circuit?
Problems
235
FIGURE 7–71
FIGURE 7–70
a
b
c
R1
R2
50 
100 
1 k potentiometer
24 V
RL
VL


© Cengage Learning 2013
a
b
c
R1
R2
10 k
10 k
10 k
10 k potentiometer
120 V
Vout


I
© Cengage Learning 2013
100 
100 
20 V
R1
R2
RL
Vout 
+
−
500 
0 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–72
FIGURE 7–73
1 kV
2 kV
72 V
R1
R2
RL
Vout 
+
−
1 kV
0 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–74
750 k
200 k
E



OFF
300mV
)))
V
5.00
200 k
V
V
A
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

c. Calculate the loading effect of the meter when used as shown.
d. If the same voltmeter is used to measure the voltage across the 200-k
resistor, what voltage will be indicated?
36. The voltmeter of Figure 7–75 has a sensitivity S  2 k/V.
a. If the meter is used on its 50-V range (R  100 k) to measure the
voltage across R2, what will be the meter reading and the loading error?
b. If the meter is changed to its 20-V range (R  40 k) determine the read-
ing on this range and the loading error. Will the meter be damaged on this
range? Will the loading error be less or more than the error in part (a)?
37. An ammeter is used to measure current in the circuit shown in Figure 7–76.
a. Explain how to correctly connect the ammeter to measure the current I1.
b. Determine the values indicated when the ammeter is used to measure each
of the indicated currents in the circuit.
c. Calculate the loading effect of the meter when measuring each of the
currents.
38. Suppose the ammeter in Figure 7–76 has an internal resistance of 0.5 :
a. Determine the values indicated when the ammeter is used to measure the
indicated currents in the circuit.
b. Calculate the loading effect of the meter when measuring each of the
currents.
236
Chapter 7 | Series-Parallel Circuits
FIGURE 7–76
FIGURE 7–75
7.6
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
39. Use Multisim to solve for V2, V4, IT, I1, and I2 in the circuit of Figure 7–10.
40. Use Multisim to solve for Vab, I1, I2, and I3 in the circuit of Figure 7–13.
41. Use Multisim to solve for the meter reading in the circuit of Figure 7–75 if
the meter is used on its 50-V range.
42. Repeat Problem 41 if the meter is used on its 20-V range.
43. Use PSpice to solve for V2, V4, IT, I1, and I2 in the circuit of Figure 7–10.
44. Use PSpice to solve for Vab, I1, I2, and I3 in the circuit of Figure 7–13.
45. Use PSpice to obtain a display of Vab and I1 in the circuit of Figure 7–59.
Let Rx change from 500  to 5 k using 100- increments.
1.2 M
300 k
R1
R2
60 V



OFF
300mV
)))
V
S = 2 k/V
V
V
A
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
6.8 V
5.6 V
I1
0.2 V
I2
3.9 V
I3
V
1
2
OFF
300mV
)))
mA
2 V
V
V
A
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
PSPICE
MultiSim
MultiSim
MultiSim
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
237
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
PT  115.2 mW, P1  69.1 mW, P2  36.9 mW, P3  9.2 mW
P1  P2  P3  115.2 mW as required.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
PT  30.0 mW, PR1  20.0 mW, PR2  2.50 mW,
PZ  7.5 mW
PR1  PR2  PZ  30 mW as required.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
RL  2 k:
a. N  1⁄4:
VL  8.7% of Vin
b. N  1⁄2:
VL  14.3% of Vin
N  3⁄4:
VL  26.1% of Vin
RL  200 k:
c. N  1⁄4:
VL  24.5% of Vin
N  1⁄2:
VL  48.8% of Vin
N  3⁄4:
VL  73.6% of Vin
d. If RL  R1, the loading effect is minimal.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Balanced Bridge
Branch-Current Analysis
Bridge Networks
Constant-Current Sources
Current Source
Linear Bilateral Networks
Mesh (Loop) Analysis
Mutual Conductance
Nodal Analysis
I OUTLINE
Constant-Current Sources
Source Conversions
Current Sources in Parallel
and Series
Branch-Current Analysis
Mesh (Loop) Analysis
Nodal Analysis
Delta-Wye (Pi-Tee)
Conversion
Bridge Networks
Circuit Analysis Using
Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• convert a voltage source into an equivalent
current source,
• convert a current source into an equivalent
voltage source,
• analyze circuits having two or more current
sources in parallel,
• write and solve branch equations for 
a network,
• write and solve mesh equations for 
a network,
• write and solve nodal equations for 
a network,
• convert a resistive delta to an equivalent wye
circuit or a wye to its equivalent delta circuit
and solve the resulting simpliﬁed circuit,
• determine the voltage across or current
through any portion of a bridge network,
• use PSpice to analyze multiloop circuits,
• use Multisim to analyze multiloop circuits.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8
METHODS OF ANALYSIS
T
he networks you have worked with so far have generally had a single voltage source and
could be easily analyzed using techniques such as Kirchhoff’s voltage law and Kirchhoff’s
current law. In this chapter, you will examine circuits that have more than one voltage source
or that cannot be easily analyzed using techniques studied in previous chapters.
The methods used in determining the operation of complex networks will include branch-
current analysis, mesh (or loop) analysis, and nodal analysis. Although any of the above meth-
ods may be used, you will ﬁnd that certain circuits are more easily analyzed using one
particular approach. The advantages of each method will be discussed in the appropriate
section.
In using the techniques outlined here, we assume that the networks are linear bilateral
networks. The term linear indicates that the components used in the circuit have voltage-current
characteristics that follow a straight line. Refer to Figure 8–1.
CHAPTER PREVIEW
V
I
(a) Linear V-I characteristics
V
I
(b) Nonlinear V-I characteristics
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

240
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
All the circuits presented so far have used voltage sources as the means of pro-
viding power. However, the analysis of certain circuits is easier if you work
with current rather than with voltage. Unlike a voltage source, a current source
maintains the same current in its branch of the circuit regardless of how compo-
nents are connected externally to the source. The symbol for a constant-current
source is shown in Figure 8–2.
The direction of the current source arrow indicates the direction of con-
ventional current in the branch. In previous chapters you learned that the mag-
nitude and the direction of current through a voltage source vary according to
the size of the circuit resistances and how other voltage sources are connected
in the circuit. For current sources, the voltage across the current source depends
on how the other components are connected.
8.1 Constant-Current
Sources
Putting It in Perspective
Sir Charles Wheatstone
CHARLES WHEATSTONE WAS BORN IN GLOUCESTER, England, on
February 6, 1802. Wheatstone’s original interest was in
the study of acoustics and musical instruments. However, he
gained fame and a knighthood as a result of inventing the
telegraph and improving the electric generator.
Although he did not invent the bridge circuit,
Wheatstone used one for measuring resistance very pre-
cisely. He found that when the currents in the Wheatstone
bridge are exactly balanced, the unknown resistance can
be compared to a known standard.
Sir Charles died in Paris, France, on October 19, 1875. I
Hulton Archive/Stringer/Hulton Archive/Getty Images
The term bilateral indicates that the components in the network will have characteristics
that are independent of the direction of the current through the element or the voltage across
the element. A resistor is an example of a linear bilateral component since the voltage across a
resistor is directly proportional to the current through it and the operation of the resistor is the
same regardless of the direction of the current.
In this chapter you will be introduced to the conversion of a network from a delta () con-
ﬁguration to an equivalent wye (Y) conﬁguration. Conversely, we will examine the transforma-
tion from a Y conﬁguration to an equivalent  conﬁguration. You will use these conversions to
examine the operation of an unbalanced bridge network. I
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–2
Ideal constant-current source.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If the current source is the only source in the circuit, then the polarity of
voltage across the source will be as shown in Figure 8–3. This, however, may
not be the case if there is more than one source. The following example illus-
trates this principle.
Section 8.1 | Constant-Current Sources
241
EXAMPLE 8–1        
Refer to the circuit of Figure 8–3:
a. Calculate the voltage VS across the current source if the resistor is 100 .
b. Calculate the voltage if the resistor is 2 k.
Solution
The current source maintains a constant current of 2 A through the
circuit. Therefore,
a. VS  VR  (2 A)(100 )  200 V
b. VS  VR  (2 A)(2 k)  4000 V
R
2 A


VS
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–3
EXAMPLE 8–2        
Determine the voltages V1, V2, and VS and the current IS for the circuit of Figure 8–4.
Solution
Since the given circuit is a series circuit, the current everywhere in
the circuit must be the same, namely
IS  2 mA
Using Ohm’s law,
V1  (2 mA)(1 k)  2.00 V
V2  (2 mA)(2 k)  4.00 V
Applying Kirchhoff’s voltage law around the closed loop,
 V  VS  V1  V2  E  0
VS  V1  V2  E
 2 V  4 V  10 V  4.00 V
From the preceding result, you see that the actual polarity of VS is opposite to
that assumed.
FIGURE 8–4
10 V
E
2 mA






V2
VS
V1
R2 = 2 k
R1 = 1 k
IS
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 8–3        
Calculate the currents I1 and I2 and the voltage VS for the circuit of Figure 8–5.
FIGURE 8–5

 VS
E1 = 10 V
E2 = 5 V
R
10 
I1
I2
a
2 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

By examining the previous examples, we can conclude the following about
current sources:
The constant-current source determines the current in its branch of the circuit.
The magnitude and polarity of voltage appearing across a constant-current
source are dependent upon the network in which the source is connected.
In the previous section you were introduced to the ideal constant-current
source. This is a source that has no internal resistance included as part of the
circuit. As you recall, voltage sources always have some series resistance,
although in some cases this resistance is so small in comparison with other cir-
cuit resistance that it may effectively be ignored when determining the opera-
tion of the circuit. Similarly, a constant-current source will always have some
shunt (or parallel) resistance. If this resistance is very large in comparison with
the other circuit resistance, the internal resistance of the source may once again
be ignored. An ideal current source has an inﬁnite shunt resistance.
Figure 8–6 shows equivalent voltage and current sources.
242
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
Solution
Because the 5-V supply is effectively across the load resistor,
I1  
1
5
0
V

  0.5 A
(in the direction assumed)
Applying Kirchhoff’s current law at point a,
I2  0.5 A  2.0 A  2.5 A
From Kirchhoff’s voltage law,
V  10 V  VS  5 V  0 V
VS  10 V  5 V  5 V
8.2 Source
Conversions
RS
E = IRS
E
I = E / RS
RS
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–6
If the internal resistance of a source is considered, the source, whether it is
a voltage source or a current source, is easily converted to the other type. The
current source of Figure 8–6 is equivalent to the voltage source if
I  R
E
S

(8–1)
and the resistance in both sources is RS.
Similarly, a current source may be converted to an equivalent voltage
source by letting
E  IRS
(8–2)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

These results may be easily veriﬁed by connecting an external resistance,
RL, across each source. The sources can be equivalent only if the voltage across
RL is the same for both sources. Similarly, the sources are equivalent only if the
current through RL is the same when connected to either source.
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 8–7. The voltage across the load
resistor is given as
VL  
RL
R

L
RS
E
(8–3)
The current through the resistor RL is given as
IL  
RL 
E
RS

(8–4)
Next, consider an equivalent current source connected to the same load as
shown in Figure 8–8. The current through the resistor RL is given by
IL  
RS
R

S
RL
I
But, when converting the source, we get
I  R
E
S

And so
IL 
RS
R

S
RL
R
E
S

This result is equivalent to the current obtained in Equation 8–4. The voltage
across the resistor is given as
VL  ILRL

RS 
E
RL
RL
The voltage across the resistor is precisely the same as the result obtained in
Equation 8–3. We therefore conclude that the load current and voltage drop are
the same whether the source is a voltage source or an equivalent current source.
Section 8.2 | Source Conversions
243
FIGURE 8–8
FIGURE 8–7
RL
IL
RS
E
1
2
VL
© Cengage Learning 2013
RL
IL
RS
I


VL
© Cengage Learning 2013
NOTES...
Although the sources are equiva-
lent, currents and voltages within
the sources may no longer be the
same. The sources are only equiva-
lent with respect to elements con-
nected external to the terminals.
EXAMPLE 8–4        
Convert the voltage source of Figure 8–9(a) into a current source and verify that
the current, IL, through the load is the same for each source.
FIGURE 8–9
40 
(a)
RL
IL
RS
10 
48 V
E
40 
10 
RL
(b)
IL
RS
I = 
 = 4.8 A
48 V
10 
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

244
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
Solution
The equivalent current source will have a current magnitude given as
I  
1
4
0
8

V
  4.8 A
The resulting circuit is shown in Figure 8–9(b).
For the circuit of Figure 8–9(a), the current through the load is found as
IL  
10 
48

V
40 
  0.96 A
For the equivalent circuit of Figure 8–9(b), the current through the load is
IL  
(
1
4
0
.8

A

)(1
4
0
0


)
  0.96 A
Clearly the results are the same.
EXAMPLE 8–5       
Convert the current source of Figure 8–10(a) into a voltage source and verify
that the voltage, VL, across the load is the same for each source.
FIGURE 8–10
Solution
The equivalent voltage source will have a magnitude given as
E  (30 mA)(30 k)  900 V
The resulting circuit is shown in Figure 8–10(b).
For the circuit of Figure 8–10(a), the voltage across the load is determined as
IL 
(
3
3
0
0
k
k

)

(3
1
0
0
m
k
A

)
  22.5 mA
VL  ILRL  (22.5 mA)(10 k)  225 V
For the equivalent circuit of Figure 8–10(b), the voltage across the load is
VL  
10 k
10

k
30 k
 (900 V)  225 V
Once again, we see that the circuits are equivalent.
10 kE
30 kE
RL
IL
RS
I
30 mA


VL
(a)
E = (30 mA)(30 k) = 900 V
10 k
RL
IL
RS = 30 k


VL
© Cengage Learning 2013
(b)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

When several current sources are placed in parallel, the circuit may be simpli-
ﬁed by combining the current sources into a single current source. The magni-
tude and direction of this resultant source is determined by adding the currents
in one direction and then subtracting the currents in the opposite direction.
Section 8.3 | Current Sources in Parallel and Series
245
1. Convert the voltage sources of Figure 8–11 into equivalent current sources.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
(a)
b
a
E
36 V
R
12 
(b)
b
a
E
250 mV
R
50 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–11
2. Convert the current sources of Figure 8–12 into equivalent voltage sources.
Answers
1. a. I  3.00 A (downward) in parallel with R  12 
b. I  5.00 A (upward) in parallel with R  50 k
2. a. E  Vab  750 V in series with R  30 
b. E  Vab  6.25 V in series with R  50 k
(a)
b
a
I
25 A
R
30 
(b)
b
a
I
125 A
R
50 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–12
8.3 Current Sources 
in Parallel and
Series
EXAMPLE 8–6        
Simplify the circuit of Figure 8–13 and determine the voltage Vab.
I1
3 A
Vab
I2
2 A I3
6 A
b
a
R3
6 
R1
6 
R2
3 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–13
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

246
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
Solution
Since all of the current sources are in parallel, they can be replaced
by a single current source. The equivalent current source will have a direction
that is the same as both I2 and I3, since the magnitude of current in the down-
ward direction is greater than the current in the upward direction. The equiva-
lent current source has a magnitude of
I  2 A  6 A  3 A  5 A
as shown in Figure 8–14(a).
The circuit is further simpliﬁed by combining the resistors into a single value:
RT  6 3 6  1.5 
The equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 8–14(b).
The voltage Vab is found as
Vab  (5 A)(1.5 )  7.5 V
I1
3 A
I2
2 A
5 A
I3
6 A
(a)
b
a
5 A
RT = 1.5 
(b)
I


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–14
EXAMPLE 8–7       
Reduce the circuit of Figure 8–15 into a single current source and solve for the
current through the resistor RL.
200 mA
400 
50 mA
100 
100 
5 V
20 
RL
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–15
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Current sources should never be placed in series. If a node is chosen between
the current sources, it becomes immediately apparent that the current entering
the node is not the same as the current leaving the node. Clearly, this cannot
occur since there would then be a violation of Kirchhoff’s current law (see
Figure 8–17).
Section 8.4 | Branch-Current Analysis
247
FIGURE 8–17
Solution
The voltage source in this circuit is converted to an equivalent current
source as shown. The resulting circuit may then be simpiﬁed to a single current
source where
IS  200 mA  50 mA  250 mA
and
RS  400 100  80 
The simpliﬁed circuit is shown in Figure 8–16.
The current through RL is now easily calculated as
IL 
80 
80


20 
(250 mA)  200 mA
250 mA
20 
RL
80 
RS
IS
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
I1 = 3 A
I2 = 5 A
Kirchhoff’s current law
is violated at this node
since Iin  Iout.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–16
NOTES...
Current sources of different values
are never placed in series.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
1. Brieﬂy explain the procedure for converting a voltage source into an equivalent
current source.
2. What is the most important rule determining how current sources are connected
into a circuit?
In previous chapters we used Kirchhoff’s current law (KCL) and Kirchhoff’s
voltage law (KVL) to solve equations for circuits having a single voltage source.
In this section, you will use these powerful tools to analyze circuits having more
than one source.
Branch-current analysis allows us to directly calculate the current in each
branch of a circuit. Since the method involves the analysis of several simulta-
neous linear equations, you may ﬁnd that a review of determinants is in order.
8.4 Branch-Current
Analysis
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix B has been included to provide a review of the mechanics of solving
simultaneous linear equations.
When applying branch-current analysis, you will ﬁnd the following technique
useful.
1. Arbitrarily assign current directions to each branch in the network. If a par-
ticular branch has a current source, then this step is not necessary since you
already know the magnitude and direction of the current in this branch.
2. Using the assigned currents, label the polarities of the voltage drops across
all resistors in the circuit.
3. Apply Kirchhoff’s voltage law around each of the closed loops. Write just
enough equations to include all branches in the loop equations. If a branch
has only a current source and no series resistance, it is not necessary to
include it in the KVL equations.
4. Apply Kirchhoff’s current law at enough nodes to ensure that all branch
currents have been included. In the event that a branch has only a current
source, it will need to be included in this step.
5. Solve the resulting simultaneous linear equations.
248
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
EXAMPLE 8–8       
Find the current in each branch in the circuit of Figure 8–18.
Solution
Step 1: Assign currents as shown in Figure 8–18.
Step 2: Indicate the polarities of the voltage drops on all resistors in the circuit,
using the assumed current directions.
Step 3: Write the Kirchhoff voltage law equations.
Loop abcda:
6 V  (2 )I1  (2 )I2  4 V  0 V
Notice that the circuit still has one branch which has not been included in the
KVL equations, namely the branch cefd. This branch would be included if a
loop equation for cefdc or for abcefda were written. There is no reason for
choosing one loop over another, since the overall result will remain unchanged
even though the intermediate steps will not give the same results.
Loop cefdc:
4 V  (2 )I2  (4 )I3  2 V  0 V
Now that all branches have been included in the loop equations, there is no need
to write any more. Although more loops exist, writing more loop equations would
needlessly complicate the calculations.
FIGURE 8–18
6 V
2 V
E3
R1 = 2 
R3 = 4 
E1
4 V
E2
2 
R2
f
e
d
c
a
b
I1
I2
I3






© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.4 | Branch-Current Analysis
249
Step 4: Write the Kirchhoff current law equation(s).
By applying KCL at node c, all branch currents in the network are included.
Node c:
I3  I1  I2
To simplify the solution of the simultaneous linear equations we write them as
follows:
2I1  2I2  0I3  2
0I1  2I2  4I3  6
1I1  1I2  1I3  0
The principles of linear algebra (Appendix B) allow us to solve for the determi-
nant of the denominator as follows:
D 

 2
  0 
  1 

 2(2  4)  0  1(8)  20
Now, solving for the currents, we have the following:


I1 
D

2
  (6) 
  0 

20


 1.200 A
Similarly,


I2 
D
 2
4
0
  0.200 A
and


I3 
D

 1.400 A
28

20
2
6
0
2
2
1
2
0
1
0
4
1
2
6
0
2
0
1
24

20
2(2  4)  6(2)  0

20
2
0
2
4
2
0
1
1
2
4
1
1
0
4
1
2
2
1
2
6
0
2
0
2
4
2
0
1
1
2
4
1
1
0
4
1
2
2
0
2
0
1
Calculator Hint: The use of cal-
culators and computer pro-
grams have made it very easy
to ﬁnd the solutions of simulta-
neous linear equations. If we
were to use  a calculator (such
as the Sharp EL-546W) to solve
for the three unknowns in this
example, we would need to
ﬁrst indicate that this is a third-
order (three-variable) system
and then enter the coefﬁcients
a11, a12, a13, and the constant b1
of the ﬁrst equation as follows:
Similarly, the coefﬁcients and
constants for the remaining
two equations would be
entered in order to result in a
solution displayed as
These results are consistent
with those found using deter-
minants, namely that I1  1.2
A, I2  0.2 A, and I3  1.4 A.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

250
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
EXAMPLE 8–9       
Find the currents in each branch of the circuit shown in Figure 8–19. Solve for
the voltage Vab.
5 A
6 V
E2
R3 = 1 
I1
8 V
E1
3 
R2
c
b
d
a
I3
I4



2 
R1
I2



© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–19
Solution
Notice that although Figure 8–19 has four currents, there are only
three unknown currents: I2, I3, and I4. The current I1 is given by the value of the
constant-current source. In order to solve this network we will need three linear
equations. As before, the equations are determined by Kirchhoff’s voltage and
current laws.
Step 1: The currents are indicated in the given circuit.
Step 2: The polarities of the voltages across all resistors are shown.
Step 3: Kirchhoff’s voltage law is applied at the indicated loops:
Loop badb:
(2 )(I2)  (3 )(I3)  8 V  0 V
Loop bacb:
(2 )(I2)  (1 )(I4)  6 V  0 V
Step 4: Kirchhoff’s current law is applied as follows:
Node a:
I2  I3  I4  5 A
Rewriting the linear equations,
2I2  3I3  0I4  8
2I2  0I3  1I4  6
1I2  1I3  1I4  5
The determinant of the denominator is evaluated as
D 

 11
Now solving for the currents, we have


1
1
1
1

I2 
D

 1.00 A


I3 
 2
1
2
1
  2.00 A
D


I4 
 4
1
4
1
  4.00 A
D
8
6
5
3
0
1
2
2
1
0
1
1
8
6
5
2
2
1
0
1
1
3
0
1
8
6
5
0
1
1
3
0
1
2
2
1
CircuitSim 08-1 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.5 | Mesh (Loop) Analysis
251
The current I2 is negative, which simply means that the actual direction of the
current is opposite to the chosen direction.
Although the network may be further analyzed using the assumed current
directions, it is easier to understand the circuit operation by showing the actual
current directions as in Figure 8–20.
5 A
6 V
E2
R3 = 1 
I1
8 V
E1
3 
R2
c
b
d
a
I3
I4



2 
R1
I2
I2 = 1.00 A
I3 = 2.00 A
I4 = 4.00 A



© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–20
Using the actual direction for I2,
Vab  (2 )(1 A)  2.00V
Use branch-current analysis to solve for the indicated currents in the circuit of
Figure 8–21.
Answers
I1  3.00 A, I2  4.00 A, I3  1.00 A
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
6 V
8 V
4 V
4 V
3 
1 
2 
2 
I1
I2
I3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–21
In the previous section you used Kirchhoff’s laws to solve for the current in each
branch of a given network. While the methods used were relatively simple,
branch-current analysis is awkward to use because it generally involves solving
several simultaneous linear equations. It is not difﬁcult to see that the number of
equations may be prohibitively large even for a relatively simple circuit.
8.5 Mesh (Loop)
Analysis
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A better approach and one that is used extensively in analyzing linear
bilateral networks is called mesh (or loop) analysis. While the technique is
similar to branch-current analysis, the number of simultaneous linear equations
tends to be less. The principal difference between mesh analysis and branch-
current analysis is that we simply need to apply Kirchhoff’s voltage law around
closed loops without the need for applying Kirchhoff’s current law.
The steps used in solving a circuit using mesh analysis are as follows:
1. Arbitrarily assign a clockwise current to each interior closed loop in the
network. Although the assigned current may be in any direction, a clock-
wise direction is used to make later work simpler.
2. Using the assigned loop currents, indicate the voltage polarities across all
resistors in the circuit. For a resistor that is common to two loops, the
polarities of the voltage drop due to each loop current should be indicated
on the appropriate side of the component.
3. Applying Kirchhoff’s voltage law, write the loop equations for each loop
in the network. Do not forget that resistors that are common to two loops
will have two voltage drops, one due to each loop.
4. Solve the resultant simultaneous linear equations.
5. Branch currents are determined by algebraically combining the loop cur-
rents that are common to the branch.
252
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
EXAMPLE 8–10       
Find the current in each branch for the circuit of Figure 8–22.
6 V
2 V
E3
R1 = 2 
R3 = 4 
E1
4 V
E2
2 
R2
I1
I2








© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–22
Solution
Step 1: Loop currents are assigned as shown in Figure 8–22. These currents are
designated I1 and I2.
Step 2: Voltage polarities are assigned according to the loop currents. Notice that
the resistor R2 has two different voltage polarities due to the different loop currents.
Step 3: The loop equations are written by applying Kirchhoff’s voltage law in
each of the loops. The equations are as follows:
Loop 1:
6 V  (2 )I1  (2 )I1  (2 )I2  4 V  0
Loop 2:
4 V  (2 )I2  (2 )I1  (4 )I2  2 V  0
Note that the voltage across R2 due to the currents I1 and I2 is indicated as two sep-
arated terms, where one term represents a voltage drop in the direction of I1 and
the other term represents a voltage rise in the same direction. The magnitude and
polarity of the voltage across R2 are determined by the actual size and directions
of the loop currents. The preceding loop equations may be simpliﬁed as follows:
Loop 1:
(4 )I1  (2 )I2  2 V
Loop 2:
(2 )I1  (6 )I2  6 V
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If the circuit being analyzed contains current sources, the procedure is a bit
more complicated. The circuit may be simpliﬁed by converting the current
source(s) to voltage sources and then solving the resulting network using the pro-
cedure shown in the previous example. Alternatively, you may not wish to alter
the circuit, in which case the current source will provide one of the loop currents.
Section 8.5 | Mesh (Loop) Analysis
253
Using determinants, the loop equations are easily solved as


I1 
 
1
2
2
4


1
4
2
  2
2
4
0
  1.20 A


and


I2 
 
2
2
4
4


4
4
  2
2
8
0
  1.40 A


4
2
2
6
4
2
2
6
4
2
2
6
2
2
6
6
EXAMPLE 8–11        
Determine the current through the 8-V battery for the circuit shown in Figure 8–23.
FIGURE 8–23
5 A
2 V
3 V
1 V
8 V
6 V
E2
E1
I
R2
R1
R3
2 V
10 V
E
R
b
a
© Cengage Learning 2013
From these results, we see that the currents through resistors R1 and R3 are I1
and I2, respectively.
The branch current for R2 is found by combining the loop currents through
this resistor:
IR2  1.40 A  1.20 A  0.20 A (upward)
The results obtained by using mesh analysis are exactly the same as those obtained
by branch-current analysis. Whereas branch-current analysis required three equa-
tions, this approach requires the solution of only two simultaneous linear equa-
tions. Mesh analysis also requires that only Kirchhoff’s voltage law be applied and
clearly illustrates why mesh analysis is preferred to branch-current analysis.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The circuit of Figure 8–23 may also be analyzed without converting the
current source to a voltage source. Although the approach is generally not used,
the following example illustrates the technique.
254
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
Solution
Convert the current source into an equivalent voltage source. The equiv-
alent circuit may now be analyzed by using the loop currents shown in Figure 8–24.
Loop 1:
10 V  (2 )I1  (3 )I1  (3 )I2  8 V  0
Loop 2:
8 V  (3 )I2  (3 )I1  (1 )I2  6 V  0
Rewriting the linear equations, you get the following:
Loop 1:
(5 )I1  (3 )I2  18 V
Loop 2:
(3 )I1  (4 )I2  2 V
Solving the equations using determinants, we have the following:
If the assumed direction of current in the 8-V battery is taken to be I2, then
I  I2  I1  4.00 A  (6.00 A)  2.00 A
The direction of the resultant current is the same as I2 (upward).
6 V
E2
a
b
R3 = 1 
8 V
E1
3 
R2
I1
I2




10 V
E
2 
R




© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–24


18
3
2
4
I1 
 6
1
6
1
  6.00 A


5
3
3
4


5
18
3
2
I2 
 4
1
4
1
  4.00 A
11
EXAMPLE 8–12       
Determine the current through R1 for the circuit shown in Figure 8–25.
6 V
E2
R3 = 1 
8 V
E1
3 
R2
I2
I1
I3


R1




2 




5 A
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–25
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Format Approach for Mesh Analysis
A very simple technique may be used to write the mesh equations for any linear
bilateral network. When this format approach is used, the simultaneous linear
equations for a network having n independent loops will appear as follows:
R11I1  R12I2  R13I3  …  R1nIn  E1
R21I1  R22I2  R23I3  …  R2nIn  E2

Rn1I1  Rn2I2  Rn3I3  …  RnnIn  En
The terms R11, R22, R33, . . . , Rnn represent the total resistance in each loop
and are found by simply adding all the resistances in a particular loop. The remain-
ing resistance terms are called the mutual resistance terms. These resistances rep-
resent resistance which is shared between two loops. For example, the mutual
resistance R12 is the resistance in loop 1, which is located in the branch between
loop 1 and loop 2. If there is no resistance between two loops, this term will be zero.
The terms containing R11, R22, R33, . . . , Rnn are positive, and all of the
mutual resistance terms are negative. This characteristic occurs because all cur-
rents are assumed to be clockwise.
Section 8.5 | Mesh (Loop) Analysis
255
Solution
By inspection, we see that the loop current I1  5 A. The mesh
equations for the other two loops are as follows:
Loop 2:
(2 )I2  (2 )I1  (3 )I2  (3 )I3  8 V  0
Loop 3:
8 V  (3 )I3  (3 )I2  (1 )I3  6 V  0
Although it is possible to analyze the circuit by solving three linear equations,
it is easier to substitute the known value I1  5 A into the mesh equation for
loop 2, which may now be written as
Loop 2:
(2 )I2  10 V  (3 )I2  (3 )I3  8 V  0
The loop equations may now be simpliﬁed as
Loop 2:
(5 )I2  (3 )I3  18 V
Loop 3:
(3 )I2  (4 )I3  2 V
The simultaneous linear equations are solved as follows:


18
3
2
4
I2 
 6
1
6
1
  6.00 A


5
3
3
4


5
18
3
2
I3 
 4
1
4
1
  4.00 A
11
The calculated values of the assumed reference currents allow us to determine
the actual current through the various resistors as follows:
IR1  I1  I2  5 A  (6 A)  1.00 A
(downward)
IR2  I3  I2  4 A  (6 A)  2.00 A
(upward)
IR3  I3  4.00 A
(left)
These results are consistent with those obtained in Example 8–9.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If the linear equations are correctly written, you will ﬁnd that the coefﬁ-
cients along the principal diagonal (R11, R22, R33, . . . , Rnn) will be positive.
All other coefﬁcients will be negative. Also, if the equations are correctly writ-
ten, the terms will be symmetrical about the principal diagonal—for example,
R12  R21.
The terms E1, E2, E3, . . . , En are the summation of the voltage rises in the
direction of the loop currents. If a voltage source appears in the branch shared by
two loops, it will be included in the calculation of the voltage rise for each loop.
The method used in applying the format approach of mesh analysis is as
follows:
1. Convert current sources into equivalent voltage sources.
2. Assign clockwise currents to each independent closed loop in the network.
3. Write the simultaneous linear equations in the format outlined.
4. Solve the resulting simultaneous linear equations.
256
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
EXAMPLE 8–13       
Solve for the currents through R2 and R3 in the circuit of Figure 8–26.
Solution
Step 1: Although we see that the circuit has a current source, it may not be
immediately evident how the source can be converted into an equivalent voltage
source. Redrawing the circuit into a more recognizable form, as shown in
Figure 8–27, we see that the 2-mA current source is in parallel with a 6-k
resistor. The source conversion is also illustrated in Figure 8–27.
R2
R1
5 k
E1
10 V
2 mA
b
a
E2
8 V
10 k
R4
12 k
R5
4 k
R3
6 k
IR3
IR2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–26
2 mA
6 k
5 k
12 k
a
b
10 V
8 V
E2
E1
R2
4 k
R5
R3
R4
10 k
R1
6 k
12 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–27
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.5 | Mesh (Loop) Analysis
257
Step 2: Redrawing the circuit is further simpliﬁed by labelling some of the
nodes, in this case a and b. After performing a source conversion, we have the
two-loop circuit shown in Figure 8–28. The current directions for I1 and I2 are
also illustrated.
Step 3: The loop equations are
Loop 1:
(6 k  10 k  5 k)I1  (5 k)I2  12 V  10 V
Loop 2:
(5 k)I1  (5 k  12 k  4 k)I2  10 V  8 V
In loop 1, both voltages are negative since they appear as voltage drops when
following the direction of the loop current.
These equations are rewritten as
(21 k)I1  (5 k)I2  22 V
(5 k)I1  (21 k)I2  18 V
Step 4: In order to simplify the solution of the previous linear equations, we
may eliminate the units (k and V) from our calculations. By inspection, we see
that the units for current must be in milliamps. Solving for the currents I1 and I2
results in:
I1  0.894 mA
and
I2  0.644 mA
The current through resistor R2 is easily determined to be
I2  I1  0.644 mA  (0.894 mA)  1.54 mA
(upward)
The current through R3 is not found as easily. A common mistake is to say that
the current in R3 is the same as the current through the 6-k resistor of the cir-
cuit in Figure 8–28. This is not the case. Since this resistor was part of the
source conversion it is no longer in the same location as in the original circuit.
Although there are several ways of ﬁnding the required current, the method
used here is the application of Ohm’s law. If we examine Figure 8–26, we see
that the voltage across R3 is equal to Vab. From Figure 8–28, we see that we
determine Vab by using the calculated value of I1.
Vab  (6 k)I1  12 V  (6 k)(0.894 mA)  12 V  6.64 V
The preceding calculation indicates that the current through R3 is upward (since
point a is negative with respect to point b). The current has a value of
IR3  
6
6
.6
k
4

V
  1.11 mA
12 V
8 V
E2
R1 = 10 k
R4 = 12 k
R5
4 k
10 V
E1
5 k
R2
I1
I2
6 k
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–28
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In the previous section we applied Kirchhoff’s voltage law to arrive at loop cur-
rents in a network. In this section we will apply Kirchhoff’s current law to
determine the potential difference (voltage) at any node with respect to some
arbitrary reference point in a network. Once the potentials of all nodes are
known, it is a simple matter to determine other quantities such as current and
power within the network.
The steps used in solving a circuit using nodal analysis are as follows:
1. Arbitrarily assign a reference node within the circuit and indicate this node
as ground. The reference node is usually located at the bottom of the cir-
cuit, although it may be located anywhere.
2. Convert each voltage source in the network to its equivalent current
source. This step, although not absolutely necessary, makes further calcu-
lations easier to understand.
3. Arbitrarily assign voltages (V1, V2, . . . , Vn) to the remaining nodes in the
circuit. (Remember that you have already assigned a reference node, so
these voltages will all be with respect to the chosen reference.)
4. Arbitrarily assign a current direction to each branch in which there is no
current source. Using the assigned current directions, indicate the corre-
sponding polarities of the voltage drops on all resistors.
5. With the exception of the reference node (ground), apply Kirchhoff’s cur-
rent law at each of the nodes. If a circuit has a total of n  1 nodes (includ-
ing the reference node), there will be n simultaneous linear equations.
6. Rewrite each of the arbitrarily assigned currents in terms of the potential
difference across a known resistance.
7. Solve the resulting simultaneous linear equations for the voltages (V1,
V2, . . . , Vn).
258
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
Use mesh analysis to ﬁnd the loop currents in the circuit of Figure 8–29.
Answers
I1  3.00 A, I2  2.00 A, I3  5.00 A
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
FIGURE 8–29
4 
3 
2 
1 
9 V
10 V
9 
14 V
3 V
I3
I2
I1
© Cengage Learning 2013
8.6 Nodal Analysis
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.6 | Nodal Analysis
259
EXAMPLE 8–14        
Given the circuit of Figure 8–30, use nodal analysis to solve for the voltage Vab.
Solution
Step 1: Select a convenient reference node.
Step 2: Convert the voltage sources into equivalent current sources. The equiv-
alent circuit is shown in Figure 8–31.
Steps 3 and 4: Arbitrarily assign node voltages and branch currents. Indicate the
voltage polarities across all resistors according to the assumed current directions.
Step 5: We now apply Kirchhoff’s current law at the nodes labelled as V1 and V2:
Node V1:
 Ientering   Ileaving
200 mA  50 mA  I1  I2
Node V2:
 Ientering   Ileaving
200 mA  I2  50 mA  I3
FIGURE 8–30
I2 = 50 mA
20 
R1
30 
R3
I3
200 mA
I1
R2
40 
R3
E
30 
a
b
6 V
200 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
V1
V2
200 mA
200 mA
50 mA
(Reference)
20 
R3
30 
40 
I1
I2




I3


R2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–31
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

260
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
Step 6: The currents are rewritten in terms of the voltages across the resistors
as follows:
I1  
20
V1


I2  
V
4
1
0


V2

I3  
30
V2


The nodal equations become
200 mA  50 mA  
20
V1

  
V
4
1
0


V2

200 mA  
V
4
1
0


V2
  50 mA  
30
V2


Substituting the voltage expressions into the original nodal equations, we have
the following simultaneous linear equations:

20
1

  
40
1

V1 
40
1

V2  0.25 A

40
1

V1 
30
1

  
40
1

V2  0.15 A
If we go back to the original circuit of Figure 8–30, we see that the voltage V2
is the same as the voltage Va, namely
Va  4.67 V  6.0 V  Vab
Therefore, the voltage Vab is simply found as
Vab  4.67 V  6.0 V  1.33 V
Calculator Hint: Most scientiﬁc
calculators are able to easily
work with the linear equations in
this example without the need
to perform intermediate calcula-
tions. The following step shows
that by using the inverse func-
tion (x1), the coefﬁcients of the
ﬁrst equation can be entered
directly into the calculator.
After entering the coefﬁcients
of the second equation, we
have the solution as follows:
Therefore the solutions of the
given linear equations are, 
V1  4.89 V and V2  4.67 V.
EXAMPLE 8–15       
Determine the nodal voltages for the circuit shown in Figure 8–32.
Solution
By following the steps outlined, the circuit may be redrawn as shown
in Figure 8–33.
FIGURE 8–32
2 A
5 
R1
R2 = 3 
3 A
6 
4 
R3
R4
6 
18 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In the previous two examples, you may have noticed that the simultaneous linear
equations have a format similar to that developed for mesh analysis. When we
wrote the nodal equation for node V1 the coefﬁcient for the variable V1 was pos-
itive, and it had a magnitude given by the summation of the conductance
attached to this node. The coefﬁcient for the variable V2 was negative and had a
magnitude given by the mutual conductance between nodes V1 and V2.
Section 8.6 | Nodal Analysis
261
Applying Kirchhoff’s current law to the nodes corresponding to V1 and V2, the
following nodal equations are obtained:
Ileaving  Ientering
Node V1:
I1  I2  2 A
Node V2:
I3  I4  I2  3 A
The currents may once again be written in terms of the voltages across the resistors:
I1  
5
V

1
I2  
V1
3


V2

I3  
4
V

2
I4  
6
V

2
The nodal equations become
Node V1:

5
V

1  
(V1
3


V2)
  2 A
Node V2:

4
V

2  
6
V

2  
(V1
3


V2)
  3 A
These equations may now be simpliﬁed as
Node V1:

5
1

  
3
1

V1 
3
1

V2  2 A
Node V2:

3
1

V1 
4
1

  
6
1

  
3
1

V2  3 A
We may use any of the previously used methods to solve the simultaneous linear
equations. Consequently, the solutions for V1 and V2 are:
V1  8.65 V
and
V2  7.85 V
V1
V2
2 A
3 A
(reference)
6 
R3
4 
R2 = 3 
I2
I4
I3
R1
5 
I1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–33
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Format Approach
A simple format approach may be used to write the nodal equations for any net-
work having n  1 nodes. Where one of these nodes is denoted as the reference
node, there will be n simultaneous linear equations, which will appear as follows:
G11V1  G12V2  G13V3  …  R1nVn  I1
G21V1  G22V2  G23V3  …  R2nVn  I2

Gn1V1  Gn2V2  Gn3V3  …  RnnVn  In
The coefﬁcients (constants) G11, G22, G33, . . . , Gnn represent the sum-
mation of the conductances attached to the particular node. The remaining
coefﬁcients are called the mutual conductance terms. For example, the mutual
conductance G23 is the conductance attached to node V2, which is common to
node V3. If there is no conductance that is common to two nodes, then this term
would be zero. Notice that the terms G11, G22, G33, . . . , Gnn are positive and
that the mutual conductance terms are negative. Further, if the equations are writ-
ten correctly, then the terms will be symmetrical about the principal diagonal—
for example, G23  G32.
The terms V1, V2, . . . , Vn are the unknown node voltages. Each voltage
represents the potential difference between the node in question and the refer-
ence node.
The terms I1, I2, . . . , In are the summation of current sources entering the
node. If a current source has a current such that it is leaving the node, then the
current is simply assigned as negative. If a particular current source is shared
between two nodes, then this current must be included in both nodal equations.
The method used in applying the format approach of nodal analysis is as
follows:
1. Convert voltage sources into equivalent current sources.
2. Label the reference node as . Label the remaining nodes as V1, V2, . . . , Vn.
3. Write the linear equation for each node using the format outlined.
4. Solve the resulting simultaneous linear equations for V1, V2, . . . , Vn.
The next examples illustrate how the format approach is used to solve circuit
problems.
262
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
EXAMPLE 8–16       
Determine the nodal voltages for the circuit shown in Figure 8–34.
Solution
The circuit has a total of three nodes: the reference node (at a potential
of zero volts) and two other nodes, V1 and V2.
R1
V1
V2
I2
I1
6 A
I3
2 A
1 A
3 
R3
4 
R2 = 5 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–34
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.6 | Nodal Analysis
263
By applying the format approach for writing the nodal equations, we get two
equations:
Node V1:

3
1

  
5
1

V1 
5
1

V2  6 A  1 A
Node V2:

5
1

V1 
5
1

  
4
1

V2  1 A  2 A
On the right-hand sides of the preceding equations, those currents that are leaving
the nodes are given a negative sign.
The solution of the preceding linear equations gives:
V1  14.25 V
and
V2  13.00 V
EXAMPLE 8–17        
Use nodal analysis to ﬁnd the nodal voltages for the circuit of Figure 8–35. Use
the answers to solve for the current through R1.
Solution
In order to apply nodal analysis, we must ﬁrst convert the voltage source
into its equivalent current source. The resulting circuit is shown in Figure 8–36.
FIGURE 8–35
FIGURE 8–36
R4
V2
V1
2 k
R2
R3 = 4 k
3 k
5 k
I4
2 mA
I2 3 mA
2 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
2 mA
5 k
3 mA
3 k
5 k
10 V
2 k
R4
2 mA
I4
R2
R3 = 4 k
R1
I2
© Cengage Learning 2013
CircuitSim 08-2 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Delta-Wye Conversion
You have previously examined resistor networks involving series, parallel, and
series-parallel combinations. We will next examine networks that cannot be
placed into any of these categories. While these circuits may be analyzed using
264
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
Labelling the nodes and writing the nodal equations, we obtain the following:
Node V1: 
5 k
1

  
3 k
1

  
4 k
1

V1 
4 k
1

V2  2 mA  3 mA
Node V2:

4 k
1

V1 
4 k
1

  
2 k
1

V2  2 mA
Because it is inconvenient to use kilohms and milliamps throughout our calcula-
tions, we may eliminate these units in our calculations. You have already seen that
any voltage obtained by using these quantities will result in the units being “volts.”
Therefore, when entering the values into a calculator, we can neglect the units.
The solutions are as follows:
V1  0.476 V
and
V2  2.51 V
Using the values derived for the nodal voltages, it is now possible to solve for
any other quantities in the circuit. To determine the current through resistor 
R1  5 k, we ﬁrst reassemble the circuit as it appeared originally. Since the
node voltage V1 is the same in both circuits, we use it in determining the desired
current. The resistor may be isolated as shown in Figure 8–37.
The current is easily found as
I 
 2.10 mA
(upward)
10 V  (0.476 V)

5 k
NOTES...
A common mistake is that the cur-
rent is determined by using the
equivalent circuit rather than the
original circuit. You must remember
that the circuits are only equivalent
external to the conversion.
V1 = 0.476 V
10 V
5 k
R1
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–37
Use nodal analysis to determine the node voltages for the circuit of Figure 8–38.
Answers
V1  3.00 V, V2  6.00 V, V3  2.00 V
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
FIGURE 8–38
1 
9 V
1 
2 
8 
4 A
3 A
V2
V3
V1
© Cengage Learning 2013
8.7 Delta-Wye (Pi-Tee)
Conversion
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

techniques developed earlier in this chapter, there is an easier approach. For
example, consider the circuit shown in Figure 8–39.
This circuit could be analyzed using mesh analysis. However, you see that
the analysis would involve solving four simultaneous linear equations, since
there are four separate loops in the circuit. If we were to use nodal analysis, the
solution would require determining three node voltages, since there are three
nodes in addition to a reference node. Unless a computer is used, both tech-
niques are very time-consuming and prone to error.
As you have already seen, it is occasionally easier to examine a circuit after
it has been converted to some equivalent form. We will now develop a technique
for converting a circuit from a delta (or pi) into an equivalent wye (or tee)
circuit. Consider the circuits shown in Figure 8–40. We start by making the
assumption that the networks shown in Figure 8–40(a) are equivalent to those
shown in Figure 8–40(b). Then, using this assumption, we will determine the
mathematical relationships between the various resistors in the equivalent circuits.
Section 8.7 | Delta-Wye (Pi-Tee) Conversion
265
FIGURE 8–39
FIGURE 8–40
60 
10 
90 
15 
30 
30 V
30 
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
(a) Wye (Y) or Tee (T) network
R3
R1
R2
c
a
b
R2
R1
R3
b
a
c
(b) Delta () or Pi () network
RC
RA
RB
b
a
c
RC
RA
RB
c
b
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
The circuit of Figure 8–40(a) can be equivalent to the circuit of Figure 8–40(b)
only if the resistance “seen” between any two terminals is exactly the same. If we
were to connect a source between terminals a and b of the Y, the resistance between
the terminals would be
Rab  R1  R2
(8–5)
But the resistance between terminals a and b of the  is
Rab  RC(RA  RB)
(8–6)
Combining Equations 8–5 and 8–6, we get
R1  R2  
R
R
A
C

(RA
R

B 
RB
R
)
C

R1  R2  
R
R
A
AR

C
R

B
R

BR
R
C
C

(8–7)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Using a similar approach between terminals b and c, we get
R2  R3  
R
R
A
AR

B
R

B
R

AR
R
C
C

(8–8)
and between terminals c and a we get
R1  R3  
R
R
A
AR

B
R

B
R

BR
R
C
C

(8–9)
If Equation 8–8 is subtracted from Equation 8–7, then
R1  R2  (R2  R3)  

R
R
A
AR

C
R

B
R

BR
R
C
C
  
R
R
A
AR

B
R

B
R

AR
R
C
C

R1  R3  
R
R
A
BR

C
R

B
R

AR
R
B
C

(8–10)
Adding Equations 8–9 and 8–10, we get
R1  R3  R1  R3  

R
R
A
AR

B
R

B
R

BR
R
C
C
  
R
R
A
BR

C
R

B 
RAR
R
B
C

2R1  
RA 
2R
R
B
B
R

C
RC

R1  
RA 
R
R
BR
B
C
 RC

(8–11)
Using a similar approach, we obtain
R2  
RA 
R
R
AR
B
C
 RC

(8–12)
R3  
RA 
R
R
AR
B
B
 RC

(8–13)
Notice that any resistor connected to a point of the Y is obtained by ﬁnd-
ing the product of the resistors connected to the same point in the  and
then dividing by the sum of all the  resistances.
If all the resistors in a  circuit have the same value, R, then the resulting
resistors in the equivalent Y network will also be equal and will have a value
given as
RY  R
3

(8–14)
266
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
EXAMPLE 8–18       
Find the equivalent Y circuit for the  circuit shown in Figure 8–41.
b
c
a
60 
90 
30 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–41
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Wye-Delta Conversion
By using Equations 8–11 to 8–13, it is possible to derive another set of equa-
tions that allow the conversion from a Y into an equivalent . Examining
Equations 8–11 through 8–13, we see that the following must be true:
RA  RB  RC  
R
R
AR
3
B
  
R
R
AR
2
C
  
R
R
BR
1
C

From the preceding expression we may write the following two equations:
RB  
R
R
AR
2
1

(8–15)
RC  
R
R
AR
3
1

(8–16)
Now, substituting Equations 8–15 and 8–16 into Equation 8–11, we have the
following:
R1 

R
R
AR
2
1

R
R
AR
3
1


RA 
R
R
AR
2
1
 
R
R
AR
3
1

Section 8.7 | Delta-Wye (Pi-Tee) Conversion
267
Solution
From the circuit of Figure 8–41, we see that we have the following
resistor values:
RA  90 
RB  60 
RC  30 
Applying Equations 8–11 through 8–13 we have the following equivalent Y
resistor values:
R1 
 
18
1
0
8
0
0

  10 
R2 
 
27
1
0
8
0
0

  15 
R3 
 
54
1
0
8
0
0

  30 
The resulting circuit is shown in Figure 8–42.
(60 )(90 )

30   60   90 
(30 )(90 )

30   60   90 
(30 )(60 )

30   60   90 
FIGURE 8–42
R1
R2
R3
c
b
a
10 
15 
30 
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

By factoring RA out of each term in the denominator, we are able to arrive at
R1 
R1 


Rewriting the preceding expression gives
RA 
(8–17)
Similarly,
RB 
(8–18)
and
RC 
(8–19)
In general, we see that the resistor in any side of a  is found by taking the
sum of all two-product combinations of Y resistor values and then dividing by
the resistance in the Y, which is located directly opposite to the resistor being
calculated.
If the resistors in a Y network are all equal, then the resultant resistors in
the equivalent  circuit will also be equal and will be given as
R  3RY
(8–20)
R1R2  R1R3  R2R3

R3
R1R2  R1R3  R2R3

R2
R1R2  R1R3  R2R3

R1
RAR1R1

R1R2  R1R3  R2R3
 
R
R
AR
2R
1R
3
1




R1R2  R
R
1
2
R
R
3
3
 R2R3


R
R
AR
2R
1R
3
1


1 R
R
1
2
 R
R
1
3


R
R
AR
2
1

R
R
AR
3
1


RA1 R
R
1
2
 R
R
1
3

268
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
EXAMPLE 8–19       
Find the  network equivalent of the Y network shown in Figure 8–43.
a
b
c
2.4 k
4.8 k
3.6 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–43
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.7 | Delta-Wye (Pi-Tee) Conversion
269
Solution
The equivalent  network is shown in Figure 8–44.
The values of the resistors are determined as follows:
RA 
 7.8 k
RB 
 10.4 k
RC 
 15.6 k
(4.8 k)(2.4 k)  (4.8 k)(3.6 k)  (2.4 k)(3.6 k)

2.4 k
(4.8 k)(2.4 k)  (4.8 k)(3.6 k)  (2.4 k)(3.6 k)

3.6 k
(4.8 k)(2.4 k)  (4.8 k)(3.6 k)  (2.4 k)(3.6 k)

4.8 k
b
a
c
RB = 10.4 k
15.6 k
RA = 7.8 k
RC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–44
EXAMPLE 8–20        
Given the circuit of Figure 8–45, ﬁnd the total resistance, RT, and the total current, I.
Solution
As is often the case, the given circuit may be solved in one of two
ways. We may convert the  into its equivalent Y and solve the circuit by placing
the resultant branches in parallel, or we may convert the Y into its equivalent .
We choose to use the latter conversion since the resistors in the Y have the same
value. The equivalent  will have all resistors given as
R  3(10 )  30 
The resulting circuit is shown in Figure 8–46(a).
60 
10 
90 
10 
30 
30 V
10 
I
RT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–45
We see that the sides of the resulting  are in parallel, which allows us to sim-
plify the circuit even further as shown in Figure 8–46(b). The total resistance of
the circuit is now easily determined as
RT  15 (20   22.5 )
 11.09 
This results in a circuit current of
I  
11
3
.
0
09
V

  2.706 A
FIGURE 8–46
(a)
30 
60 
30 
30 
90 
30 
I
30 V
RT
30  || 90  = 22.5 
30  || 30 
= 15    
30  || 60 
     = 20 
30 V
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In this section you will be introduced to the bridge network. Bridge networks
are used in electronic measuring equipment to precisely measure resistance in
dc circuits and similar quantities in ac circuits. The bridge circuit was origi-
nally used by Sir Charles Wheatstone in the mid-nineteenth century to measure
resistance by balancing small currents. The Wheatstone bridge circuit is still used
to measure resistance very precisely. The digital bridge, shown in Figure 8–47, is
an example of one such instrument.
270
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
FIGURE 8–48
Convert the  network of Figure 8–44 into an equivalent Y network. Verify that
the result you obtain is the same as that found in Figure 8–43.
Answers
R1  4.8 k, R2  3.6 k, R3  2.4 k
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
© Agilent Technologies, Inc. June 2011 Reproduced with
Permission, Courtesy of Agilent Technologies, Inc.
FIGURE 8–47
The Agilent E4980A precision LCR meter combines accuracy, speed, and
versatility for a wide range of component measurements.
8.8 Bridge Networks
You will use the techniques developed earlier in the chapter to analyze the
operation of these networks. Bridge circuits may be shown in various conﬁgu-
rations as seen in Figure 8–48.
R3
R1
R4
R2
R5
(a)
b
a
c
d
R1
R3
R2
R4
(b)
c
b
a
d
R5
R2
R1
R4
R3
R5
(c)
a
c
b
d
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Although a bridge circuit may appear in one of three forms, you can see
that they are equivalent. There are, however, two different states of bridges: the
balanced bridge and the unbalanced bridge.
A balanced bridge is one in which the current through the resistance R5 is
equal to zero. In practical circuits, R5 is generally a variable resistor in series with
a sensitive galvanometer. When the current through R5 is zero, then it follows that
Vab  (R5)(0 A)  0 V
IR1  IR3  
R1
V

cd
R3

IR2  IR4  
R2
V

cd
R4

But the voltage Vab is found as
Vab  Vad  Vbd  0
Therefore, Vad  Vbd and
R3IR3  R4IR4
R3
R1
V

cd
R3
  R4
R2
V

cd
R4
 ,
which simpliﬁes to

R1
R

3
R3
  
R2
R

4
R4

Now, if we invert both sides of the equation and simplify, we get the following:

R1
R

3
R3
  
R2
R

4
R4

R
R
1
3
  1  R
R
2
4
  1
Finally, by subtracting 1 from each side, we obtain the following ratio for a
balanced bridge:
R
R
1
3
  R
R
2
4

(8–21)
From Equation 8–21, we notice that a bridge network is balanced when-
ever the ratios of the resistors in the two arms are the same.
An unbalanced bridge is one in which the current through R5 is not zero,
and so the preceding ratio does not apply to an unbalanced bridge network.
Figure 8–49 illustrates each condition of a bridge network.
If a balanced bridge appears as part of a complete circuit, its analysis is
very simple since the resistor R5 may be removed and replaced with either a
short (since VR5  0) or an open (since IR5  0).
Section 8.8 | Bridge Networks
271
FIGURE 8–49
R3
R1
R4
R2
R5 = 90 
60 
30 
(a) Balanced bridge
240 
120 
R3
R1
R4
R2
R5 = 30 
40 
20 
(b) Unbalanced bridge
80 
60 
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

However, if a circuit contains an unbalanced bridge, the analysis is more
complicated. In such cases, it is possible to determine currents and voltages by
using mesh analysis, nodal analysis, or by using  to Y conversion. The fol-
lowing examples illustrate how bridges may be analyzed.
272
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
EXAMPLE 8–21       
Solve for the currents through R1 and R4 in the circuit of Figure 8–50.
Solution
We see that the bridge of the circuit in Figure 8-50 is balanced (since
R1	R3  R2	R4). Because the circuit is balanced, we may remove R5 and replace
it with either a short circuit (since the voltage across a short circuit is zero) or
an open circuit (since the current through an open circuit is zero). The remain-
ing circuit is then solved by one of the methods developed in previous chapters.
Both methods will be illustrated to show that the results are exactly the same.
Method 1: If R5 is replaced by an open, the result is the circuit shown in
Figure 8–51.
The total circuit resistance is found as
RT  10   (3   12 )(6   24 )
 10   15 30 
 20 
The circuit current is
IT  
2
6
0
0

V
  3.0 A
The current in each branch is then found by using the current divider rule:
IR1 
30 
30


15 
(3.0 A)  2.0 A
IR4  
24 
10


6 
(3.0 A)  1.0 A
Method 2: If R5 is replaced with a short circuit, the result is the circuit shown
in Figure 8–52.
The total circuit resistance is found as
RT  10   (3 6 )  (12 24 )
 10   2   8 
 20 
This result is precisely the same as that found using Method 1. Therefore the
circuit current will remain as IT  3.0 A.
R3
R1
R4
R2
RS = 10 
R5 = 9 
IT
6 
3 
24 
12 
60 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–52
FIGURE 8–51
FIGURE 8–50
24 
R4
6 
R2
3 
R1
RS = 10 
12 
R3
IR4
60 V
IR1
© Cengage Learning 2013
24 
R4
6 
R2
3 
R1
RS = 10 
12 
R3
IR4
60 V
IR1
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The previous example illustrates that if the bridge is not balanced, there
will always be some current through resistor R5. The unbalanced circuit may
also be easily analyzed using nodal analysis, as in the following example.
Section 8.8 | Bridge Networks
273
The currents through R1 and R4 may be found by the current divider rule as
IR1 
6 
6


3 
(3.0 A)  2.0 A
and
IR4 
12 
12


24 
(3.0 A)  1.0 A
Clearly, these results are precisely those obtained in Method 1, illustrating that
the methods are equivalent. Remember, though, R5 can be replaced with a short
circuit or an open circuit only when the bridge is balanced.
EXAMPLE 8–22        
Use mesh analysis to ﬁnd the currents through R1 and R5 in the unbalanced bridge
circuit of Figure 8–53.
Solution
After assigning loop currents as shown, we write the loop equations as
Loop 1:
(15 )I1  (6 )I2  (3 )I3  30 V
Loop 2:
(6 )I1  (36 )I2  (18 )I3  0
Loop 3:
(3 )I1  (18 )I2  (24 )I3  0
The loop currents are evaluated as
I1  2.586 A
I2  0.948 A
and
I3  1.034 A
The current through R1 is found as
IR1  I1  I2  2.586 A  0.948 A  1.638 A
The current through R5 is found as
IR5  I3  I2  1.034 A  0.948 A
 0.086 A
(to the right)
R4
RS = 6 
I1
I2
I3
R2
R3
18 
6 
3 
12 
3 
30 V
R1
R5
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–53
EXAMPLE 8–23        
Determine the node voltages and the voltage VR5 for the circuit of Figure 8–54.
R3
R1
R4
R2
RS = 6 
R5 = 18 
12 
6 
3 
3 
30 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–54
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A ﬁnal method for analyzing bridge networks involves the use of  to Y
conversion. The following example illustrates the method used.
274
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
Solution
By converting the voltage source into an equivalent current source,
we obtain the circuit shown in Figure 8–55.
The nodal equations for the circuit are as follows:
Node 1:

6
1

  
6
1

  
12
1

V1 
6
1

V2 
12
1

V3  5 A
Node 2:

6
1

V1 
6
1

  
3
1

  
18
1

V2 
18
1

V3  0 A
Node 3:

12
1

V1 
18
1

V2 
3
1

  
12
1

  
18
1

V3  0 A
Again notice that the elements on the principal diagonal are positive and that the
determinant is symmetrical about the principal diagonal.
The node voltages are calculated to be
V1  14.48 A
V2  4.66 V
and
V3  3.10 V
Using the preceding results, we ﬁnd the voltage across R5:
VR5  V2  V3  4.655 V  3.103 V  1.55 V
and the current through R5 is
IR5  
1
1
.5
8
5

V
  0.086 A
(to the right)
As expected, the results are the same whether we use mesh analysis or nodal
analysis. It is therefore a matter of personal preference as to which approach
should be used.
R3
R1
R4
RS
R2
R5 = 18 
12 
6 
5 A
6 
V1
V2
3 
3 
V3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–55
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.8 | Bridge Networks
275
EXAMPLE 8–24        
Find the current through R5 for the circuit shown in Figure 8–56.
FIGURE 8–56
R3
R1
R4
R2
RS = 6 
R5 = 18 
I
12 
a
d
b
c
6 
3 
3 
30 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
Solution
By inspection we see that this circuit is not balanced, since
R
R
1
3
 
 R
R
2
4

Therefore, the current through R5 cannot be zero. Notice, also, that the circuit
contains two possible  conﬁgurations. If we choose to convert the top  to its
equivalent Y, we get the circuit shown in Figure 8–57.
By combining resistors, it is possible to reduce the complicated circuit to the
simple series circuit shown in Figure 8–58.
The circuit of Figure 8–58 is easily analyzed to give a total circuit current of
I 
 2.59 A
30 V

6   2   3.6 
FIGURE 8–57
RS = 6 
3 
3 
30 V
b
c
d
a
I
R4
R3
= 3 
(6) (18)
6  12  18
= 2 
(6) (12)
6  12  18
= 6 
(12) (18)
6  12  18
© Cengage Learning 2013
RS = 6 
a
d
30 V
2  (3  3) || (6  3) = 5.6 
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–58
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

276
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
Using the calculated current, it is possible to work back to the original circuit.
The currents in the resistors R3 and R4 are found by using the current divider rule
for the corresponding resistor branches, as shown in Figure 8–57.
IR3 
(2.59 A)  1.55 A
IR4 
(2.59 A)  1.03 A
These results are exactly the same as those found in Examples 8–21 and 8–22.
Using these currents, it is now possible to determine the voltage Vbc as
Vbc  (3 )IR4  (3 )IR3
 (3 )(1.034 A)  (3 )(3.103 A)
 1.55 V
The current through R5 is determined to be
IR5  
1
1
.5
8
5

V
  0.086 A
(to the right)
(3   3 )

(6   3 )  (3   3 )
(6   3 )

(6   3 )  (3   3 )
1. For a balanced bridge, what will be the value of voltage between the midpoints
of the arms of the bridge?
2. If a resistor or sensitive galvanometer is placed between the arms of a balanced
bridge, what will be the current through the resistor?
3. In order to simplify the analysis of a balanced bridge, how may the resistance
R5, between the arms of the bridge, be replaced?
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
1. For the circuit shown in Figure 8–59, what value of R4 will ensure that the
bridge is balanced?
2. Determine the current I through R5 in Figure 8–59 when R4  0  and when
R4  50 .
Answers
1. 20 V; 2. 286 mA, 52.6 mA
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
R3
R1
R2
R5 = 10 
10 
20 
40 
10 V
I
R4 = 0        50 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–59
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Multisim and PSpice are able to analyze a circuit without the need to con-
vert between voltage and current sources or having to write lengthy linear
equations. It is possible to have the program output the value of voltage
across or current through any element in a given circuit. The following
examples were previously analyzed using several other methods throughout
this chapter.
Section 8.9 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
277
8.9 Circuit Analysis
Using Computers
PSPICE
MultiSim
EXAMPLE 8–25        
Given the circuit of Figure 8–60, use Multisim to ﬁnd the voltage Vab and the
current through each resistor.
Solution
The circuit is entered as shown in Figure 8–61. The current source is
obtained by clicking on the Signal source button in the Virtual Components tool-
bar. As before, it is necessary to include a ground symbol in the schematic although
the original circuit of Figure 8–60 did not have one. Make sure that all values are
changed from the default values to the required circuit values. In this example, we
use the Measurement Probe from the Instruments toolbar. Notice that, for simplic-
ity, all unnecessary quantities have been removed from the Properties of the probe.
From the preceding results, we have the following values:
Vab  2.00 V
IR1  1.00 A
(downward)
IR2  2.00 A
(upward)
IR3  4.00 A
(to the left)
5 A
6 V
E2
R3 = 1 
8 V
E1
3 
R2
b
a
2 
R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 8–61
FIGURE 8–60
V2
6 V
V1
8 V
V: 2.00 V
I: 1.00 A
l: 2.00 A
l: 4.00 A
I1
5 A
TP4
TP1
R3
1 Ω
R2
3 Ω
TP2
R1
2 Ω
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PSpice
278
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
EXAMPLE 8–26       
Use PSpice to ﬁnd currents through R1 and R5 in the circuit of Figure 8–62.
FIGURE 8–63
FIGURE 8–62
R2
12 
R4
3 
R3
R5
30 V
3 
6 
R1
6 
18 
R5
© Cengage Learning 2013
Solution
The PSpice ﬁle is entered as shown in Figure 8–63. 
© Cengage Learning 2013
Open a new folder for Chapter 8 and save the New Simulation Proﬁle. Be sure
to select the Analysis type to be Bias Point with General Settings. When you
click on the Run icon, your display should appear as shown. Here we have the
currents as IR1  1.64 A and IR5  86.2 mA. These results are consistent with
those obtained in Example 8–22.
Use Multisim to determine the currents IT, IR1, and IR4 in the circuit of Figure 8–50.
Compare your results to those obtained in Example 8–21.
Answers
IT  3.00 A, IR1  2.00 A, and IR4  1.00 A
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 7
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 8.9 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
279
Use PSpice to input the circuit of Figure 8–50. Determine the value of IR5 when
R4  0  and when R4  48 .
Note: Since PSpice cannot let R4  0 , you will need to let it equal some very small
value such as 1 m (1e-6).
Answers
IR5  1.08 A when R4  0  and IR5  0.172 A when R4  48 
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 8
Use PSpice to input the circuit of Figure 8–54, so that the output ﬁle will provide
the currents through R1, R2, and R5. Compare your results to those obtained in
Example 8–23.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 9
S
train gauges are manufactured from very ﬁne wire mounted on insulated sur-
faces that are then glued to large metal structures. These instruments are used
by civil engineers to measure the movement and mass of large objects such as
bridges and buildings. When the very ﬁne wire of a strain gauge is subjected to
stress, its effective length is increased (due to stretching) or decreased (due to
compression). This change in length results in a corresponding minute change in
resistance. By placing one or more strain gauges into a bridge circuit, it is possi-
ble to detect variation in resistance, R. This change in resistance can be cali-
brated to correspond to an applied force. Consequently, it is possible to use such
a bridge as a means of measuring very large masses. Consider that you have two
strain gauges mounted in a bridge as shown in the accompanying ﬁgure.
Putting It into Practice
R + ΔR
R − ΔR
R = 100 
R
24 V
R
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
The variable resistors R2 and R4 are strain gauges that are mounted on
opposite sides of a steel girder used to measure very large masses. When a
mass is applied to the girder, the strain gauge on one side of the girder will
compress, reducing the resistance. The strain gauge on the other side of the
girder will stretch, increasing the resistance. When no mass is applied, there
will be neither compression nor stretching and so the bridge will be balanced,
resulting in a voltage Vab  0 V.
Write an expression for R as a function of Vab. Assume that the scale is
calibrated so that resistance variation of R  0.02  corresponds to a mass
of 5000 kg. Determine the measured mass if Vab  4.20 mV.
Strain gauge bridge.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

280
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
FIGURE 8–68
FIGURE 8–69
FIGURE 8–67
FIGURE 8–66
FIGURE 8–65
FIGURE 8–64
20 V
3 A


VS
6 
© Cengage Learning 2013
30 V
5 mA
2 k
4 k
VS


© Cengage Learning 2013
3. Refer to the circuit of Figure 8–66:
a. Find the current I3.
b. Determine the voltages VS and V1.
4. Consider the circuit of Figure 8–67:
a. Calculate the voltages V2 and VS.
b. Find the currents I and I3.
5. For the circuit of Figure 8–68, ﬁnd the currents I1 and I2.
6. Refer to the circuit of Figure 8–69:
a. Find the voltages VS and V2.
b. Determine the current I4.
20 mA
100 
R1
I3
R2 = 300 
R3 = 200 
VS


V1


© Cengage Learning 2013
5 V
3 mA
VS
V2
+

2 k
R3
3 k
R2 = 5 k
R1
I3
I
–

© Cengage Learning 2013
50 k
150 k
15 V
100 A
I2
I1
© Cengage Learning 2013
40 
R4
R1
400 mA
20 
R3
20 
30 
R2
V2
VS
I4




© Cengage Learning 2013
Problems
8.1
Constant-Current Sources
1. Find the voltage VS for the circuit shown in Figure 8–64.
2. Find the voltage VS for the circuit shown in Figure 8–65.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7. Verify that the power supplied by the sources is equal to the summation of
the powers dissipated by the resistors in the circuit of Figure 8–68.
8. Verify that the power supplied by the source in the circuit of Figure 8–69 is
equal to the summation of the powers dissipated by the resistors.
8.2
Source Conversions
9. Convert each of the voltage sources of Figure 8–70 into its equivalent current
source.
10. Convert each of the current sources of Figure 8–71 into its equivalent voltage
source.
Problems
281
FIGURE 8–74
FIGURE 8–73
FIGURE 8–72
FIGURE 8–71
FIGURE 8–70
RS
5 V
(a)
20 
RS
25 V
(b)
2 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
11. Refer to the circuit of Figure 8–72:
a. Solve for the current through the load resistor using the current divider
rule.
b. Convert the current source into its equivalent voltage source and again
determine the current through the load.
12. Find Vab and I2 for the network of Figure 8–73.
13. Refer to the circuit of Figure 8–74:
a. Convert the current source and the 330- resistor into an equivalent 
voltage source.
b. Solve for the current I through RL.
c. Determine the voltage Vab.
RS
30 mA
(a)
20 
3 A
(b)
6 
© Cengage Learning 2013
RS
8 A
450 
RL
50 
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
R2 = 3 
R3 = 7 
R1
I2
30 V
2 A
a
b
5 
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
R2
E
330 
RL = 100 
470 
I
16 V
I = 65 mA
a
b


© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14. Refer to the circuit of Figure 8–75:
a. Convert the voltage source and the 36- resistor into an equivalent 
current source.
b. Solve for the current I through RL.
c. Determine the voltage Vab.
8.3
Current Sources in Parallel and Series
15. Find the voltage V2 and the current I1 for the circuit of Figure 8–76.
16. Convert the voltage sources of Figure 8–77 into current sources and solve for
the current I1 and the voltage Vab.
17. For the circuit of Figure 8–78, convert the current source and the 2.4-k
resistor into a voltage source and ﬁnd the voltage Vab and the current I3.
18. For the circuit of Figure 8–78, convert the voltage source and the series
resistors into an equivalent current source.
a. Determine the current I2.
b. Solve for the voltage Vab.
282
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
FIGURE 8–78
FIGURE 8–77
FIGURE 8–76
FIGURE 8–75
R2
R1 = 36 
12 V
40 
I
I
2 A
b
a
RL
60 


© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
I1
50 mA
3 k
R2
V2
6 k
100 mA


R3
8 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
40 
I1
a
b
R4
60 
E3
48 V
R3
24 
E2
24 V
R2
6 
Vab


© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
R2 = 2.4 k
1.6 k
R3
2.0 k
8 V
3 mA
I3
I2
b
a
Vab


© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.4
Branch-Current Analysis
19. Write the branch-current equations for the circuit shown in Figure 8–79 and
solve for the branch currents using determinants.
20. Refer to the circuit of Figure 8–80:
a. Solve for the current I1 using branch-current analysis.
b. Determine the voltage Vab.
21. Write the branch-current equations for the circuit shown in Figure 8–81 and
solve for the current I2.
22. Refer to the circuit shown in Figure 8–82:
a. Write the branch-current equations.
b. Solve for the currents I1 and I2.
c. Determine the voltage Vab.
23. Refer to the circuit shown in Figure 8–83:
a. Write the branch-current equations.
b. Solve for the current I2.
c. Determine the voltage Vab.
Problems
283
FIGURE 8–83
FIGURE 8–82
FIGURE 8–81
FIGURE 8–80
FIGURE 8–79
R1
30 
E1
15 V
R2
6 
R3
20 
E3
5 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
R4
R1
E2
R3 = 4 
6 V
E1
8 V
10 
16 
I1
0.4 A
b
a
R2
10 
E3 = 2 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
R4
8.2 
I2
R3
4.7 
E1
10 V
R1
R2 = 6.2 
5 
2.5 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
I2
I1
E1
3.3 
R2
6.7 
E2
3 V
8 V
I
2 A
a
b
R3
1.0 
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
R2 = 6 
16 V
2 
I2
b
a
R4
4 
R3
E
10 
I
12 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24. Refer to the circuit shown in Figure 8–84:
a. Write the branch-current equations.
b. Solve for the current I.
c. Determine the voltage Vab.
8.5
Mesh (Loop) Analysis
25. Write the mesh equations for the circuit shown in Figure 8–79 and solve for
the loop currents.
26. Use mesh analysis for the circuit of Figure 8–80 to solve for the current I1.
27. Use mesh analysis to solve for the current I2 in the circuit of Figure 8–81.
28. Use mesh analysis to solve for the loop currents in the circuit of Figure 8–83.
Use your results to determine I2 and Vab.
29. Use mesh analysis to solve for the loop currents in the circuit of Figure 8–84.
Use your results to determine I and Vab.
30. Using mesh analysis, determine the current through the 6- resistor in the
circuit of Figure 8–85.
31. Write the mesh equations for the network in Figure 8–86. Solve for the loop
currents using determinants.
32. Repeat Problem 31 for the network in Figure 8–87.
284
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
FIGURE 8–86
FIGURE 8–87
FIGURE 8–85
FIGURE 8–84
R2
E2
R1 = 40 
E1 = 2 V
R3
E3
a
b
I
60 
12 V
80 
8 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
R3
6 
R1 = 4 
R2 = 2 
E1
3 A
4 A
a
R4
1 
E4
3 V
8 V
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
R4 = 6 
R5 = 3 
E4 = 5 V
E2
R1
R2
3 
1 
R3
4 
4 V
E1
E3
2 V
6 V
a
b
c
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
R3 = 4 k
R5 = 4 k
E2 = 6 V
R2
2 k
3 k
E1 = 9 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8.6
Nodal Analysis
33. Write the nodal equations for the circuit of Figure 8–88 and solve for the
nodal voltages.
34. Write the nodal equations for the circuit of Figure 8–89 and determine the
voltage Vab.
35. Repeat Problem 33 for the circuit of Figure 8–90.
36. Repeat Problem 34 for the circuit of Figure 8–91.
37. Write the nodal equations for the circuit of Figure 8–86 and solve for V6 .
38. Write the nodal equations for the circuit of Figure 8–85 and solve for V6 .
8.7
Delta-Wye (Pi-Tee) Conversion
39. Convert each of the  networks of Figure 8–92 into its equivalent 
Y conﬁguration.
40. Convert each of the  networks of Figure 8–93 into its equivalent 
Y conﬁguration.
Problems
285
FIGURE 8–94
FIGURE 8–93
FIGURE 8–92
FIGURE 8–91
FIGURE 8–90
FIGURE 8–89
FIGURE 8–88
R2 = 5 
I2 = 2 A
R1
2 
R3
4 
I1
3 A
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1 = 20 
R3 = 50 
I1 = 40 mA
I3 = 25 mA
R2
30 
a
b
I2
60 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
I2 = 6 mA
a
b
I1
3 mA
2 k
R2
5 k
R3
10 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
R3 = 4 
R2 = 5  E2 = 10 V
I3 = 3 A
R1
I1
3 
a
b
6 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
b
c
a
(a)
90 
270 
30 
(b)
4.7 k
7.8 k
5.6 k
b
c
a
c
© Cengage Learning 2013
a
(a)
c
b
c
220 
420 
360 
100 
200 
(b)
a
c
a
b
200 
© Cengage Learning 2013
c
(a)
b
a
10 
20 
30 
(b)
390 k
470 k
220 k
a
b
c
c
© Cengage Learning 2013
41. Convert each of the Y networks of Figure 8–94 into its equivalent 
 conﬁguration.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

42. Convert each of the Y networks of Figure 8–95 into its equivalent 
 conﬁguration.
43. Using -Y or Y- conversion, ﬁnd the current I for the circuit of Figure 8–96.
44. Using -Y or Y- conversion, ﬁnd the current I and the voltage Vab for the
circuit of Figure 8–97.
8.8
Bridge Networks
47. Refer to the bridge circuit of Figure 8–100:
a. Is the bridge balanced? Explain.
b. Write the mesh equations.
c. Calculate the current through R5.
d. Determine the voltage across R5.
286
Chapter 8 | Methods of Analysis
FIGURE 8–100
FIGURE 8–99
FIGURE 8–98
FIGURE 8–97
FIGURE 8–96
FIGURE 8–95
(a)
68 
120 
82 
a
a
b
c
c
(b)
b
a
48 
96 
24 
© Cengage Learning 2013
All resistors are 4.5 k
R1
R4
R2
R5
R6
R3
60 V
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
I
20 
24 V
b
a
R3
R1 = 20 
R4 = 30 
R2 = 20 
E
© Cengage Learning 2013
300 
75 
450 
150 
50 
150 
30 V
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
30 
20 
 = 20 
30 
10 
20 V
R2
R3
R6
R5
a
b
R4
R1
10 
I
E
© Cengage Learning 2013
R3
R1
E
R2
R4
R5 = 24 
18 
6 
12 
6 
15 V
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
45. Repeat Problem 43 for the circuit of Figure 8–98.
46. Repeat Problem 44 for the circuit of Figure 8–99.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

48. Consider the bridge circuit of Figure 8–101:
a. Is the bridge balanced? Explain.
b. Write the mesh equations.
c. Determine the current through R5.
d. Calculate the voltage across R5.
49. Given the bridge circuit of Figure 8–102, ﬁnd the current through each resistor.
50. Refer to the bridge circuit of Figure 8–103:
a. Determine the value of resistance Rx such that the bridge is balanced.
b. Calculate the current through R5 when Rx  0  and when Rx  10 k.
8.9
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
51. Use Multisim to solve for the currents through all resistors of the circuit
shown in Figure 8–86.
52. Use Multisim to solve for the voltage across the 5-k resistor in the circuit
of Figure 8–87.
53. Use PSpice to solve for the currents through all resistors in the circuit of
Figure 8–96.
54. Use PSpice to solve for the currents through all resistors in the circuit of
Figure 8–97.
Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
287
FIGURE 8–103
FIGURE 8–101
FIGURE 8–102
R1
E
R5 = 40 
I
30 
90 V
R2
40 
R3
80 
R4
80 
© Cengage Learning 2013
R3
R1
R4
R2
RS = 100 
R5 = 100 
300 
100 
900 
300 
24 V
E
© Cengage Learning 2013
R3
R1
E
R2
R5
4 k
1 k
2 k
3 k
6 V
I
Rx = 
0        10 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
PSPICE
MultiSim
MultiSim
PSPICE
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. A voltage source E in series with a resistor R is equivalent to a current source
having an ideal current source I  E/R in parallel with the same resistance, R.
2. Current sources are never connected in series.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
1. Voltage is zero.
2. Current is zero.
3. R5 can be replaced with either a short circuit or an open circuit.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Maximum Power Transfer
Theorem
Millman’s Theorem
Norton’s Theorem
Reciprocity Theorem
Substitution Theorem
Superposition Theorem
Thévenin’s Theorem
I OUTLINE
Superposition Theorem
Thévenin’s Theorem
Norton’s Theorem
Maximum Power Transfer
Theorem
Substitution Theorem
Millman’s Theorem
Reciprocity Theorem
Circuit Analysis Using
Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter you will be able to
• apply the superposition theorem to
determine the current through or voltage
across any resistance in a given network,
• state Thévenin’s theorem and determine the
Thévenin equivalent circuit of any resistive
network,
• state Norton’s theorem and determine the
Norton equivalent circuit of any resistive
network,
• determine the required load resistance of
any circuit to ensure that the load receives
maximum power from the circuit,
• apply Millman’s theorem to determine the
current through or voltage across any
resistor supplied by any number of sources
in parallel,
• state the reciprocity theorem and
demonstrate that it applies for a given single-
source circuit,
• state the substitution theorem and apply the
theorem in simplifying the operation of a
given circuit.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9
NETWORK THEOREMS
I
n this chapter you will learn how to use some basic theorems which will allow the analysis 
of even the most complex resistive networks. The theorems that are most useful in analyzing
networks are the superposition, Thévenin, Norton, and maximum power transfer theorems.
You will also be introduced to other theorems which, while useful for providing a well-
rounded appreciation of circuit analysis, have limited use in the analysis of circuits. These
theorems, which apply to speciﬁc types of circuits, are the substitution, reciprocity, and
Millman theorems. Your instructor may choose to omit the latter theorems without any loss 
in continuity. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

290
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
The superposition theorem is a method that allows us to determine the cur-
rent through or the voltage across any resistor or branch in a network. The
advantage of using this approach instead of mesh analysis or nodal analysis is
that it is not necessary to use determinants or matrix algebra to analyze a given
circuit. The theorem states the following:
The total current through or voltage across a resistor or branch may be
determined by summing the effects due to each independent source.
In order to apply the superposition theorem it is necessary to remove all
sources other than the one being examined. In order to “zero” a voltage source,
we replace it with a short circuit, since the voltage across a short circuit is zero
volts. A current source is zeroed by replacing it with an open circuit, since the
current through an open circuit is zero amps.
If we wish to determine the power dissipated by any resistor, we must ﬁrst
ﬁnd either the voltage across the resistor or the current through the resistor:
P  I2R  V
R
2

Putting It in Perspective
André Marie Ampère
ANDRÉ MARIE AMPÈRE WAS BORN in Polémieux, Rhône, near
Lyon, France, on January 22, 1775. As a youth, Ampère was
a brilliant mathematician who was able to master advanced
mathematics by the age of twelve. However, the French
Revolution, and the ensuing anarchy that swept through
France from 1789 to 1799, did not exclude the Ampère
family. Ampère’s father, who was a prominent merchant and
city ofﬁcial in Lyon, was executed under the guillotine in
1793. Young André suffered a nervous breakdown from
which he never fully recovered. His suffering was further
compounded in 1804, when after only ﬁve years of mar-
riage, Ampère’s wife died.
Even so, Ampère was able to make profound contribu-
tions to the field of mathematics, chemistry, and physics.
As a young man, Ampère was appointed as professor 
of chemistry and physics in Bourg. Napoleon was a 
great supporter of Ampère’s work, though Ampère had 
a reputation as an “absent-minded professor.” Later he moved to Paris, where he taught
mathematics.
Ampère showed that two current-carrying wires were attracted to one another when the cur-
rent in the wires was in the same direction. When the current in the wires was in the opposite
direction, the wires repelled. This work set the stage for the discovery of the principles of electric
and magnetic ﬁeld theory. Ampère was the ﬁrst scientist to use electromagnetic principles to
measure current in a wire. In recognition of his contribution to the study of electricity, current is
measured in the unit of amperes.
Despite his personal suffering, Ampère remained a popular, friendly human being. He died of
pneumonia in Marseille on June 10, 1836 after a brief illness. I
Hulton Archive/Stringer/Hulton Archive/Getty Images
9.1 Superposition
Theorem
NOTES...
The superposition theorem does not
apply to power, since power is not a
linear quantity, but rather is found
as the square of either current or
voltage.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.1 | Superposition Theorem
291
EXAMPLE 9–1        
Consider the circuit of Figure 9–1:
a. Determine the current in the load resistor, RL.
b. Verify that the superposition theorem does not apply to power.
Solution
a. We ﬁrst determine the current through RL due to the voltage source 
by removing the current source and replacing in with an open circuit (zero
amps) as shown in Figure 9–2.
The resulting current through RL is determined from Ohm’s law as
IL(1)  
16 
20

V
24 
  0.500 A
Next, we determine the current through RL due to the current source by
removing the voltage source and replacing it with a short circuit (zero
volts) as shown in Figure 9–3.
The resulting current through RL is found with the current divider
rule as
IL(2)  
24 
24


16 
(2 A)  1.20 A
The resultant current through RL is found by applying the superposition
theorem:
IL  0.5 A  1.2 A  0.700 A
The negative sign indicates that the current through RL is opposite to the
assumed reference direction. Consequently, the current through RL will, in
fact, be upward with a magnitude of 0.7 A.
b. If we assume (incorrectly) that the superposition theorem applies for power,
we will have the power due the ﬁrst source given as
P1  I2
L(1)RL  (0.5 A)2(16 )  4.0 W
and the power due the second source as
P2  I2
L(2)RL  (1.2 A)2(16 )  23.04 W
The total power, if superposition applies, will be
PT  P1  P2  4.0 W  23.04 W  27.04 W
Clearly, this result is wrong, since the actual power dissipated by the load
resistor is correctly given as
PL  I2
LRL  (0.7 A)2(16 )  7.84 W
FIGURE 9–1
R1
24 
I
2 A
IL
RL
16 
E
20 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–3
FIGURE 9–2
R1
24 
RL
16 
Current source
replaced with an
open circuit
E
20 V
IL (1)
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
24 
RL
16 
IL (2)
I
2 A
Voltage source
replaced with a
short circuit
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The superposition theorem may also be used to determine the voltage
across any component or branch within the circuit.
292
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
EXAMPLE 9–2       
Determine the voltage drop across the resistor R2 of the circuit shown in Figure 9–4.
R3
1.6 k
E1
16 V
I
5 mA
R2
1.6 k
R1
VR2


E2
2.4 k
32 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–4
FIGURE 9–5
Solution
Since this circuit has three separate sources, it is necessary to deter-
mine the voltage across R2 due to each individual source.
First, we consider the voltage across R2 due to the 16-V source as shown in
Figure 9–5.
R3
1.6 k
R2
1.6 k
R1
VR2 (1)


2.4 k
R2  R3 = 0.8 k
E1
16 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
The voltage across R2 will be the same as the voltage across the parallel combi-
nation of R2R3  0.8 k. Therefore,
VR2(1)  
0.8 k
0.8

k
2.4 k
(16 V)  4.00 V
The negative sign in the preceding calculation simply indicates that the voltage
across the resistor due to the ﬁrst source is opposite to the assumed reference
polarity.
Next, we consider the current source. The resulting circuit is shown in
Figure 9–6. From this circuit, you can observe that the total resistance “seen” by
the current source is
RT  R1R2R3  0.6 k
The resulting voltage across R2 is
VR2(2)  (0.6 k)(5 mA)  3.00 V
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In this section, we will apply one of the most important theorems of electric
circuits. Thévenin’s theorem allows even the most complicated circuit to be
reduced to a single voltage source and a single resistance. The importance of
such a theorem becomes evident when we try to analyze a circuit as shown in
Figure 9–8.
If we wanted to ﬁnd the current through the variable load resistor when 
RL  0, RL  2 k, and RL  5 k using existing methods, we would need to
Section 9.2 | Thévenin’s Theorem
293
Finally, the voltage due to the 32-V source is found by analyzing the circuit of
Figure 9–7. The voltage across R2 is
VR2(3) 
0.96 k
0

.96

k
1.6 k
(32 V)  12.0 V
By superposition, the resulting voltage is
VR2  4.0 V  3.0 V  12.0 V  11.0 V
FIGURE 9–6
R3
1.6 k
I
5 mA
R2
1.6 k
R1
VR2 (2)


2.4 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–7
R3
1.6 k
R2
1.6 k
R1
VR2 (3)


2.4 k
E2
32 V
R1  R2 = 0.96 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
Use the superposition theorem to determine the voltage across R1 and R3 in the
circuit of Figure 9–4.
Answers
VR1  27.0 V, VR3  21.0 V
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
Use the ﬁnal results of Example 9–2 and Practice Problem 1 to determine the
power dissipated by the resistors in the circuit of Figure 9–4. Verify that the
superposition theorem does not apply to power.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
9.2 Thévenin’s
Theorem
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

analyze the entire circuit three separate times. However, if we can reduce the
entire circuit external to the load resistor to a single voltage source in series
with a resistor, the solution becomes very easy.
Thévenin’s theorem is a circuit analysis technique that reduces any linear
bilateral network to an equivalent circuit having only one voltage source and
one series resistor. The resulting two-terminal circuit is equivalent to the orig-
inal circuit when connected to any external branch or component. In summary,
Thévenin’s theorem is simpliﬁed as follows:
Any linear bilateral network may be reduced to a simpliﬁed two-terminal
circuit consisting of a single voltage source in series with a single resistor as
shown in Figure 9–9.
A linear network, remember, is any network that consists of components
having a linear (straight-line) relationship between voltage and current. A
resistor is a good example of a linear component since the voltage across a
resistor increases proportionally to an increase in current through the resistor.
Voltage and current sources are also linear components. In the case of a volt-
age source, the voltage remains constant, although current through the source
may change.
A bilateral network is any network that operates in the same manner
regardless of the direction of current in the network. Again, a resistor is a
good example of a bilateral component, since the magnitude of current
through the resistor is not dependent upon the polarity of voltage across the
component. (A diode is not a bilateral component, since the magnitude of
current through the device is dependent upon the polarity of the voltage
applied across the diode.)
The following steps provide a technique that converts any circuit into its
Thévenin equivalent:
1. Identify and remove the load from the circuit.
2. Label the resulting two terminals. We will label them as a and b, although
any notation may be used.
3. Set all sources in the circuit to zero.
Voltage sources are set to zero by replacing them with short circuits (zero
volts).
Current sources are set to zero by replacing them with open circuits (zero
amps).
4. Determine the Thévenin equivalent resistance, RTh, by calculating the
resistance “seen” between terminals a and b. It may be necessary to redraw
the circuit to simplify this step.
5. Replace the sources removed in Step 3, and determine the open-circuit
voltage between the terminals. If the circuit has more than one source, it
may be necessary to use the superposition theorem. In that case, it will be
294
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
FIGURE 9–9
R1
6 k
E
15 V
I
5 mA
R2
2 k
RL
0→5 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–8
ETh
RTh
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

necessary to determine the open-circuit voltage due to each source sepa-
rately and then determine the combined effect. The resulting open-circuit
voltage will be the value of the Thévenin voltage, ETh.
6. Draw the Thévenin equivalent circuit using the resistance determined in
Step 4 and the voltage calculated in Step 5. As part of the resulting circuit,
include that portion of the network removed in Step 1.
Section 9.2 | Thévenin’s Theorem
295
EXAMPLE 9–3        
Determine the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to the resistor RL for the cir-
cuit of Figure 9–10. Use the Thévenin equivalent circuit to calculate the current
through RL.
Solution
Steps 1 and 2: Removing the load resistor from the circuit and labelling the
remaining terminals, we obtain the circuit shown in Figure 9–11.
Step 3: Setting the sources to zero, we have the circuit shown in Figure 9–12.
Step 4: The Thévenin resistance between the terminals is RTh  24 .
FIGURE 9–12
FIGURE 9–11
R1
24 
I
2 A
E
20 V
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–10
R1
24 
I
2 A
RL
16 
E
20 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
24 
RTh = 24 
Voltage source
replaced with a
short circuit
a
b
Current source
replaced with an
open circuit
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

296
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
Step 5: From Figure 9–11, the open-circuit voltage between terminals a and b
is found as
Vab  20 V  (24 )(2 A)  28.0 V
Step 6: The resulting Thévenin equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 9–13.
Using this Thévenin equivalent circuit, we easily ﬁnd the current through RL as
IL 
24 
28

V
16 
  0.700 A
(upward)
This result is the same as that obtained by using the superposition theorem in
Example 9–1.
ETh
RTh
RL = 16 
a
b
28 V
24 


VL
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–13
EXAMPLE 9–4       
Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit of the indicated area in Figure 9–14. Using
the equivalent circuit, determine the current through the load resistor when 
RL  0, RL  2 k, and RL  5 k.
FIGURE 9–14
Solution
Steps 1, 2, and 3: After removing the load, labelling the terminals, and setting
the sources to zero, we have the circuit shown in Figure 9–15.
CircuitSim 09-1 
R1
6 k
E
15 V
I
5 mA R2
2 k
RL
0→5 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.2 | Thévenin’s Theorem
297
Step 4: The Thévenin resistance of the circuit is
RTh  6 k2 k  1.5 k
Step 5: Although several methods are possible, we will use the superposition
theorem to ﬁnd the open-circuit voltage Vab. Figure 9–16 shows the circuit for
determining the contribution due to the 15-V source.
Vab(1) 
2 k
2

k
6 k
(15 V)  3.75 V
FIGURE 9–15
Figure 9–17 shows the circuit for determining the contribution due to the 5-mA
source.
Vab(2) 
2
(2
k
k



)(6
6
k
k


)
(5 mA)  7.5 V
The Thévenin equivalent voltage is
ETh  Vab(1)  Vab(2)  3.75 V  7.5 V  11.25 V
Step 6: The resulting Thévenin equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 9–18.
R1
6 k
I
5 mA
R2
2 k
Vab (2)




© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
6 k
R2
2 k
Vab (1)




E
15 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–16
FIGURE 9–17
FIGURE 9–18
R1
6 k
RTh = 6 k  2 k
Voltage source
replaced with a
short circuit
a
b
Current source
replaced with an
open circuit
R2
2 k
= 1.5 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
ETh
RTh
RL =
0→5 k
a
b
11.25 V
1.5 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

298
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
From this circuit, it is now an easy matter to determine the current for any value
of load resistor:
RL  0 :
IL  
1
1
1
.5
.2
k
5

V
  7.5 mA
RL  2 k:
IL  
1.5
1
k
1

.2

5 V
2 k
  3.21 mA
RL  5 k:
IL  
1.5
1
k
1

.2

5 V
5 k
  1.73 mA
EXAMPLE 9–5       
Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to R5 in the circuit in Figure 9–19.
Use the equivalent circuit to determine the current through the resistor.
Solution
Notice that the circuit is an unbalanced bridge circuit. If the tech-
niques of the previous chapter had to be used, we would need to solve either
three mesh equations or three nodal equations.
Steps 1 and 2: Removing the resistor R5 from the circuit and labelling the two
terminals a and b, we obtain the circuit shown in Figure 9–20.
By examining the circuit shown in Figure 9–20, we see that it is no simple
task to determine the equivalent circuit between terminals a and b. The process
is simpliﬁed by redrawing the circuit as illustrated in Figure 9–21.
Notice that the circuit of Figure 9–21 has nodes a and b conveniently shown
at the top and bottom of the circuit. Additional nodes (node c and node d) are
added to simplify the task of correctly placing resistors between the nodes.
After simplifying a circuit, it is always a good idea to ensure that the result-
ing circuit is indeed an equivalent circuit. You may verify the equivalence of the
two circuits by conﬁrming that each component is connected between the same
nodes for each circuit.
Now that we have a circuit that is easier to analyze, we ﬁnd the Thévenin
equivalent of the resultant.
Step 3: Setting the voltage source to zero by replacing it with a short, we obtain
the circuit shown in Figure 9–22.
Step 4: The resulting Thévenin resistance is
RTh  10 20   20 50 
 6.67   14.29   20.95 
E
R3
10 V
20 
R1
10 
R2
R4
R5
30 
20 
50 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–21
FIGURE 9–22
FIGURE 9–20
FIGURE 9–19
E
R3
10 V
20 
R1 10  R2
R4
a
b
20 
50 
d
c
© Cengage Learning 2013
b
a
c
d
10 
20 
10 V
20 
50 
E
R1
R3
R2
R4
© Cengage Learning 2013
b
a
10 
20 
20 
50 
R1
R3
R2
R4
c
d
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.2 | Thévenin’s Theorem
299
FIGURE 9–24
FIGURE 9–23
b
a
10 
20 
20 
50 
R1
R3
E
R2
R4








I1
I2
10 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
Step 5: The open-circuit voltage between terminals a and b is found by ﬁrst
indicating the loop currents I1 and I2 in the circuit of Figure 9–23.
Because the voltage source E provides a constant voltage across the resistor
combinations R1-R3 and R2-R4, we simply use the voltage divider rule to deter-
mine the voltage across the various components:
Vab  VR1  VR2
 
(10 
30
)(

10 V)
  
(20 
70
)(

10 V)

 0.476 V
Note: The preceding technique could not be used if the source had some series
resistance, since then the voltage provided to resistor combinations R1-R3 and
R2-R4 would no longer be the entire supply voltage but rather would be depen-
dent upon the value of the series resistance of the source.
Step 6: The resulting Thévenin circuit is shown in Figure 9–24.
From the circuit of Figure 9–24, it is now possible to calculate the current
through the resistor R5 as
I 
20.9
0
5
.4

76

V
30 
  9.34 mA
(from b to a)
This example illustrates the importance of labelling the terminals that remain
after a component or branch is removed. If we had not labelled the terminals and
drawn an equivalent circuit, the current through R5 would not have been found
as easily.
Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to resistor R1 in the circuit of
Figure 9–1.
Answer
RTh  16 , ETh  52 V
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
Use Thévenin’s theorem to determine the current through load resistor RL for the
circuit of Figure 9–25.
Answer
IL  10.0 mA (upward)
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
ETh
RTh
R5
a
b
0.476 V
30 
20.95 
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Norton’s theorem is a circuit analysis technique that is similar to Thévenin’s
theorem. By using this theorem we reduce the circuit to a single current source
and one parallel resistor. As with the Thévenin equivalent circuit, the resulting
two-terminal circuit is equivalent to the original circuit when connected to any
external branch or component. In summary, Norton’s theorem may be simpli-
ﬁed as follows:
Any linear bilateral network may be reduced to a simpliﬁed two-terminal
circuit consisting of a single current source and a single shunt resistor as
shown in Figure 9–26.
The following steps provide a technique that allows the conversion of any
circuit into its Norton equivalent:
1. Identify and remove the load from the circuit.
2. Label the resulting two terminals. We will label them as a and b, although
any notation may be used.
3. Set all sources to zero. As before, voltage sources are set to zero by replac-
ing them with short circuits, and current sources are set to zero by replacing
them with open circuits.
4. Determine the Norton equivalent resistance, RN, by calculating the resis-
tance seen between terminals a and b. It may be necessary to redraw the
circuit to simplify this step.
5. Replace the sources removed in Step 3, and determine the current that
would occur in a short if the short were connected between terminals a and
b. If the original circuit has more than one source, it may be necessary to
use the superposition theorem. In this case, it will be necessary to deter-
mine the short-circuit current due to each source separately and then deter-
mine the combined effect. The resulting short-circuit current will be the
value of the Norton current IN.
300
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
FIGURE 9–25
RL
300 
E
10 V
200 
80 
I
50 mA
R2
R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–26
In the circuit of Figure 9–25, what would the value of R1 need to be for the
Thévenin resistance to be equal to RL  80 ?
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
9.3 Norton’s Theorem
IN
RN
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6. Sketch the Norton equivalent circuit using the resistance determined in
Step 4 and the current calculated in Step 5. As part of the resulting circuit,
include that portion of the network removed in Step 1.
The Norton equivalent circuit may also be determined directly from the
Thévenin equivalent circuit by using the source conversion technique devel-
oped in Chapter 8. As a result, the Thévenin and Norton circuits shown in
Figure 9–27 are equivalent.
Section 9.3 | Norton’s Theorem
301
FIGURE 9–27
IN = ETh
        RN
RN = RTh
a
b
ETh = INRN
RTh = RN
a
b
Thévenin equivalent circuit
Norton equivalent circuit
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 9–6        
Determine the Norton equivalent circuit external to the resistor RL for the circuit of
Figure 9–28. Use the Norton equivalent circuit to calculate the current through RL.
Compare the results to those obtained using Thévenin’s theorem in Example 9–3.
Solution
Steps 1 and 2: Remove load resistor RL from the circuit and label the remain-
ing terminals as a and b. The resulting circuit is shown in Figure 9–29.
Step 3: Zero the voltage and current sources as shown in the circuit of Figure 9–30.
Step 4: The resulting Norton resistance between the terminals is
RN  Rab  24 
Step 5: The short-circuit current is determined by ﬁrst calculating the current
through the short due to each source. The circuit for each calculation is illus-
trated in Figure 9–31.
Voltage Source, E: The current in the short between terminals a and b
[Figure 9–31(a)] is found from Ohm’s law as
Iab(1)  
2
2
4
0

V
  0.833 A
R1
24 
I2
2 A
RL
16 
E
20 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–28
R1
24 
I
2 A
E
20 V
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–29
From Figure 9–27 we see that the relationship between the circuits is as
follows:
ETh  INRN
(9–1)
IN  
E
R
T
T
h
h

(9–2)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

302
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
Current Source, I: By examining the circuit for the current source [Figure 9–31(b)]
we see that the short circuit between terminals a and b effectively removes R1 from
the circuit. Therefore, the current through the short will be
Iab(2)  2.00 A
Notice that the current Iab is indicated as being a negative quantity. As we have
seen before, this result merely indicates that the actual current is opposite to the
assumed reference direction.
Now, applying the superposition theorem, we ﬁnd the Norton current as
IN  Iab(1)  Iab(2)  0.833 A  2.0 A  1.167 A
As before, the negative sign indicates that the short-circuit current is actually
from terminal b toward terminal a.
Step 6: The resultant Norton equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 9–32. Now we
can easily ﬁnd the current through load resistor RL by using the current divider rule:
IL 
24 
24


16 
(1.167 A)  0.700 A
(upward)
By referring to Example 9–3, we see that the same result was obtained by ﬁnd-
ing the Thévenin equivalent circuit. An alternate method of ﬁnding the Norton
FIGURE 9–32
FIGURE 9–30
(b) Current source
I
2 A
R1
24 
Iab (2)
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
Notice that R1 is
shorted by the short 
circuit between a and b
R1
24 
Iab (1)
20 V
E
a
b
(a) Voltage source
FIGURE 9–31
RN
IN
RL
24 
16 
1.167 A
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
24 
RN = 24 
Voltage source
replaced with a
short circuit
Current source replaced
with an open circuit
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.3 | Norton’s Theorem
303
equivalent circuit is to convert the Thévenin circuit found in Example 9–3 into
its equivalent Norton circuit shown in Figure 9–33.
IN = 28 V
        24 
= 1.167 A
RN  = RTh = 24 
a
b
ETh
RTh
a
b
28 V
24 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–33
EXAMPLE 9–7        
Find the Norton equivalent of the circuit external to resistor RL in the circuit in
Figure 9–34. Use the equivalent circuit to determine the load current IL when
RL  0, 2 k, and 5 k.
Solution
Steps 1, 2, and 3:After removing the load resistor, labelling the remaining two ter-
minals a and b, and setting the sources to zero, we have the circuit of Figure 9–35.
FIGURE 9–34
R1
6 k
RN = 6 k2 k
Voltage source
replaced with a
short circuit
a
b
Current source
replaced with an
open circuit
R2
2 k
= 1.5 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–35
R1
6 k
E
15 V
I
5 mA
R2
2 k
RL = 0→5 k
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

304
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
Step 4: The Norton resistance of the circuit is found as
RN  6 k2 k  1.5 k
Step 5: The value of the Norton constant-current source is found by determin-
ing the current effects due to each independent source acting on a short circuit
between terminals a and b.
Voltage Source, E: Referring to Figure 9–36(a), a short circuit between termi-
nals a and b eliminates resistor R2 from the circuit. The short-circuit current due
to the voltage source is
Iab(1)  
6
15
k
V
  2.50 mA
R1
6 k
R2
2 k
Iab (1)
E
15 V
(a)
a
b
(b)
R1
6 k
I
5 mA
R2
2 k
Iab (2)
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
Current Source, I: Referring to Figure 9–36(b), the short circuit between termi-
nals a and b eliminates both resistors R1 and R2. The short-circuit current due to
the current source is therefore
Iab(2)  5.00 mA
The resultant Norton current is found from superposition as
IN  Iab(1)  Iab(2)  2.50 mA  5.00 mA  7.50 mA
Step 6: The Norton equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 9–37.
Let RL  0: The current IL must equal the source current, and so
IL  7.50 mA
Let RL  2 k: The current IL is found from the current divider rule as
IL 
1.5 k
1

.5

k
2 k
(7.50 mA)  3.21 mA
Let RL  5 k: Using the current divider rule again, the current IL is found as
IL 
1.5 k
1

.5

k
5 k
(7.50 mA)  1.73 mA
Comparing the preceding results to those obtained in Example 9–4, we see that
they are precisely the same.
IN
7.5 mA
RN
1.5 k
RL =
0→5 k
IL
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–37
FIGURE 9–36
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.3 | Norton’s Theorem
305
EXAMPLE 9–8        
Consider the circuit of Figure 9–38:
a. Find the Norton equivalent circuit external to terminals a and b.
b. Determine the current through RL.
Solution
a. Steps 1 and 2: After removing the load, (which consists of a current
source in parallel with a resistor), we have the circuit of Figure 9–39.
Step 3: After zeroing the sources, we have the network shown in
Figure 9–40.
R1
R2
E
560 mA
280 
120 
a
b
I
24 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
280 
120 
R2
RN  = 120   280 
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
Step 4: The Norton equivalent resistance is found as
RN  120 280   84 
Step 5: In order to determine the Norton current we must again determine
the short-circuit current due to each source separately and then combine
the results using the superposition theorem.
Voltage Source, E: Referring to Figure 9–41(a), notice that the resistor R2
is shorted by the short circuit between terminals a and b, and so the cur-
rent in the short circuit is
Iab(1)  
1
2
2
4
0
V

  0.2 A  200 mA
Current Source, I: Referring to Figure 9–41(b), the short circuit between termi-
nals a and b will now eliminate both resistors. The current through the short will
FIGURE 9–40
FIGURE 9–39
FIGURE 9–38
R2
R1
RL
I
E
24 V
120 
280 
560 mA
180 mA
168 
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(b)
R1
120 
I
560 mA
R2
280 
Iab (2)
a
b
Both resistors are shorted
by the short circuit between
terminals a and b
© Cengage Learning 2013
306
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
simply be the source current. However, since the current will not be from a to b
but rather in the opposite direction, we write
Iab(2)  560 mA
Now the Norton current is found as the summation of the short-circuit currents
due to each source:
IN  Iab(1)  Iab(2)  200 mA  (560 mA)  360 mA
The negative sign in the preceding calculation for current indicates that if a
short circuit were placed between terminals a and b, current would actually 
be in the direction from b to a. The Norton equivalent circuit is shown in 
Figure 9–42.
FIGURE 9–42
FIGURE 9–41
R1
120 
R2
280 
Iab (1)
a
b
This resistor is shorted by
the short circuit between
terminals a and b
E
(a)
24 
b. The current through the load resistor is found by applying the current
divider rule:
IL 
84 
8

4 
168 
(360 mA  180 mA)  60 mA
(upward)
IN
RN
RL
84 
168 
180 mA
360 mA
a
b
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.3 | Norton’s Theorem
307
Find the Norton equivalent of the circuit shown in Figure 9–43. Use the source
conversion technique to determine the Thévenin equivalent of the circuit
between points a and b.
Answers
RN  RTh  17.6 , IN  0.05 A, ETh  0.88 V
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
R1
66 
E
3.3 V
R2
24 
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–43
Find the Norton equivalent external to RL in the circuit of Figure 9–44. Solve
for the current IL when RL  0, 10 k, 50 k, and 100 k.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
70 V
60 k
35 V
30 k
E2
15 k
R2
E1
RL = 0→100 k
R3
R1
IL
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
Answers
RN  42 k, IN  1.00 mA
For RL  0: IL  1.00 mA
For RL  10 k: IL  0.808 mA
For RL  50 k: IL  0.457 mA
For RL  100 k: IL  0.296 mA
FIGURE 9–44
1. Show the relationship between the Thévenin equivalent circuit and the Norton
equivalent circuit. Sketch each circuit.
2. If a Thévenin equivalent circuit has ETh  100 mV and RTh  500 , draw the
corresponding Norton equivalent circuit.
3. If a Norton equivalent circuit has IN  10 A and RN  20 k, draw the cor-
responding Thévenin equivalent circuit.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In ampliﬁers and in most communication circuits such as radio receivers and
transmitters, it is often desired that the load receive the maximum amount of
power from a source.
The maximum power transfer theorem states the following:
A load resistance will receive maximum power from a circuit when the
resistance of the load is exactly the same as the Thévenin (Norton) resistance
looking back at the circuit.
The proof for the maximum power transfer theorem is determined from the
Thévenin equivalent circuit and involves the use of calculus. This theorem is
proved in Appendix C.
From Figure 9–45 we see that once the network has been simpliﬁed using
either Thévenin’s or Norton’s theorem, maximum power will occur when
RL  RTh  RN
(9–3)
Examining the equivalent circuits of Figure 9–45, shows that the following
equations determine the power delivered to the load:
PL 
which gives
PL  
(RL
E

2
ThR
R
L
Th)2

(9–4)
Similarly,
PL 
RL
IN

RN
RN

2
 RL
(9–5)
Under maximum power conditions (RL  RTh  RN), the preceding equa-
tions may be used to determine the maximum power delivered to the load and
may therefore be written as
Pmax  
4
E
R
2
T
T
h
h

(9–6)
Pmax  
I2
N
4
RN

(9–7)

RL 
RL
RTh
  ETh
2

RL
308
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
FIGURE 9–45
9.4 Maximum Power
Transfer Theorem
ETh
RTh
a
b
RL
IL
(a)
(b)
IN
RN
a
b
RL
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
NOTES...
Optional problems and derivations
using calculus are marked by a 
icon. These may be omitted without
loss of continuity by those who do
not require calculus.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If the data from Table 9–1 are plotted on linear graphs, the graphs will appear
as shown in Figures 9–47, 9–48, and 9–49.
Section 9.4 | Maximum Power Transfer Theorem
309
EXAMPLE 9–9        
For the circuit of Figure 9–46, sketch graphs of VL, IL, and PL as functions of RL.
ETh
RTh
RL 
0→10 
10 V
5 


VL
b
a
© Cengage Learning 2013
RL ()
VL (V)
IL (A)
PL (W)
0
0
2.000
0
1
1.667
1.667
2.778
2
2.857
1.429
4.082
3
3.750
1.250
4.688
4
4.444
1.111
4.938
5
5.000
1.000
5.000
6
5.455
0.909
4.959
7
5.833
0.833
4.861
8
6.154
0.769
4.734
9
6.429
0.714
4.592
10
6.667
0.667
4.444
TABLE 9–1
Solution
We may ﬁrst set up a table of data for various values of resistance, RL.
See Table 9–1. Voltage and current values are determined by using the voltage
divider rule and Ohm’s law, respectively. The power PL for each value of resis-
tance is determined by ﬁnding the product PL  VLIL, or by using Equation 9–4.
FIGURE 9–46
10
5
6.67
0
0
5
10
RL ()
VL (V)
© Cengage Learning 2013
2.0
0
0.667
1.0
0
5
10
RL ()
IL (A)
© Cengage Learning 2013
5
0
0
5
10
RL ()
PL (W)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–47
Voltage versus RL.
FIGURE 9–48
Current versus RL.
FIGURE 9–49
Power versus RL.
Notice in the graphs that although voltage across the load increases as 
RL increases, the power delivered to the load will be a maximum when RL 
RTh  5 . The reason for this apparent contradiction is because, as RL
increases, the reduction in current more than offsets the corresponding increase
in voltage.
EXAMPLE 9–10        
Consider the circuit of Figure 9–50:
a. Determine the value of load resistance required to ensure that maximum
power is transferred to the load.
b. Find VL, IL, and PL when maximum power is delivered to the load.
CircuitSim 09-2 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Recall that efﬁciency was deﬁned as the ratio of output power to input power:
h  
P
P
o
i
u
n
t
or as a percentage:
h  
P
P
o
i
u
n
t  100%
By using the maximum power transfer theorem, we see that under the con-
dition of maximum power the efﬁciency of the circuit is
h  
P
P
o
i
u
n
t  100%

 100%  0.500  100%  50%
(9–8)

4
E
R
2
T
T
h
h



2
E
R
2
T
T
h
h

310
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
Solution
a. In order to determine the conditions for maximum power transfer, it is ﬁrst
necessary to determine the equivalent circuit external to the load. We may
determine either the Thévenin equivalent circuit or the Norton equivalent
circuit. This circuit was analyzed in Example 9–4 using Thévenin’s
theorem, and we determined the equivalent circuit to be as shown in
Figure 9–51.
Maximum power will be transferred to the load when RL  1.5 k.
b. Letting RL  1.5 k, we see that half of the Thévenin voltage will appear
across the load resistor and half will appear across the Thévenin resistance.
So, at maximum power,
VL  E
2
Th  
11.2
2
5 V
  5.625 V
IL  
5
1
.
.
6
5
2
k
5

V
  3.750 mA
The power delivered to the load is found as
PL  V
RL
2
L  
(5
1
.6
.5
25
k
V)2
  21.1 mW
Or, alternatively using current, we calculate the power as
PL  I2
LRL  (3.75 mA)2(1.5 k)  21.1 mW
In solving this problem, we could just as easily have used the Norton
equivalent circuit to determine required values.
R1
6 k
E
15 V
I
5 mA
R2
2 k
0→5 k
RL
VL


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–50
FIGURE 9–51
ETh
RTh
RL  
0→5 k
a
b
11.25 V
1.5 k


VL
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For communication circuits and for many ampliﬁer circuits, 50% repre-
sents the maximum possible efﬁciency. At this efﬁciency level, the voltage
presented to the following stage would only be half of the maximum terminal
voltage.
In power transmission such as the 115-Vac, 60-Hz power in your home, the
condition of maximum power is not a requirement. Under the condition of
maximum power transfer, the voltage across the load will be reduced to half of
the maximum available terminal voltage. Clearly, if we are working with power
supplies, we would like to ensure that efﬁciency is brought as close to 100% as
possible. In such cases, load resistance RL is kept much larger than the internal
resistance of the voltage source (typically RL 	 10Rint), ensuring that the volt-
age appearing across the load will be very nearly equal to the maximum ter-
minal voltage of the voltage source.
Section 9.4 | Maximum Power Transfer Theorem
311
EXAMPLE 9–11        
Refer to the circuit of Figure 9–52, which represents a typical dc power supply.
a. Determine the value of RL needed for maximum power transfer.
b. Determine terminal voltage VL and the efﬁciency when the value of the
load resistor is RL  50 .
c. Determine terminal voltage VL and the efﬁciency when the value of the
load resistor is RL  100 .
Solution
a. For maximum power transfer, the load resistor will be given as RL  0.05 .
At this value of load resistance, the efﬁciency will be only 50%.
b. For RL  50 , the voltage appearing across the output terminals of the
voltage source is
VL 
50 
5

0 
0.05 
(9.0 V)  8.99 V
The efﬁciency is
h  
P
P
o
i
u
n
t  100%

 100%
 
1
1
.
.
6
6
1
1
6
8
8
4
W
W
  100%  99.90%
c. For RL  100 , the voltage appearing across the output terminals of the
voltage source is
VL 
100 
10

0 
0.05 
(9.0 V)  8.995 50 V

(8
5
.9
0
9

V)2



5
(9
0
.
.
0
05
V

)2

E
Rint
RL 
0→100 
9.0 V
0.05 


VL
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–52
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

312
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
The efﬁciency is
h  
P
P
o
i
u
n
t  100%

 100%
 
1
1
.
.
6
6
1
1
6
8
8
4
W
W
  100%  99.95%
From this example, we see that if efﬁciency is important, as it is in power trans-
mission, then the load resistance should be much larger than the resistance of
the source (typically RL 	 10Rint). If, on the other hand, it is more important to
ensure maximum power transfer, then the load resistance should equal the
source resistance (RL  Rint).

(8.
1
9
0
9
0
55

V)2



1
(
0
9
0
.0
.0
V
5
)

2

Refer to the circuit of Figure 9–44. For what value of RL will the load receive
maximum power? Determine the power when RL  RN, when RL  25 k, and
when RL  50 k.
Answers
RL  42 k: PL  10.5 mW
RL  25 k: PL  9.82 mW
RL  50 k: PL  10.42 mW
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
A Thévenin equivalent circuit consists of ETh  10 V and RTh  2 k.
Determine the efﬁciency of the circuit when
a. RL  RTh
b. RL  0.5RTh
c. RL  2RTh
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
1. In what instances is maximum power transfer a desirable characteristic of 
a circuit?
2. In what instances is maximum power transfer an undesirable characteristic of 
a circuit?
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 5
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The substitution theorem states the following:
Any branch within a circuit may be replaced by an equivalent branch, pro-
vided the replacement branch has the same current through it and voltage
across it as the original branch.
This theorem is best illustrated by examining the operation of a circuit.
Consider the circuit of Figure 9–53.
The voltage Vab and the current I in the circuit of Figure 9–53 are given as
Vab 
4 k
6

k
6 k
(10 V)  6.0 V
and
I  
4 k
10

V
6 k
  1 mA
The resistor R2 may be replaced with any combination of components, pro-
vided that the resulting components maintain the preceding conditions. We see
that the branches of Figure 9–54 are each equivalent to the original branch
between terminals a and b of the circuit in Figure 9–53.
Although each of the branches in Figure 9–54 is different, the current
entering or leaving each branch will be same as that in the original branch.
Similarly, the voltage across each branch will be the same. If any of these
branches is substituted into the original circuit, the balance of the circuit will
operate in the same way as the original. It is left as an exercise for the student
to verify that each circuit behaves the same as the original.
This theorem allows us to replace any branch within a given circuit with
an equivalent branch, thereby simplifying the analysis of the remaining circuit.
Section 9.5 | Substitution Theorem
313
9.5 Substitution
Theorem
FIGURE 9–53
FIGURE 9–54
E
R1
10 V
4 k


a
b
R2
6 k   Vab
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
1 mA
6 V
4 V
2 k
a
b
1 mA
6 V


a
b
6 V

6 V

1 mA
2 V
8 k
a
b
1 mA
a
b
1 mA
6 V


3 k
a
b
1 mA
6 V


1 mA


© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 9–12        
If the indicated portion in the circuit of Figure 9–55 is to be replaced with a cur-
rent source and a 240- shunt resistor, determine the magnitude and direction
of the required current source.
Solution
The voltage across the branch in the original circuit is
Vab 
(20 V) 
16 
24


24 
(20 V)  12.0 V
40 60 

16   (40 60 )
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Millman’s theorem is used to simplify circuits having several parallel voltage
sources as illustrated in Figure 9–57. Although any of the other theorems devel-
oped in this chapter will work in this case, Millman’s theorem provides a much
simpler and more direct equivalent.
In circuits of the type shown in Figure 9–57, the voltage sources may be
replaced with a single equivalent source as shown in Figure 9–58.
To ﬁnd the values of the equivalent voltage source Eeq and series resistance
Req, we need to convert each of the voltage sources of Figure 9–57 into its
equivalent current source using the technique developed in Chapter 8. The
value of each current source would be determined by using Ohm’s law (i.e.,
I1  E1/R1, I2  E2/R2, etc.). After the source conversions are completed, the
circuit appears as shown in Figure 9–59.
314
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
which results in a current of
I  
1
6
2
0
.0

V
  0.200 A  200 mA
In order to maintain the same terminal voltage, Vab  12.0 V, the current
through resistor R4  240  must be
IR4  
1
2
2
4
.
0
0

V
  0.050 A  50 mA
Finally, we know that the current entering terminal a is I  200 mA. In order
for Kirchhoff’s current law to be satisﬁed at this node, the current source must
have a magnitude of 150 mA and the direction must be downward, as shown in
Figure 9–56.
FIGURE 9–55
R4
240 
I = 200 mA
150 mA
I4
12 V


50 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–56
9.6 Millman’s
Theorem
En
Rn
RL
E1
R1
E2
R2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–57
Req
RL
Eeq
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
R2
In
Rn
RL
I2
I1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–58
FIGURE 9–59
(a)
R3
16 
I
60 
40 
20 V
R2
R1
a
b
(b)
R4
a
b
?
240 
I4
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

From the circuit of Figure 9–59 we see that all of the current sources have
the same direction. Clearly, this will not always be the case since the direction
of each current source will be determined by the initial polarity of the corre-
sponding voltage source.
It is now possible to replace the n current sources with a single current
source having a magnitude given as
Ieq  
n
x0
Ix  I1  I2  I3  …  In
(9–9)
which may be written as
Ieq  E
R
1
1
  E
R
2
2
  E
R
3
3
  …  E
R
n
n

(9–10)
If the direction of any current source is opposite to the direction shown,
then the corresponding magnitude will be subtracted, rather than added. From
Figure 9–59, we see that removing the current sources results in an equivalent
resistance given as
Req  R1R2R3…Rn
(9–11)
which may be determined as
Req  G
1
eq
 
(9–12)
The general expression for the equivalent voltage is
Eeq  IeqReq 
(9–13)
E
R
1
1
  E
R
2
2
  E
R
3
3
  …  E
R
n
n


R
1
1
  R
1
2
  R
1
3
  …  R
1
n

1

R
1
1
  R
1
2
  R
1
3
  …  R
1
n

Section 9.6 | Millman’s Theorem
315
EXAMPLE 9–13        
Use Millman’s theorem to simplify the circuit of Figure 9–60 so that it has only a
single source. Use the simpliﬁed circuit to ﬁnd the current in the load resistor, RL.
80 V
800 
E3
R3
RL = 192 
96 V
240 
E1
R1
40 V
200 
E2
R2
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–60
Solution
From Equation 9–13, we express the equivalent voltage source as
Vab  Eeq 
Vab  
1

0.
0
4
.
2
30
m
0
S
  28.8 V


24
9
0
6

V
  
2
4
0
0
0
V

  

80
8
0
0

V



240
1

  
200
1

  
800
1


Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The reciprocity theorem is a theorem that can only be used with single-source
circuits. This theorem, however, may be applied to either voltage sources or
current sources. The theorem states the following:
Voltage Sources
A voltage source causing a current I in any branch of a circuit may be removed
from the original location and placed into that branch having the current I. The
voltage source in the new location will produce a current in the original source
location that is exactly equal to the originally calculated current, I.
When applying the reciprocity theorem for a voltage source, the following
steps must be followed:
1. The voltage source is replaced by a short circuit in the original location.
2. The polarity of the source in the new location is such that the current direc-
tion in that branch remains unchanged.
Current Sources
A current source causing a voltage V at any node of a circuit may be removed
from the original location and connected to that node. The current source in
the new location will produce a voltage in the original source location that is
exactly equal to the originally calculated voltage, V.
When applying the reciprocity theorem for a current source, the following
conditions must be met:
1. The current source is replaced by an open circuit in the original location.
2. The direction of the source in the new location is such that the polarity of
the voltage at the node to which the current source is now connected
remains unchanged.
The following examples illustrate how the reciprocity theorem is used
within a circuit.
316
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
The equivalent resistance is
Req 
 
10.4
1
2 mS
  96 
The equivalent circuit using Millman’s theorem is shown in Figure 9–61. Notice
that the equivalent voltage source has a polarity that is opposite to the originally
assumed polarity. This is because the voltage sources E1 and E3 have magni-
tudes which overcome the polarity and magnitude of the source E2.
From the equivalent circuit of Figure 9–61, it is a simple matter to deter-
mine the current through the load resistor:
IL  
96 
28

.8
1
V
92 
  0.100 A  100 mA
(upward)
1


240
1

  
200
1

  
800
1


Req
RL = 192 
Eeq
96 
28.8 V
a
b
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
9.7 Reciprocity
Theorem
FIGURE 9–61
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.7 | Reciprocity Theorem
317
EXAMPLE 9–14        
Consider the circuit of Figure 9–62:
a. Calculate the current I.
b. Remove voltage source E and place it into the branch with R3. Show that
the current through the branch which formerly had E is now the same as
the current I.
Solution
a. V12  
4 
8


(8
1

2


12 )
(22 V) 4
8
.
.
8
8
(22 V)  12.0 V
I  
1
V
2
12


  
1
1
2
2
.0

V
  1.00 A
b. Now removing the voltage source from its original location and moving it
into the branch containing the current I, we obtain the circuit shown in
Figure 9–63.
E
R3
4 
I
12 
8 
22 V
R2
R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–62
R1
4 
R2
8 
R3
22 V
E
12 
I
When E is removed 
it is replaced by
a short circuit.
Polarity of the source is such
that the current direction
remains unchanged.
© Cengage Learning 2013
For the circuit of Figure 9–63, we determine the current I as follows:
V4  
12 
4


(

4
8


8 )
(22 V) 
1
2
4
.6
.6
(22 V)  4.00 V
I  
4
V4


  
4.
4
00

V
  1.00 A
From this example, we see that the reciprocity theorem does indeed apply.
FIGURE 9–63
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Multisim and PSpice are easily used to illustrate the important theorems devel-
oped in this chapter. We will use each software package in a somewhat differ-
ent approach to verify the theorems. Multisim allows us to “build and test” a
circuit just as it would be done in a lab. When using PSpice we will activate the
Probe postprocessor to provide a graphical display of voltage, current, and
power as a function of load resistance.
Multisim
318
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
EXAMPLE 9–15       
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 9–64:
a. Determine the voltage V across resistor R3.
b. Remove the current source I and place it between node b and the reference
node. Show that the voltage across the former location of the current
source (node a) is now the same as the voltage V.
Solution
a. The node voltages for the circuit of Figure 9–64 are determined as follows:
RT  6 k(9 k  3 k)  4 k
Va  (2 mA)(4 k)  8.00 V
Vb 
3 k
3

k
9 k
(8.0 V)  2.00 V
b. After relocating the current source from the original location, and
connecting it between node b and ground, we obtain the circuit shown in
Figure 9–65.
The resulting node voltages are now found as follows:
RT  3 k(6 k  9 k)  2.50 k
Vb  (2 mA)(2.5 k)  5.00 V
Va 
6 k
6

k
9 k
(5.0 V)  2.00 V
From the preceding results, we conclude that the reciprocity theorem again
applies for the given circuit.
R1
V
6 k
2 mA
3 k
R3
R2
I
a
b


9 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
R3
3 k
R2
a
b
2 mA
I
V
6 k
R1


9 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–65
FIGURE 9–64
9.8 Circuit Analysis
Using Computers
PSPICE
MultiSim
EXAMPLE 9–16       
Use Multisim to ﬁnd both the Thévenin and the Norton equivalent circuits exter-
nal to the load resistor in the circuit of Figure 9–66:
Solution
1. Using Multisim, construct the circuit as shown in Figure 9–67.
2. Just as in a lab, we will use a multimeter to ﬁnd the open circuit (Thévenin)
voltage and the short-circuit (Norton) current. As well, the multimeter is
used to measure the Thévenin (Norton) resistance.
CircuitSim 09-3 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.8 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
319
The steps in these measurements are essentially the same as those used to
theoretically determine the equivalent circuits.
a. We begin by removing the load resistor RL from the circuit (using the
Edit menu and the Cut/Paste menu items). While not absolutely
necessary, the remaining terminals are labelled as a and b for clarity.
b. The Thévenin voltage is measured by simply connecting the multimeter
between terminals a and b. After clicking on the power switch, we
obtain a reading of ETh  11.25 V as shown in Figure 9–68.
R1
6 kE
E
a
b
15 V
I
5 mA
R2
2 kE
RL
0→5 kE
© Cengage Learning 2013
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–66
FIGURE 9–67
R1
V1
15 V
I1
5 mA
R2
2 kΩ
a
b
XMM1
6 kΩ
+
–
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–68
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

320
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
c. With the multimeter between terminals a and b, the Norton current
is easily measured by switching the multimeter to its ammeter range.After
clicking on the power switch, we obtain a reading of IN  7.50 mA as
shown in Figure 9–69.
R1
V1
15 V
I1
5 mA
R2
2 kΩ
a
b
XMM1
6 kΩ
+
–
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–70
FIGURE 9–69
d. In order to measure the Thévenin resistance, the voltage source is
removed and replaced by a short circuit (wire) and the current source
is removed and replaced by an open circuit. Now, with the multimeter
connected between terminals a and b, it is set to measure resistance
(by clicking on the  button). After clicking on the power switch, we
have the display shown in Figure 9–70. The multimeter provides the
Thévenin resistance as RTh  1.5 k.
R1
R2
a
b
2 kΩ
XMM1
6 kΩ
+
–
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Note: From the previous example we see that it is not necessary to directly
measure the Thévenin (Norton) resistance since the value can be easily calcu-
lated from the Thévenin voltage and the Norton current. The following equa-
tion is an application of Ohm’s law and always applies when ﬁnding an
equivalent circuit.
RTh  RN  
E
IN
Th
(9–14)
Applying Equation 9–14 to the measurements of Example 9–16, we get
RTh  RN  
7
1
.
1
5
.
0
25
m
V
A
  1.50 k
Clearly, this is the same result as that obtained when we went through the extra
step of removing the voltage and current sources. This approach is the most
practical method and is commonly used when actually measuring the Thévenin
(Norton) resistance of a circuit.
Section 9.8 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
321
3. Using the measured results, we are able to sketch both the Thévenin
equivalent and the Norton equivalent circuit as illustrated in Figure 9–71.
ETh
RTh
RL
0→5 kE
a
b
11.25 V
1.5 kE
(a) Thévenin equivalent circuit
(b) Norton equivalent circuit
7.5 mA
RL
RN
IN
a
b
0
1.5 k
5 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
These results are consistent with those obtained in Example 9–4.
FIGURE 9–71
Use Multisim to ﬁnd both the Thévenin and the Norton equivalent circuits
external to the load resistor in the circuit of Figure 9–25.
Answers
ETh  2.00 V, IN  16.67 mA, RTh  RN  120 
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 7
PSpice
As we have already seen, PSpice has an additional postprocessor called
Probe, which is able to provide a graphical display of numerous variables.
The following example uses PSpice to illustrate the maximum power transfer
theorem.
PSPICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

322
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
EXAMPLE 9–17       
Use PSpice to input the circuit of Figure 9–72 and use the Probe postprocessor
to display output voltage, current, and power as a function of load resistance.
Solution
The circuit is constructed as shown in Figure 9–73.
•
Double-click on each resistor in the circuit and change the Reference cells
to RTH and RL. Click on Apply to accept the changes.
•
Double-click on the value for RL and enter {Rx}. Place the PARAM
part adjacent to RL. Use the Property Editor to assign a default value
of 10  to Rx. Click on Apply. Have the display show the name and value
and then exit the Property Editor. If necessary, refer to Example 7–15
for the complete procedure on how to assign parameters to a circuit
component.
FIGURE 9–72
FIGURE 9–73
ETh
RTh
RL 
0→10 
10 V
5 
© Cengage Learning 2013
© Cengage Learning 2013
•
Adjust the Simulation Settings to result in a dc sweep of the load resistor
from 0.1  to 10  in 0.1  increments. 
•
Click on the Run icon once the circuit is complete.
•
Once the design is simulated, you will see a blank screen with the abscissa
(horizontal axis) showing RX scaled from 0 to 10 .
•
Since we would like to have a simultaneous display of voltage, current,
and power, it is necessary to do the following:
To display VL: Click Trace and then Add Trace. Select V(RL:1). Click
OK and the load voltage will appear as a function of load resistance.
To display IL: First add another axis by clicking on Plot and Add Y Axis.
Next, click Trace and then Add Trace. Select I(RL). Click OK and the
load current will appear as a function of load resistance.
To display PL: Add another Y axis. Click Trace and Add Trace. One
method of showing power is to enter W(RL) and then click OK. The dis-
play will appear as shown in Figure 9–74. The color and line thickness of
a trace can be changed by right-clicking anywhere on the desired trace
and selecting Trace Property.
PSPICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 9.8 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
323
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–74
Use PSpice to input the circuit of Figure 9–66. Use the Probe postprocessor 
to obtain voltage, current, and power for the load resistor as it is varied from 
0 to 5 k.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 8
A
simple battery cell (such as a D cell) can be represented as a Thévenin
equivalent circuit as shown in the accompanying figure.
The Thévenin voltage represents the open-circuit (or unloaded) voltage of
the battery cell, while the Thévenin resistance is the internal resistance of the bat-
tery. When a load resistance is connected across the terminals of the battery, the
voltage Vab will decrease due to the voltage drop across the internal resistor. By
taking two measurements, it is possible to ﬁnd the Thévenin equivalent circuit of
the battery.
When no load is connected between the terminals of the battery, the termi-
nal voltage is found to be Vab  1.493 V. When a resistance of RL  10.6  is
connected across the terminals, the voltage is measured to be Vab  1.430 V.
Determine the Thévenin equivalent circuit of the battery. Use the measurements
to determine the efﬁciency of the battery for the given load.
Putting It into Practice
RL
a
b
RTh
ETh
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

324
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
R2
R1
10 V
100 
E2
E1
R4
20 V
100 
R3
50 
100 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–75
R1
16 V
680 
32 mA
750 
R3
R2
220 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–76
Va
30 
10 
E1
a


E2
60 
I
5 V
2 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
200 mA
60 V
480 
120 
200 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
E
RL
37 V
2.5 k
IL
2 k
3 k
4 k
5 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–77
FIGURE 9–78
FIGURE 9–79
4. Using superposition, ﬁnd the current through the 480- resistor in the circuit
of Figure 9–78.
5. Given the circuit of Figure 9–79, what must be the value of the unknown
voltage source to ensure that the current through the load is IL  5 mA as
shown? Verify the results using superposition.
6. If the load resistor in the circuit of Figure 9–80 is to dissipate 120 W, determine
the value of the unknown voltage source. Verify the results using superposition.
RL
16 
E
4 A
40 
PL
120 W
60 
60 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–80
9.2
Thévenin’s Theorem
7. Find the Thévenin equivalent external to RL in the circuit of Figure 9–81. Use
the equivalent circuit to ﬁnd Vab.
8. Repeat Problem 7 for the circuit of Figure 9–82.
9. Repeat Problem 7 for the circuit of Figure 9–83.
10. Repeat Problem 7 for the circuit of Figure 9–84.
11. Refer to the circuit of Figure 9–85:
a. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to RL.
b. Use the equivalent circuit to determine Vab when RL  20  and when
RL  50 .
9.1
Superposition Theorem
1. Given the circuit of Figure 9–75, use superposition to calculate the current
through each of the resistors.
2. Use superposition to determine the voltage drop across each of the resistors
of the circuit in Figure 9–76.
3. Use superposition to solve for the voltage Va and the current I in the circuit
of Figure 9–77.
Problems
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems 
325
FIGURE 9–81
FIGURE 9–82
FIGURE 9–83
50 V
RL
12 
a
b
10 
40 
R2
E
30 
R3
R1
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
90 
40 mA
60 
R2 = 30 
I
a
b
RL
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
8 V
R2
E
6.8 k
1.0 k
1.5 k
a
b
RL IL
R3
R1
1.2 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
50 k
100 A
180 k
R2
I
a
b
RL
20 k
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
E
R2
20 →50 
a
b
2.4 V
24 
IL
16 
R1
I
0.2 A
RL
Vab


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–84
FIGURE 9–85
12. Refer to the circuit of Figure 9–86:
a. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to RL.
b. Use the equivalent circuit to determine Vab when RL  10 k and when
RL  20 k.
13. Refer to the circuit of Figure 9–87:
a. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to the indicated terminals.
b. Use the Thévenin equivalent circuit to determine the current through the
indicated branch.
10 k→20 k
a
b
IL
5 k
R2
E1
10 V
R1
6 k
6 V
E2
E3
R3
15 k
12 V
RL
Vab


© Cengage Learning 2013
100 V
60 
RL = 50 
a
b
I
35 
20 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–86
FIGURE 9–87
14. Refer to the circuit of Figure 9–88:
a. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to RL.
b. Use the Thévenin equivalent circuit to ﬁnd VL.
15. Refer to the circuit of Figure 9–89:
a. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to the indicated terminals.
b. Use the Thévenin equivalent circuit to determine the current through the
indicated branch.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16. Refer to the circuit of Figure 9–90:
a. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to the indicated terminals.
b. If R5  1 k, use the Thévenin equivalent circuit to determine the voltage
Vab and the current through this resistor.
326
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
7 mA
50 V
RL
20 V
   VL   
All resistors are 3.3 k.
© Cengage Learning 2013
25 mA
1.8 k
2 k
20 V
1.5 k
3 k
a
b
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–88
FIGURE 9–89
R2
R5
R4
R1
100 
400 
E
32 V
200 
300 
R3
b
a
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–90
17. Refer to the circuit of Figure 9–91:
a. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to RL.
b. Use the Thévenin equivalent circuit to ﬁnd the current I when RL  0,
10 k, and 50 k.
18. Refer to the circuit of Figure 9–92:
a. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to RL.
b. Use the Thévenin equivalent circuit to ﬁnd the power dissipated by RL.
40 
45 
100 
a
25 
25 
b
15 
16 V
RL
© Cengage Learning 2013
25 k
3 mA
20 k
RL = 0→50 k
15 k
5 mA
a
b
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–91
FIGURE 9–92
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems 
327
19. Repeat Problem 17 for the circuit of Figure 9–93.
20. Repeat Problem 17 for the circuit of Figure 9–94.
+ 48 V
24 k
16 k
10 k
a
RL =
50 k
0
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
300 mA
5 V
8 V
16 
16 
22 
a
b
18 
4 
© Cengage Learning 2013
8 V
33 k
47 k
56 k
6 V
RL = 0→50 k
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
30 
60 V
1 A
10 
20 
RL 
2 A
b
a
© Cengage Learning 2013
200 mA
I1
RL
400 
100 
120 
160 
a
b
300 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–93
FIGURE 9–94
FIGURE 9–95
FIGURE 9–96
FIGURE 9–97
21. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit of the network external to the indicated
branch as shown in Figure 9–95.
22. Refer to the circuit of Figure 9–96.
a. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to the indicated terminals.
b. Use the Thévenin equivalent circuit to determine the current through the
indicated branch.
23. Repeat Problem 22 for the circuit of Figure 9–97.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24. Repeat Problem 22 for the circuit of Figure 9–98.
328
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
3 k
3 mA
6 k
4 V
2 k
4 k
10 V
b
a
RL 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–98
9.3
Norton’s Theorem
25. Find the Norton equivalent circuit external to RL in the circuit of Figure 9–81.
Use the equivalent circuit to ﬁnd IL for the circuit.
26. Repeat Problem 25 for the circuit of Figure 9–82.
27. Repeat Problem 25 for the circuit of Figure 9–83.
28. Repeat Problem 25 for the circuit of Figure 9–84.
29. Refer to the circuit of Figure 9–85:
a. Find the Norton equivalent circuit external to RL.
b. Use the equivalent circuit to determine IL when RL  20  and when 
RL  50 .
30. Refer to the circuit of Figure 9–86:
a. Find the Norton equivalent circuit external to RL.
b. Use the equivalent circuit to determine IL when RL  10 k and when 
RL  20 k.
31. a. Find the Norton equivalent circuit external to the indicated terminals of
Figure 9–87.
b. Convert the Thévenin equivalent circuit of Problem 13 to its Norton
equivalent.
32. a. Find the Norton equivalent circuit external to RL in the circuit of Figure 9–88.
b. Convert the Thévenin equivalent circuit of Problem 14 to its Norton
equivalent.
33. Repeat Problem 31 for the circuit of Figure 9–91.
34. Repeat Problem 31 for the circuit of Figure 9–92.
35. Repeat Problem 31 for the circuit of Figure 9–95.
36. Repeat Problem 31 for the circuit of Figure 9–96.
9.4
Maximum Power Transfer Theorem
37. a. For the circuit of Figure 9–91, determine the value of RL so that maxi-
mum power is delivered to the load.
b. Calculate the value of the maximum power which can be delivered to the
load.
c. Sketch the curve of power versus resistance as RL is adjusted from 0  to
50 k in increments of 5 k.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

38. Repeat Problem 37 for the circuit of Figure 9–94.
39. a. For the circuit of Figure 9–99, ﬁnd the value of R so that RL  RTh.
b. Calculate the maximum power dissipated by RL.
40. Repeat Problem 39 for the circuit of Figure 9–100.
Problems 
329
25 V
600 
RL = 50 
R
20 
© Cengage Learning 2013
100 mV
3 k
RL = 2 k
R
0.5 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–99
FIGURE 9–100
41. a. For the circuit of Figure 9–101, determine the values of R1 and R2 so that
the 32-k load receives maximum power.
b. Calculate the maximum power delivered to RL.
R1
RL = 32 k
25 V
200-k potentiometer
R2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–101
42. Repeat Problem 41 if the load resistor has a value of RL  25 k.
9.5
Substitution Theorem
43. If the indicated portion of the circuit in Figure 9–102 is to be replaced with
a voltage source and a 50- series resistor, determine the magnitude and
polarity of the resulting voltage source.
44. If the indicated portion of the circuit in Figure 9–102 is to be replaced with
a current source and a 200- shunt resistor, determine the magnitude and
direction of the resulting current source.
125 
RL
10 V
75 
100 
50 mA
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–102
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9.6
Millman’s Theorem
45. Use Millman’s theorem to ﬁnd the current through and the power dissipated
by RL in the circuit of Figure 9–103.
46. Repeat Problem 45 for the circuit of Figure 9–104.
47. Repeat Problem 45 for the circuit of Figure 9–105.
48. Repeat Problem 45 for the circuit of Figure 9–106.
330
Chapter 9 | Network Theorems
10 V
RL = 25 
20 V
30 
a
b
20 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–103
100 
36 V
390 
220 
24 V
330 
40 V
a
b
RL
© Cengage Learning 2013
6 V
RL
5 V
10 V
4.7 k
1.8 k
3.3 k
a
b
5.6 k
= 10 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
30 
10 
24 V
30 
60 
22.5 
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
30 
10 
24 V
30 
60 
22.5 
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
RL
10 V
30 mA
1500 
500 
125 
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–104
FIGURE 9–105
FIGURE 9–107
FIGURE 9–106
FIGURE 9–108
9.7
Reciprocity Theorem
49. a. Determine the current I in the circuit of Figure 9–107.
b. Show that reciprocity applies for the given circuit.
50. Repeat Problem 49 for the circuit of Figure 9–108.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

51. a. Determine the voltage V in the circuit of Figure 9–109.
b. Show that reciprocity applies for the given circuit.
52. Repeat Problem 51 for the circuit of Figure 9–110.
Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
331
12.5 
3 A
50 
20 
150 
30 
V


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–109
12.5 
3 A
50 
20 
30 
V


150 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 9–110
9.8
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
53. Use Multisim to ﬁnd both the Thévenin and the Norton equivalent circuits
external to the load resistor in the circuit of Figure 9–81.
54. Repeat Problem 53 for the circuit of Figure 9–82.
55. Use the schematic editor of PSpice to input the circuit of Figure 9–83 and use
the Probe postprocessor to display output voltage, current, and power as 
a function of load resistance. Use the cursor in the Probe postprocessor to
determine the value of load resistance for which the load will receive maxi-
mum power. Let the load resistance vary from 100  to 4000  in increments
of 100 .
56. Repeat Problem 55 for the circuit of Figure 9–84. Let the load resistance
vary from 1 k to 100 k in increments of 1 k.
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
PR1  304 mW, PR2  76 mW, PR3  276 mW
Assuming that superposition applies for power:
PR1(1)  60 mW, PR1(2)  3.75 mW, PR1(3)  60 mW
But PR1  304 mW 
 123.75 mW
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
R1  133 
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
1. Refer to Figure 9–27.
2. IN  200 mA, RN  500 
3. ETh  0.2 V, RTh  20 k
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
a. h  50%
b. h  33.3%
c. h  66.7%
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 5
1. In communication circuits and some ampliﬁers, maximum
power transfer is a desirable characteristic.
2. In power transmission and dc voltage sources, maximum
power transfer is not desirable.
PSPICE
MultiSim
MultiSim
PSPICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

333
10 Capacitors and
Capacitance
11 Capacitor Charging,
Discharging, and Simple
Waveshaping Circuits
12 Magnetism and Magnetic
Circuits
13 Inductance and Inductors
14 Inductive Transients
I
CAPACITANCE 
AND INDUCTANCE
III
R
esistance, inductance, and capacitance are the three basic circuit properties
that we use to control voltages and currents in electrical and electronic circuits.
However, each behaves in a fundamentally different way. Resistance, for example
(as you learned in earlier chapters), opposes current, while (as you will soon see)
inductance opposes any change in current, and capacitance opposes any change
in voltage. In addition, resistance dissipates energy, while inductance and capaci-
tance both store energy—inductance in its magnetic ﬁeld and capacitance in its
electric ﬁeld.
Circuit elements that are built to possess capacitance are called capacitors,
while elements built to possess inductance are called inductors. In Part III of this book,
we explore these elements, their properties, and their behavior in electric circuits.
Note
Part III of this book deals with the basics of capacitors, inductors, magnetic 
circuits, and simple transients. However, some colleges and universities cover
some of these topics in an order different than presented here, for example, by
teaching ac before transients. To provide ﬂexibility, Part III has been organized so
that all or parts of Chapters 11, 12, and 14 may be delayed if desired (without loss
of continuity) to ﬁt individual curriculums. I
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Capacitance
Capacitor
Charged
Dielectric
Dielectric Absorption
Dielectric Breakdown
Dielectric Constant
Dielectric Strength
Electric Constant
Electric Field
Electric Field Intensity
Electric Flux Density
Electrolytic Capacitors
Equivalent Series
Resistance (ESR)
Farad
Flux
Instantaneous Quantities
Leakage
Permittivity
Polarized
Relative Permittivity
Supercapacitor
Surface Mount Devices
Temperature Coefﬁcient
Working Voltage
I OUTLINE
Capacitance
Factors Affecting
Capacitance
Electric Fields
Dielectrics
Nonideal Effects
Types of Capacitors
Capacitors in Parallel 
and Series
Capacitor Current and
Voltage During Charging
Energy Stored by a
Capacitor
Capacitor Failures 
and Troubleshooting
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• describe the basic construction of capacitors,
• explain how capacitors store charge,
• deﬁne capacitance,
• describe what factors affect capacitance
and in what way,
• describe the electric ﬁeld of a capacitor,
• compute the breakdown voltages of various
materials,
• describe various types of commercial
capacitors,
• compute the capacitance of capacitors in
series and in parallel combinations,
• compute capacitor voltage and current for
simple time-varying waveforms,
• determine stored energy,
• describe capacitor faults and the basic
troubleshooting of capacitors.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10
CAPACITORS AND CAPACITANCE
A
capacitor is a circuit component designed to store electrical charge. If you connect a dc
voltage source to a capacitor, for example, the capacitor will “charge” to the voltage of the
source. If you then disconnect the source, the capacitor will remain charged, that is, its voltage
will remain constant at the value that it attained while connected to the source (assuming no
leakage). Because of this tendency to hold voltage, a capacitor opposes
changes in voltage. It is this characteristic that gives capacitors their
unique properties.
Capacitors are widely used in electrical and electronic applications.
They are used in electronic systems for signal conditioning and timing,
for example, in speaker system crossover networks to separate high- and
low-frequency signals, in cameras to store the charge that ﬁres the
photoﬂash, on pump and refrigeration motors to increase starting torque, in
electric power systems to increase operating efﬁciency, and so on. A photo
of some typical capacitors is shown on the right.
Capacitance is the electrical property of capacitors: it is a measure of
how much charge a capacitor can hold. In this chapter, we look at capaci-
tance and its basic properties. In Chapter 11, we look at capacitors in dc and
pulse circuits; in later chapters, we look at capacitors in ac applications. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
© Cengage Learning 2013
Typical capacitors.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A capacitor consists of two conductors separated by an insulator. One of its
basic forms is the parallel-plate capacitor shown in Figure 10–1. It consists of
two metal plates separated by a nonconducting material (i.e., an insulator) called
a dielectric. The dielectric may be air, oil, mica, plastic, ceramic, or other suit-
able insulating material.
336
Chapter 10 | Capacitors and Capacitance
10.1 Capacitance
Putting It in Perspective
Michael Faraday and the Field Concept
THE UNIT OF CAPACITANCE, the farad, is named after Michael
Faraday (1791–1867). Born in England to a working class
family, Faraday received limited education. Nonetheless,
he was responsible for many of the fundamental discover-
ies of electricity and magnetism. Lacking mathematical
skills, he used his intuitive ability rather than mathematical
models to develop conceptual pictures of basic phenom-
ena. It was his development of the ﬁeld concept, for
example, that made it possible to map out the ﬁelds that
exist around magnetic poles and electrical charges.
To get at this idea, recall from Chapter 2 that unlike
charges attract and like charges repel, that is, a force
exists between electrical charges. We call the region
where this force acts an electric ﬁeld. To visualize this
ﬁeld, we use Faraday’s ﬁeld concept and draw lines of
force (or ﬂux lines) that show at every point in space the
magnitude and direction of the force. Now, rather than
supposing that one charge exerts a force on another, we instead visualize that the original
charges create a ﬁeld in space and that other charges introduced into this ﬁeld experience a
force due to the ﬁeld. This concept is helpful in studying certain aspects of capacitors, as you
will see in this chapter.
The development of the ﬁeld concept had a signiﬁcant impact on science. We now picture
several important phenomena in terms of ﬁelds, including electric ﬁelds, gravitation, and mag-
netism. When Faraday published his theory in 1844, however, it was not taken seriously, much
like Ohm’s work two decades earlier. It is also interesting to note that the development of the
ﬁeld concept grew out of Faraday’s research into magnetism, not electric charge. I
Photo Researchers/Photo Researchers/Getty Images
Lead
Dielectric
(air)
Lead
Metal
plates
(a) Basic construction
(b) Symbol
C
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–1
Parallel-plate capacitor.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 10.1 | Capacitance 
337
Since the plates of the capacitor are metal, they contain huge numbers
of free electrons. In their normal state, however, they are uncharged, that is,
there is no excess or deficiency of electrons on either plate. If a dc source
is now connected (Figure 10–2), electrons are pulled from the top plate by
the positive potential of the battery and the same number deposited on the
bottom plate. This leaves the top plate with a deficiency of electrons (i.e.,
positive charge) and the bottom plate with an excess (i.e., negative charge).
In this state, the capacitor is said to be charged. (Note that no current
can pass through the dielectric between the plates—thus, the movement of
electrons illustrated in Figure 10–2 will cease when the capacitor reaches
full charge.)
If Q coulombs of electrons are moved during the charging process (leaving
the top plate with a deﬁciency of Q electrons and the bottom with an excess
of Q), we say that the capacitor has a charge of Q.
If we now disconnect the source (Figure 10–3), the excess electrons that
were moved to the bottom plate remain trapped as they have no way to return to
the top plate. The capacitor therefore remains charged with voltage E across it
even though no source is present. Because of this, we say that a capacitor can
store charge. Capacitors with little leakage (Section 10.5) can hold their charge
for a considerable time—sometimes for years.
Large-value capacitors charged to high voltages contain a great deal of
energy and can store a potentially lethal charge; you must therefore be very
careful with them. Even high-value, low-voltage units can contain enough
energy to vaporize a screwdriver and spray metal in your eyes if you attempt to
short the leads. If you intend to handle such capacitors, or work on them,
always discharge them after power has been removed. You can do this by con-
necting a high-wattage resistor (sometimes referred to as a bleeder resistor) of
about 50 /V of the rated voltage of the capacitor across the capacitor’s termi-
nals until it is discharged, but be careful to protect yourself from shock. Note
also that some voltage may spring back due to dielectric absorption after the
discharge resistor is removed—see Section 10.5.
Deﬁnition of Capacitance
The amount of charge Q that a capacitor can store depends on the applied
voltage. Experiments show that for a given capacitor, Q is proportional to volt-
age. Let the constant of proportionality be C. Then,
Q  CV
(10–1)
Rearranging terms yields
C  Q
V

(farads, F)
(10–2)
The term C is deﬁned as the capacitance of the capacitor. As indicated, its unit
is the farad. By deﬁnition, the capacitance of a capacitor is one farad if it
stores one coulomb of charge when the voltage across its terminals is one volt.
The farad, however, is a very large unit. Most practical capacitors (except
supercapacitors, Section 10.6 ) range in size from picofarads (pF or 1012 F) to
microfarads (F or 106 F). The larger the value of C, the more charge that the
capacitor can hold for a given voltage.
Movement of electrons
E
B
A
()
()
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–2
Capacitor during charging.
At the instant that you connect the source,
there is a momentary surge of current as
electrons are pulled from plate A and an
equal number deposited on plate B. This
leaves the top plate positively charged and
the bottom plate negatively charged. When
charging is complete, there is no further
movement of electrons, and the current is
thus zero.
E
     
     V = E


Q
Q
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–3
Capacitor after charging.
When you disconnect the source, electrons
are trapped on the bottom plate and cannot
return—thus, charge is stored.
CircuitSim 10-1 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Effect of Area
As shown by Equation 10–2, capacitance is directly proportional to charge.
This means that the more charge you can put on a capacitor’s plates for a given
voltage, the greater will be its capacitance. Consider Figure 10–4. The capaci-
tor of (b) has four times the area of (a). Since it has the same number of free
electrons per unit area, it has four times the total charge and hence four times
the capacitance. This turns out to be true in general, that is, capacitance is
directly proportional to plate area.
338
Chapter 10 | Capacitors and Capacitance
10.2 Factors Affecting
Capacitance
(b) Plates with four times the area
have four times the charge and
therefore, four times the capacitance
(a) Capacitor with area A
and charge Q
E
Area 4A
Charge = 4Q
E
V


V


Area A
Charge = Q
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–4
For a ﬁxed separation, capacitance is proportional to plate area.
Effect of Spacing
Now consider Figure 10–5. Since the top plate has a deﬁciency of electrons and
the bottom plate an excess, a force of attraction exists across the gap. For a
ﬁxed spacing as in (a), the charges are in equilibrium. Now move the plates
closer together as in (b). As spacing decreases, the force of attraction increases,
pulling more electrons from within the bulk material of plate B to its top sur-
face. This creates a deﬁciency of electrons throughout B. To replenish these, the
source moves additional electrons around the circuit, leaving A with an even
greater deﬁciency and B with an even greater excess. The charge on the plates
therefore increases and hence, according to Equation 10–2, so does the capac-
itance. We therefore conclude that decreasing spacing increases capacitance,
and vice versa. In fact, as we will show later, capacitance is inversely propor-
tional to plate spacing.
EXAMPLE 10–1       
a. How much charge is stored on a 10-F capacitor when it is connected to
a 24-volt source?
b. The charge on a 20-nF capacitor is 1.7 C. What is its voltage?
Solution
a. From Equation 10–1, Q  CV. Thus, Q  (10  106 F)(24 V)  240 C.
b. Rearranging Equation 10–1, V  QC  (1.7  106 C)(20 
109 F)  85 V.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Effect of Dielectric
Capacitance also depends on the dielectric. Consider Figure 10–6(a), which
shows an air-dielectric capacitor. If you substitute different materials for air,
the capacitance increases. Table 10–1 shows the factor by which capacitance
increases for a number of different materials. For example, if Teﬂon® is used
instead of air, capacitance is increased by a factor of 2.1. This factor is called
the relative permittivity of the material (or in older terminology, its dielectric
constant). (Permittivity is a measure of how easy it is to establish electric ﬂux
in a material. We revisit it below.) Note that high-permittivity ceramic increases
capacitance by as much as 7500, as indicated in Figure 10–6(b).
Section 10.2 | Factors Affecting Capacitance
339
(a) Charges in
equilibrium
(b) As spacing decreases, more
electrons move from A to B,
increasing the charge on the
plates and hence, their
capacitance
E
      
     V


A
B
      
     
V


E
A
B
More electrons are
drawn to plate B
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–5
Decreasing spacing increases capacitance.
Material
r (Nominal Values)
Vacuum
1
Air
1.0006
Ceramic
30–7500
Mica
5.5
Mylar (Note 3)
3
Oil
4
Paper (dry)
2.2
Polystyrene
2.6
Teﬂon (Note 3)
2.1
TABLE 10–1
Relative Permittivity 
of Various Materials
(a) C = 200 pF with air dielectric
(b) C = 1.5 µF with high-permittivity
ceramic dielectric
Ceramic
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–6
The factor by which a dielectric causes capacitance to increase is termed its relative permittivity. The ceramic used here
has a value of 7500.
NOTES...
1. Actually, Equation 10–3 is true in
general, that is, it holds for other
shapes as well as for the parallel-
plate conﬁguration. It is just harder
to determine the effective area and
spacing for other geometries.
2. In modern terminology,0 (the
absolute permittivity of free space)
is also called the electric constant.
3. Teﬂon is a trademark of DuPont. 
Mylar is a trademark of Dupont
Teijin Films.
Capacitance of a Parallel-Plate Capacitor
From the preceding observations, we see that capacitance is directly propor-
tional to plate area, inversely proportional to plate separation, and dependent
on the dielectric. In equation form,
C   A
d

(F)
(10–3)
where area A is in square meters and spacing d is in meters—see Note 1.
Permittivity (Revisited)
The constant  in Equation 10–3 is the absolute permittivity of the insulating
material. Its units are farads per meter (F/m). For air or vacuum,  has a value
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

of o  8.854  1012 F/m—see Note 2. For other materials,  is expressed
as the product of the relative permittivity, r (shown in Table 10–1), times o.
That is,
  ro
(10–4)
Consider, again, Equation 10–3: C  Ad  roAd. Note that oAd
is the capacitance of a vacuum- (or air-) dielectric capacitor. Denote it by Co.
Then, for any other dielectric,
C  rCo
(10–5)
340
Chapter 10 | Capacitors and Capacitance
EXAMPLE 10–2       
Compute the capacitance of a parallel-plate capacitor with plates 10 cm by 
20 cm, separation of 5 mm, and
a. an air dielectric,
b. a ceramic dielectric with a relative permittivity of 7500.
Solution
Convert all dimensions to meters. Thus,A  (0.1 m)(0.2 m)  0.02 m2,
and d  5  10–3 m.
a. For air, C  oAd  (8.854  1012)(2  102)(5  103)  35.4 
1012 F  35.4 pF.
b. For ceramic with r  7500, C  7500(35.4 pF)  0.266 F.
EXAMPLE 10–3       
A parallel-plate capacitor with air dielectric has a value of C  12 pF. What is
the capacitance of a capacitor that has the following:
a. The same separation and dielectric but five times the plate area?
b. The same dielectric but four times the area and one-fifth the plate
spacing?
c. A dry paper dielectric, six times the plate area, and twice the plate
spacing?
Solution
a. Since the plate area has increased by a factor of ﬁve and everything else
remains the same, C increases by a factor of ﬁve. Thus, C  5(12 pF) 
60 pF.
b. With four times the plate area, C increases by a factor of four. With 
one-ﬁfth the plate spacing, C increases by a factor of ﬁve. Thus, C  (4)(5)
(12 pF)  240 pF.
c. Dry paper increases C by a factor of 2.2. The increase in plate area increases
C by a factor of six. Doubling the plate spacing reduces C by one-half.
Thus, C  (2.2)(6)(1⁄2)(12 pF)  79.2 pF.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Electric Flux
In Chapter 2, we learned that unlike charges attract while like charges repel;
that is, a force exists between them. The region where this force exists is called
an electric ﬁeld. To visualize this ﬁeld, Faraday introduced the idea of using a
small positive test charge Qt to map the forces. He deﬁned the direction of a
ﬁeld as the direction of force on the test charge, and the strength of the ﬁeld as
the force per unit charge (considered below). He then mapped the ﬁeld as lines
of force where the direction of the lines represented the direction of the force,
and the density of lines represented its strength. To illustrate, consider
Figure 10–8(a). Because like charges repel, the force on the positive test charge
is directed outward, resulting in a radial ﬁeld as indicated. Now consider (b).
Section 10.3 | Electric Fields
341
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
1. A capacitor with plates 7.5 cm  8 cm and plate separation of 0.1 mm has an
oil dielectric:
a. Compute its capacitance;
b. If the charge on this capacitor is 0.424 C, what is the voltage across its plates?
2. For a parallel-plate capacitor, if you triple the plate area and halve the plate
spacing, how does capacitance change?
3. For the capacitor of Figure 10–6, if you use mica instead of ceramic, what
will be the capacitance?
4. What is the dielectric for the capacitor of Figure 10–7(b)?
(a) C = 24 pF with air dielectric
d
A
(b) C = 66 pF
2d
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–7
10.3 Electric Fields
(a) Force on a test charge Qt
Qt
Force
Q

(b) Field about a pair of positive
and negative charges
Q

w
Q

w
(c) Field of a parallel-plate
capacitor
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–8
Electric ﬁelds.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The test charge will be repelled by charge 	Q and attracted by charge Q,
resulting in the curved ﬁeld shown. Faraday determined that lines never cross
and that the stronger the ﬁeld, the more dense the lines. Figure 10–8(c) shows
another example: the ﬁeld of a parallel-plate capacitor. In this case, the ﬁeld is
uniform across the gap with some fringing near its edges. Electric ﬁeld lines
(also called ﬂux lines) are denoted by the Greek letter  (psi).
Electric Field Intensity 
As noted previously, the strength of an electric ﬁeld (more usually called its inten-
sity) is deﬁned as the force per unit charge that the ﬁeld exerts on a small posi-
tive test charge Qt. Let this electric ﬁeld intensity be denoted by the script letter
. Then by deﬁnition,
  FQt
(newtons/coulomb, N/C)
(10–6)
To illustrate, let us determine the ﬁeld about the point charge Q of
Figure 10–8(a). When the test charge is placed near Q, it experiences a force of
F  kQQtr2 (Coulomb’s law, Chapter 2). The constant in Coulomb’s law is
actually equal to 14p. Thus, F  QQt4pr2, and from Equation 10–6,
  Q
F
t
  
4p
Q
r2

(N/C)
(10–7)
Electric Flux Density
Because of the presence of  in Equation 10–7, the electric ﬁeld intensity
depends on the medium in which the charge is located. Let us deﬁne a new
quantity, D, that is independent of the medium. Let
D   
(10–8)
D is known as electric ﬂux density. As is shown in physics, D represents the
density of ﬂux lines in space, that is,
D  
tot
a
a
r
l
e
f
a
lux
  w
A

(10–9)
where w is the ﬂux passing through area A.
Electric Flux (Revisited)
Consider Figure 10–9. Flux w is due to the charge Q. Again, as shown in
physics, in the SI system the number of ﬂux lines emanating from a charge Q
is equal to the charge itself, that is,
w  Q
(C)
(10–10)
An easy way to visualize this is to think of one ﬂux line as emanating from
each positive charge on the body as shown in Figure 10–9. Then, as indicated,
the total number of lines is equal to the total number of charges.
Field of a Parallel-Plate Capacitor
Now consider a parallel-plate capacitor (Figure 10–10). The ﬁeld here is cre-
ated by the charge distributed over its plates. Since plate A has a deﬁciency of
electrons, it looks like a sheet of positive charge, while plate B looks like a
sheet of negative charge. A positive test charge Qt between these sheets is
therefore repelled by the positive sheet and attracted by the negative sheet.
342
Chapter 10 | Capacitors and Capacitance
Q







w
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–9
In the SI system, total ﬂux
 equals charge Q.
       
       
E
Qt
Plate A
Plate B
d
F
V


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–10
Work moving test charge
Qt is force times distance.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now move the test charge from plate B to plate A. The work W required to
move the charge against the force F is force times distance. Thus,
W  Fd
(J)
(10–11)
In Chapter 2, we deﬁned voltage as work divided by charge, that is, V  W/Q.
Since the charge here is the test charge, Qt, the voltage between plates A and B is
V  WQt  (Fd)Qt
(V)
(10–12)
Now divide both sides by d. This yields Vd  FQt. But FQt  , from
Equation 10–6. Thus,
  Vd
(V/m)
(10–13)
Equation 10–13 shows that the electric ﬁeld intensity between capacitor plates
is equal to the voltage across the plates divided by the distance between them.
Thus, if V  30 V and d  10 mm,   3000 V/m.
Section 10.3 | Electric Fields
343
EXAMPLE 10–4        
Suppose that the electric ﬁeld intensity between the plates of a capacitor is 
50 000 V/m when 80 V is applied:
a. What is the plate spacing if the dielectric is air? If the dielectric is ceramic?
b. What is  if the plate spacing is halved?
Solution
a.   Vd, independent of dielectric. Thus,
d  
V
  
50 
8
1
0
0
V
3 V/m
  1.6  103 m
b. Since   Vd,  will double to 100 000 V/m.
1. What happens to the electric ﬁeld intensity of a capacitor if you do the 
following:
a. Double the applied voltage?
b. Triple the applied voltage and double the plate spacing?
2.
If the electric ﬁeld intensity of a capacitor with polystyrene dielectric and plate
size 2 cm by 4 cm is 100 kV/m when 50 V is applied, what is its capacitance?
Answers
1. a. Doubles, b. Increases by a factor of 1.5; 2. 36.8 pF
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
Capacitance (Revisited)
With the preceding background, we can examine capacitance a bit more rigor-
ously. Recall, C  QV. Using the above relationships yields
C  Q
V
  w
V
  A

D
d  D

A
d
  A
d

This conﬁrms Equation 10–3 that we developed intuitively in Section 10.2.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

As you saw in Figure 10–6, a dielectric increases capacitance. We now exam-
ine why. Consider Figure 10–11. For a charged capacitor, electron orbits
(which are normally nearly circular) become elliptical as electrons are
attracted toward the positive (	) plate and repelled from the negative ()
plate. This makes the end of the atom nearest the positive plate appear nega-
tive while its other end appears positive. Such atoms are polarized.
Throughout the bulk of the dielectric, the negative end of a polarized atom is
adjacent to the positive end of another polarized atom, and the effects cancel.
However, at the surfaces of the dielectric, there are no atoms to cancel, and
the net effect is as if a layer of negative charge exists on the surface of the
dielectric at the positive plate and a layer of positive charge at the negative
plate. This makes the plates appear closer together, thus increasing capaci-
tance. Materials for which the effect is largest result in the greatest increase
in capacitance.
Dielectric Breakdown
If the voltage of Figure 10–11 is increased beyond a critical value, the force
on the electrons is so great that they are literally torn from orbit. This is called
dielectric breakdown, and the electric ﬁeld intensity (Equation 10–13) at
breakdown is called the dielectric strength of the material. For air, break-
down occurs when the voltage gradient reaches 3 kV/mm. The breakdown
strengths for other materials are shown in Table 10–2. Since the quality of
a dielectric depends on many factors, dielectric strength varies from sample
to sample.
Breakdown is not limited to capacitors; it can occur with any type of elec-
trical apparatus whose insulation is stressed beyond safe limits. (For example,
air breaks down and ﬂashovers occur on high-voltage transmission lines when
they are struck by lightning.) The shape of conductors also affects breakdown
voltage. Breakdown occurs at lower voltages at sharp points than at blunt
points. This effect is made use of in lightning arresters.
344
Chapter 10 | Capacitors and Capacitance
10.4 Dielectrics
E
Electron
orbit
Nucleus
Dielectric
A
B
()
()
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–11
Effect of the capacitor’s
electric ﬁeld on an atom of its dielectric.
Material
kV/mm
Air
3
Ceramic (high r)
3
Mica
40
Mylar
16
Oil
15
Polystyrene
24
Rubber
18
Teﬂon®
60
*Values depend on the composition of the 
material. These are the values we use in 
this book.
TABLE 10–2
Dielectric Strength*
EXAMPLE 10–5       
A capacitor with plate dimensions of 2.5 cm by 2.5 cm and a ceramic dielectric
with r  7500 experiences breakdown at 2400 V. What is C?
Solution
From Table 10–2 dielectric strength  3 kV/mm. Thus, d  2400 V
3000 Vmm  0.8 mm  8  10–4 m. So
C  ro Ad
 (7500)(8.854  1012)(0.025 m)2(8  104 m)
 51.9 nF
PRACTICAL NOTES...
Breakdown in solid dielectrics is 
generally destructive. Typically, a car-
bonized pinhole results, and since
this is a conductive path, the dielec-
tric is no longer a useful insulator. Air,
vacuum, and insulating liquids like oil,
on the other hand, recover from the
ﬂashover once it is extinguished.
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Capacitor Voltage Rating
Because of dielectric breakdown, capacitors are rated for maximum operating
voltage (called working voltage) by their manufacturer (indicated on the
capacitor as WVDC or working voltage dc). If you operate a capacitor beyond
its working voltage, you may damage it.
Section 10.5 | Nonideal Effects
345
1. At what voltage will breakdown occur for a Mylar dielectric capacitor with
plate spacing of 0.25 cm?
2. An air-dielectric capacitor breaks down at 500 V. If the plate spacing is dou-
bled and the capacitor is ﬁlled with oil, at what voltage will breakdown
occur?
Answers
1. 40 kV; 2. 5 kV
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
So far, we have assumed ideal capacitors. However, real capacitors have several
nonideal characteristics.
Leakage Current
When a charged capacitor is disconnected from its source, it will eventually
discharge. This is because no insulator is perfect, and a small amount of charge
“leaks” through the dielectric. Similarly, a small leakage current will pass through
its dielectric when a capacitor is connected to a source.
The effect of leakage is modeled by a resistor in Figure 10–12. Except for
electrolytic capacitors (see Section 10.6), leakage is very small and R is very
large, typically hundreds of megohms. The larger R is, the longer a capacitor
can hold its charge. For most applications, leakage can be neglected, and you
can treat the capacitor as ideal.
Equivalent Series Resistance (ESR)
Real capacitors have a small amount of resistance due to the resistance of their
leads, the contact connections between leads and plates, and ac losses in the
dielectric. This resistance, known as equivalent series resistance or ESR, can
be modeled as a resistance in series with the capacitor. Note that ESR is of con-
cern only with ac operation—it does not affect dc operation. For many types of
capacitors, ESR is so small that it can be neglected, but in others, ESR is a seri-
ous concern, largely because it is responsible for heat generation inside the capac-
itor, and heat is often the cause of capacitor failure. (ESR is mainly a problem with
electrolytic capacitors.) Typically, ESR values are less than 0.1  for high-
frequency capacitors, but they may be 10 ohms or more for electrolytic capacitors.
Note that ESR cannot be measured with an ohmmeter, but it must be measured
using specialized test instruments of the type depicted in Section 10.10.
Dielectric Absorption
When you discharge a capacitor by temporarily placing a resistor across its
terminals, it should have zero (or nearly zero) volts across itself after the resistor
is removed. However, considerable residual voltage may spring back. To see
10.5 Nonideal Effects
C
R
Leakage
current


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–12
Leakage current.
CircuitSim 10-2 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

why, recall polarization, Figure 10–11. In some dielectrics, when source volt-
age is removed, the relaxation of atoms to their nonpolarized state may take
considerable time, and it is the residual charge from these remaining polarized
atoms that creates the residual voltage. This effect is known as dielectric
absorption. In electronic circuits, the voltage due to dielectric absorption can
upset circuit voltage levels; in old CRT-type TV tubes and with electrical power
apparatus, it can result in large and potentially dangerous voltages. You may
have to put the shorting resistor back on to complete the discharge.
Temperature Coefﬁcient
Because dielectrics are affected by temperature, capacitance may change with
temperature. If capacitance increases with increasing temperature, the capaci-
tor is said to have a positive temperature coefﬁcient; if it decreases, the capac-
itor has a negative temperature coefﬁcient; if it remains essentially constant,
the capacitor has a zero temperature coefﬁcient.
The temperature coefﬁcient is speciﬁed as a change in capacitance in
parts per million (ppm) per degree Celsius. Consider a 1-F capacitor. Since
1 F  1 million pF, 1 ppm is 1 pF. Thus, a 1-F capacitor with a temperature
coefﬁcient of 200 ppm/
 C could change as much as 200 pF per degree Celsius.
If the circuit you are designing is sensitive to a capacitor’s value, you may have
to use a capacitor with a small temperature coefﬁcient.
346
Chapter 10 | Capacitors and Capacitance
Since no single capacitor type suits all applications, capacitors are made in a
variety of types and sizes. Among these are ﬁxed and variable types with dif-
fering dielectrics and recommended areas of application. (In the following, we
talk in general about recommended areas of application, but many manufac-
turers typically recommend where each type that they make should be used.)
Fixed Capacitors
Fixed capacitors are often identiﬁed by their dielectric. Common dielectric mate-
rials include ceramic, plastic, and mica, plus, for electrolytic capacitors, alu-
minum and tantalum oxide. Design variations include tubular and interleaved
plates. The interleave design (Figure 10–13) uses multiple plates to increase
effective plate area. A layer of insulation separates plates, and alternate plates are
connected together. The tubular design (Figure 10–14) uses sheets of metal foil
separated by an insulator such as plastic ﬁlm. Fixed capacitors are encapsulated
10.6 Types of
Capacitors
Insulation
Metal
plate
© Cengage Learning 2013
Lead
Inner foil
Lead
Outer foil
Insulating
material
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–13
Stacked capacitor construction. The
stack is compressed, leads attached, and the unit
coated with epoxy resin or other insulating material.
FIGURE 10–14
Tubular capacitor with axial leads.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

in plastic, epoxy resin, or other insulating material and identiﬁed with value,
tolerance, and other appropriate data either via body markings or color coding.
Electrical characteristics and physical size depend on the dielectric used.
Ceramic Capacitors
First, consider ceramic. The permittivity of ceramic varies widely (as indicated
in Table 10–1). At one end are ceramics with extremely high permittivity. These
permit packaging a great deal of capacitance in a small space, but they yield
capacitors whose characteristics vary widely with temperature and operating
voltage. However, they are popular in applications where temperature variations
are modest and small size and cost are important. At the other end are ceramics
with highly stable characteristics. They yield capacitors whose values change
little with temperature, voltage, or aging. However, since their dielectric con-
stants are relatively low (typically 30 to 80), these capacitors are physically
larger than equivalent capacitors made using high-permittivity ceramic. Many
surface mount capacitors (considered later in this section) use ceramic dielectrics,
as do disc capacitors of the type illustrated in Figure 10–15. Capacitors as in
Figure 10–15 are used in bypass, ﬁltering, and dc blocking applications (tasks
that you will learn about in your electronics courses).
Plastic Film Capacitors
Plastic-ﬁlm capacitors are of two basic types: ﬁlm/foil or metallized ﬁlm.
Film/foil capacitors use metal foil separated by plastic ﬁlm as in Figure 10–14,
while metallized-ﬁlm capacitors have their foil material vacuum-deposited
directly onto plastic ﬁlm. Film/foil capacitors are generally larger than metallized-
foil units, but have better capacitance stability and higher insulation resistance.
Typical ﬁlm materials are polyester, Mylar, polypropylene, and polycarbonate.
Figure 10–16 shows a selection of plastic-ﬁlm capacitors.
Section 10.6 | Types of Capacitors
347
Courtesy of Illinois Capacitor, Inc.
FIGURE 10–15
Ceramic disc capacitor.
Courtesy of Illinois Capacitor, Inc.
FIGURE 10–16
Radial lead ﬁlm capacitors.
Metallized-ﬁlm capacitors are self-healing. Thus, if voltage stress at an
imperfection exceeds breakdown, an arc occurs that evaporates the metallized area
around the fault, isolating the defect. (Film/foil capacitors are not self-healing.)
Silver Mica Capacitors
Silver mica capacitors provide high accuracy, low leakage, and good stability.
Available values range from a few picofarads to about 0.1 F.
Electrolytic Capacitors
Electrolytic capacitors provide relatively large capacitance (i.e., up to several
thousand microfarads) at a relatively low cost. (Their capacitance is large
because they have a very thin layer of oxide as their dielectric.) However, their
leakage is relatively high and breakdown voltage relatively low. Electrolytics
have either aluminum or tantalum as their plate material. Tantalum devices are
smaller than aluminum devices, have less leakage, and are more stable.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The basic aluminum electrolytic capacitor construction is similar to that of
Figure 10–14, with strips of aluminum foil separated by gauze saturated with an
electrolyte. During manufacture, chemical action creates a thin oxide layer that
acts as the dielectric. This layer must be maintained during use. For this reason,
electrolytic capacitors are polarized (marked with a 	 and  sign), and the plus
(	) terminal must always be kept positive with respect to the minus () termi-
nal. Aluminum electrolytic capacitors have a shelf life; that is, if they are not used
for an extended period, they may fail when powered up again. Figure 10–17(a)
shows a selection of typical electrolytic capacitors, while Figure 10–17(b) shows
their graphic symbol as used on circuit schematics. These capacitors are typically
used in power supplies to smooth rectiﬁed waveforms.
Tantalum capacitors come in two basic types: wet slug and solid dielectric.
Figure 10–18 shows a cutaway view of a solid tantalum unit. The slug, made
from powdered tantalum, is highly porous and provides a large internal surface
area that is coated with an oxide to form the dielectric. Tantalum capacitors are
polarized and must be inserted into a circuit properly.
348
Chapter 10 | Capacitors and Capacitance
(a) Radial lead aluminium
  electrolytic capacitors
(b) Schematic symbol for an
        electrolytic capacitor
Photo courtesy of Illinois Capacitor Inc.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–17
Electrolytic capacitors.
Graphite
Terminal
wire
Tantalum wire
Tantalum
Resin encapsulation
Silver
Solder
Manganese
dioxide
Tantalum
pentoxide
Courtesy AVX Corporation
FIGURE 10–18
Cutaway view of a solid tantalum capacitor.
Surface Mount Capacitors
Most electronic products now use surface mount devices (SMDs). (SMDs do not
have connection leads, but are soldered directly onto printed circuit boards by
automated assembly machines.) Figure 10–19 shows a surface mount, ceramic
chip capacitor. Such devices are extremely small and provide high packaging
density as can be seen in Figure 10–30 later in this chapter.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Variable Capacitors
Several types of variable capacitors are still in use. One type (used for many
years in radios to tune in stations) has a set of stationary plates and a set of
movable plates that are ganged together and mounted on a shaft. As the user
rotates the shaft, the movable plates mesh with the stationary plates, changing
the effective surface area (and hence the capacitance).
Another adjustable type is the trimmer or padder capacitor, which is used
for ﬁne adjustments, usually over a very small range. A trimmer is usually set
to its required value, then never touched again.
The symbol for a variable capacitor may be found in the table of schematic
symbols, Table 1–7 of Chapter 1.
Standard Capacitor Values
Capacitors are manufactured only in speciﬁc standard value sizes, speciﬁcally
0.1 F, 0.22 F, 0.47 F, and so on, plus multiples and submultiples thereof
such as 0.1 pF, 0.22 pF, and 0.47 pF.
Supercapacitors
A relatively recent entry among capacitor offerings are supercapacitors. These
devices, also known as ultracapacitors, are available with enormous capacitance
values—values that extend up into the hundreds of farads range and beyond. (By
comparison, the largest electrolytic capacitors usually do not exceed a few thou-
sand microfarads.) The areas of application of supercapacitors are somewhat dif-
ferent than ordinary capacitors, however—typically, they are used in power source
roles (roles normally serviced by batteries)—in GPS tracking systems, automotive
regenerative braking systems, medical equipment, PDAs, and alarm and security
systems. A common setup utilizes a supercapacitor in conjunction with a battery,
wherein the battery supplies the steady bulk power demands of the load while the
supercapacitor supplies the high-energy bursts that are required from time to time.
Most major capacitor manufacturers now have supercapacitors in their
product lines. As indicated in Figure 10–20, from the outside, the capacitor
looks like an ordinary capacitor. It achieves its massive capacitance through its
internal construction, which creates an enormous amount of surface area with
a very small separation between “plates.” However, their voltage rating is quite
low, typically only a few volts.
Section 10.6 | Types of Capacitors
349
(a) Typical size is 2 mm × 1 mm
(See Figure 1–4)
Terminations
© Cengage Learning 2013
(b) Cutaway view
Silver, Nickel, Solder
End Terminations
Precious
Metal
Electrodes
Margin
Courtesy AVX Corporation
FIGURE 10–19
Surface mount, ceramic chip capacitor.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Capacitors in Parallel
For capacitors in parallel, the effective plate area is the sum of the individual
plate areas; thus, the total capacitance is the sum of the individual capacitances.
This is easily shown mathematically. Consider Figure 10–21. The charge on
each capacitor is given by Equation 10–1, that is, Q1  C1V and Q2  C2V.
Thus, QT  Q1 	 Q2  C1V 	 C2V  (C1 	 C2) V. But QT  CTV. Thus,
CT  C1 	 C2. For more than two capacitors,
CT  C1 	 C2 	 … 	 CN
(10–14)
That is, the total capacitance of capacitors in parallel is the sum of their indi-
vidual capacitances.
350
Chapter 10 | Capacitors and Capacitance
Photo courtesy of Illinois Capacitor, Inc.
FIGURE 10–20
Supercapacitors. Most supercapacitors look pretty much like ordinary
capacitors, but don’t let that fool you—their storage capacity is immense. Here we show 
a pair of ﬂat pack supercapacitors.
A 2.5-F capacitor has a tolerance of 	80% and 20%. Determine what its
maximum and minimum values could be.
Answer
4.5 F and 2 F
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
10.7 Capacitors in
Parallel 
and Series
E
C1
C2
V = E


Q1 = C1V
Q2 = C2V
(a) Parallel capacitors
V


E
C1
C2
(b) CT = C1 + C2
V
E
CT


(c) Equivalent
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–21
Capacitors in parallel. Total capacitance is the sum of the individual capacitances.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Capacitors in Series
For capacitors in series (Figure 10–22), the same charge appears on each. Thus,
Q  C1V1, Q  C2V2, and so on. Solving for voltages yields V1  QC1, V2 
QC2, and so on. Applying KVL, we get V  V1 	 V2 	 … 	 VN. Therefore,
V  C
Q
1
 	 C
Q
2
 	 … 	 C
Q
N
  QC
1
1
 	 C
1
2
 	 … 	 C
1
N

But V  QCT. Equating this with the right side and cancelling Q yields
C
1
T
  C
1
1
 	 C
1
2
 	 … 	 C
1
N

(10–15)
For two capacitors in series, this reduces to
CT  
C
C
1 	
1C
C
2
2

(10–16)
Section 10.7 | Capacitors in Parallel and Series
351
EXAMPLE 10–6        
A 10-F, a 15-F, and a 100-F capacitor are connected in parallel across a 
50-V source. Determine the following:
a. Total capacitance.
b. Total charge stored.
c. Charge on each capacitor.
Solution
a. CT  C1 	 C2 	 C3  10 F 	 15 F 	 100 F  125 F
b. QT  CTV  (125 F)(50 V)  6.25 mC
c. Q1  C1V  (10 F)(50 V)  0.5 mC
Q2  C2V  (15 F)(50 V)  0.75 mC
Q3  C3V  (100 F)(50 V)  5.0 mC
Check: QT  Q1 	 Q2 	 Q3  (0.5 	 0.75 	 5.0) mC  6.25 mC.
1. Three capacitors are connected in parallel. If C1  20 F, C2  10 F, and 
CT  32.2 F, what is C3?
2. Three capacitors are paralleled across an 80-V source, with QT  0.12 C.
If C1  200 F and C2  300 F, what is C3?
3. Three capacitors are paralleled. If the value of the second capacitor is twice
that of the ﬁrst and the value of the third is one-quarter that of the second and
the total capacitance is 70 F, what are the values of each capacitor?
Answers
1. 2.2 F; 2. 1000 F; 3. 20 F, 40 F, and 10 F
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
NOTES...
1. For capacitors in parallel, total
capacitance is always larger than
the largest capacitance, while for
capacitors in series, total capaci-
tance is always smaller than the
smallest capacitance.
2. The formula for capacitors in 
parallel is similar to the formula
for resistors in series, while the
formula for capacitors in series is
similar to the formula for resistors
in parallel.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

352
Chapter 10 | Capacitors and Capacitance
(a) Series connection
V1
E
V2
VN






V


C1
C2
CN
(b) Equivalent
V


CT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–22
Capacitors in series: C
1
T
  C
1
1
 	 C
1
2
 	 … 	 C
1
N
.
EXAMPLE 10–7       
Refer to Figure 10–23(a):
a. Determine CT.
b. If 50 V is applied across the capacitors, determine Q.
c. Determine the voltage on each capacitor.
Solution
a. C
1
T
  C
1
1
 	 C
1
2
 	 C
1
3
  
30
1
F
 	 
60
1
F
 	 
20
1
F

 0.0333  106 	 0.0167  106 	 0.05  106  0.1  106
Therefore as indicated in (b),
CT  
0.1 
1
106
  10 F
b. Q  CTV  (10  106 F)(50 V)  0.5 mC
c. V1  QC1  (0.5  103 C)(30  106 F)  16.7 V
V2  QC2  (0.5  103 C)(60  106 F)  8.3 V
V3  QC3  (0.5  103 C)(20  106 F)  25.0 V
Check: V1 	 V2 	 V3  16.7 	 8.3 	 25  50 V.
CT
C3
C2
C1
30 μF
10 μF
60 μF
20 μF
(a)
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–23
Calculator Hint: You can also
use your calculator to evaluate
Equation 10–15 directly. For the
capacitors of Example 10–7, the
solution for CT would look simi-
lar to the following, depending
on the make and model of your
calculator.
Thus, CT  10 F.
For N equal capacitors in series, Equation 10–15 yields CT  CN.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Voltage Divider Rule for Series Capacitors
For capacitors in series (Figure 10–25) a simple voltage divider rule can be
developed. Recall, for individual capacitors, Q1  C1V1, Q2  C2V2, and so on,
and for the complete string, QT  CTVT. As noted earlier, Q1  Q2  . . .  QT.
Thus, C1V1  CTVT. Solving for V1 yields
V1 C
C
T
1
VT
Section 10.7 | Capacitors in Parallel and Series
353
EXAMPLE 10–8        
For the circuit of Figure 10–24(a), determine CT.
Solution
The problem is easily solved through step-by-step reduction. C2 and
C3 in parallel yield 45 F 	 15 F  60 F. C4 and C5 in parallel total 20 F.
The reduced circuit is shown in (b). The two 60-F capacitances in series
reduce to 30 F. The series combination of 30 F and 20 F can be found from
Equation 10–16. Thus,
CT  
3
3
0
0 


F
F

	
2
2
0
0


F
F  12 F
Alternately, use your calculator to reduce (b) as described in Example 10–7.
12  F
60  F
20 F
30  F
CT
(c)
60  F
CT
20  F
12  F
CT
60  F
45  F
CT
8  F
C5
C4
15  F
C2
C3
C1
(b)
(a)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–24
Systematic reduction.
V1
V2
V3
E








VT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–25
Capacitive voltage divider.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

This type of relationship holds for all capacitors. Thus,
Vx C
C
T
x
VT
(10–17)
From this, you can see that the voltage across a capacitor is inversely propor-
tional to its capacitance, that is, the smaller the capacitance, the larger the volt-
age, and vice versa. Other useful variations are
V1 C
C
2
1
V2,
V1 C
C
3
1
V3,
V2 C
C
3
2
V3,
and so on.
354
Chapter 10 | Capacitors and Capacitance
1. Verify the voltages of Example 10–7 using the voltage divider rule for
capacitors.
2. Determine the voltage across each capacitor of Figure 10–24 if the voltage
across C5 is 30 V.
Answers
1. V1  16.7 V, V2  8.3 V, V3  25.0 V; 2. V1  10 V, V2  V3  10 V, V4  V5  30 V
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
As noted earlier (Figure 10–2), during charging, electrons are moved from one
plate of a capacitor to the other plate. Several points should be noted.
1. This movement of electrons constitutes a current.
2. This current lasts only long enough for the capacitor to charge. When the
capacitor is fully charged, current is zero.
3. Current in the circuit during charging is due solely to the movement of
electrons from one plate to the other around the external circuit through
the battery; no current passes through the dielectric between the plates.
4. As charge is deposited on the plates, the capacitor voltage builds. However,
this voltage does not jump to full value immediately since it takes time to
move electrons from one plate to the other. (Billions of electrons must be
moved.)
5. Since voltage builds up as charging progresses, the difference in voltage
between the source and the capacitor decreases and hence the rate of move-
ment of electrons (i.e., the current) decreases as the capacitor approaches
full charge.
Figure 10–26 shows what the voltage and current look like during the
charging process. As indicated, the current starts out with an initial surge, then
decays to zero while the capacitor voltage gradually climbs from zero to full
voltage. The charging time typically ranges from nanoseconds to milliseconds,
depending on the resistance and capacitance of the circuit. (We study these
relationships in detail in Chapter 11.) A similar surge (but in the opposite direc-
tion) occurs during discharge.
As Figure 10–26 indicates, current exists only while the capacitor voltage
is changing. This observation turns out to be true in general, that is, current in
a capacitor exists only while capacitor voltage is changing. The reason is not
10.8 Capacitor
Current and
Voltage During
Charging
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

hard to understand. As you saw before, a capacitor’s dielectric is an insulator,
and consequently no current can pass through it (assuming zero leakage). The
only charges that can move, therefore, are the free electrons that exist on the
capacitor’s plates. When capacitor voltage is constant, these charges are in
equilibrium, no net movement of charge occurs, and the current is thus zero.
However, if the source voltage is increased, additional electrons are pulled
from the positive plate; inversely, if the source voltage is decreased, excess
electrons on the negative plate are returned to the positive plate. Thus, in both
cases, capacitor current results when capacitor voltage is changed. As we show
next, this current is proportional to the rate of change of voltage. Before we do
this, however, we need to look at symbols.
Symbols for Time-Varying Voltages and Currents
Quantities that vary with time are called instantaneous quantities. Standard
industry practice requires that we use lowercase letters for time-varying quan-
tities, rather than capital letters as for dc. Thus, we use vC and iC to represent
changing capacitor voltage and current rather than VC and IC. (Often we drop
the subscripts and just use v and i.) Since these quantities are functions of time,
they may also be shown as vC(t) and iC(t).
Capacitor v-i Relationship
The relationship between charge and voltage for a capacitor is given by
Equation 10–1. For the time-varying case, it is
q  CvC
(10–18)
But current is the rate of movement of charge. In calculus notation, this is 
iC  dq/dt. Differentiating Equation 10–18 yields
iC  d
d
q
t
  d
d
t
(CvC)
(10–19)
Since C is constant, we get
iC  Cd
d
v
t
C
(A)
(10–20)
Equation 10–20 shows that current through a capacitor is equal to C times the
rate of change of voltage across it. This means that the faster the voltage
Section 10.8 | Capacitor Current and Voltage during Charging
355
R
vC
E


iC
(a)
(b) Current surge during charging. Current
is 0 when fully charged.
Before
charging
During
charging
After
charging
Current decays
as capacitor
charges
Time
iC
(c) Capacitor voltage. vC = E
when fully charged.
Voltage builds
as capacitor charges
Time
E
vC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–26
The capacitor does not charge instantaneously, as a ﬁnite amount of time is required to move electrons around the circuit.
CircuitSim 10-3 
NOTES...
Calculus is introduced at this point
to aid in the development of ideas
and to help explain concepts.
However, not everyone who uses
this book knows calculus. Therefore,
the material is presented in such a
manner that it never relies entirely
on mathematics; thus, where calcu-
lus is used, intuitive explanations
accompany it. However, to provide
the enrichment that calculus offers,
optional derivations and problems
are included, but they are marked
with a
icon so that they may be
omitted if desired.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

changes, the larger the current, and vice versa. It also means that if the voltage
is constant, the current is zero (as we noted earlier).
Reference conventions for voltage and current are shown in Figure 10–27.
As usual, the plus sign goes at the tail of the current arrow. If the voltage is
increasing, dvC/dt is positive and the current is in the direction of the reference
arrow; if the voltage is decreasing, dvC/dt is negative and the current is oppo-
site to the arrow.
The derivative dvC/dt of Equation 10–20 is the slope of the capacitor volt-
age versus time curve. When capacitor voltage varies linearly with time (i.e., the
relationship is a straight line as in Figure 10–28), Equation 10–20 reduces to
iC  C
D
D
v
t
C
  Cr
r
i
u
s
n
e  C  slope of the line
(10–21)
356
Chapter 10 | Capacitors and Capacitance
vC


iC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–27
The 	 sign for vC goes at
the tail of the current arrow.
EXAMPLE 10–9       
A signal generator applies voltage to a 5-F capacitor with a waveform as in
Figure 10–28(a). The voltage rises linearly from 0 V to 10 V in 1 ms, falls linearly
to 10 V at t  3 ms, remains constant until t  4 ms, rises to 10 V at t  5 ms,
and remains constant thereafter.
a. Determine the slope of vC in each time interval.
b. Determine the current and sketch its graph.
Solution
a. We need the slope of vC during each time interval where slope  riserun 
vt.
0 ms to 1 ms: v  10 V; t  1 ms; therefore, slope  10 V1 ms 
10 000 V/s.
1 ms to 3 ms: Slope  20 V2 ms  10 000 V/s.
3 ms to 4 ms: Slope  0 V/s.
4 ms to 5 ms: Slope  20 V1 ms  20 000 V/s.
b. iC  CdvCdt  C times slope. Thus,
0 ms to 1 ms: i  (5  106 F)(10 000 V/s)  50 mA.
1 ms to 3 ms: i  (5  106 F)(10 000 V/s)  50 mA.
3 ms to 4 ms: i  (5  106 F)(0 V/s)  0 A.
4 ms to 5 ms: i  (5  106 F)(20 000 V/s)  100 mA.
The current is plotted in Figure 10–28(b).
10
–10
1      2       3       4      5
vC (V)
t(mS)
0
Slope = 20 000 V/s
Slope = −10 000 V/s
Slope = 10 000 V/s
(a)
(b)
50
1
2
3
4
5
6
–50
iC (mA)
t (mS)
100 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–28
CircuitSim 10-4 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 10.10 | Capacitor Failures and Troubleshooting
357
EXAMPLE 10–10        
The voltage across a 20-F capacitor is vC  100 t et V. Determine current iC.
Solution
Differentiation by parts using 
d(
d
u
t
v)
  ud
d
v
t
 	 v d
d
u
t
 with u  100 t
and v  e–t yields
iC  Cd
d
t
(100 t et)  100 Cd
d
t
(t et)  100 Ctd
d
t
(et) 	 etd
d
t
t

 2000  106(t et 	 et) A  2.0 (1  t)et mA
An ideal capacitor does not dissipate power. When power is transferred to a
capacitor, all of it is stored as energy in the capacitor’s electric ﬁeld. When the
capacitor is discharged, this stored energy is returned to the circuit. You will
ﬁnd that this is an important observation when you study ac in Chapter 15.
To determine the stored energy, consider Figure 10–29. Power is given by
p  vi watts. Using calculus (see ), it can be shown that the stored energy is
given by
W  1
2
CV2
(J)
(10–22)
where V is the voltage across the capacitor. This means that the energy at any
time depends on the value of the capacitor’s voltage at that time. We will leave
this topic at this time, but return to it again in Chapter 17 and later chapters where
you encounter it in an ac context.
Deriving Equation 10–22
Power to the capacitor (Figure 10–29) is given by p  vi, where i  Cdvdt.
Therefore, p  Cvdvdt. However, p  dWdt. Equate the two values of p, then
after a bit of manipulation, you can integrate. Thus,
W 
t
0pdt  C
t
0vd
d
v
t
 dt  C
V
0 vdv  1
2
CV2
10.9 Energy Stored 
by a Capacitor
v
p
i
W


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–29
Storing energy in a 
capacitor.
Although capacitors are quite reliable, they may fail because of misapplication,
excessive voltage, current, temperature, or simply because they age. They can
short internally, leads may become open, dielectrics may become excessively
leaky, and they may fail catastrophically due to incorrect use. (If an electrolytic
capacitor is connected with its polarity reversed, for example, it may explode.)
Capacitors should be used well within their rating limits. Excessive voltage can
lead to dielectric puncture creating pinholes that short the plates together. High
temperatures may cause an increase in leakage and/or a permanent shift in capac-
itance. High temperatures may be caused by inadequate heat removal, excessive
current, lossy dielectrics, or an operating frequency beyond the capacitor’s rated
limit. Generally, capacitors are so inexpensive that you simply replace them if
you suspect they are faulty. To help locate faulty capacitors, you can sometimes
use an ohmmeter or a capacitor tester, as described next.
10.10 Capacitor
Failures and
Troubleshooting
CircuitSim 10-5 
CircuitSim 10-6 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Basic Testing with an Ohmmeter
Some basic (out-of-circuit) tests can be made with an analog ohmmeter. The
ohmmeter can detect opens and shorts and, to a certain extent, leaky dielectrics.
First, ensure that the capacitor is discharged, then set the ohmmeter to its high-
est range and connect it to the capacitor. (For electrolytic devices, ensure that
the plus [	] side of the ohmmeter is connected to the plus [	] side of the
capacitor.)
Initially, the ohmmeter reading should be low, then for a good capacitor
gradually increase to inﬁnity as the capacitor charges through the ohmmeter
circuit. (Or at least a very high value, since most good capacitors, except elec-
trolytics, have a resistance of hundreds of megohms.) (For small capacitors,
this test is probably useless, as the time for charging may be too short to yield
useful results.)
Faulty capacitors respond differently. If a capacitor is shorted, the meter
resistance reading will stay low. If it is leaky, the reading will be lower than
normal. If it is open circuited, the meter will indicate inﬁnity immediately,
without dipping to zero when ﬁrst connected.
Capacitor Testers
Ohmmeter testing is of limited usefulness as it tells you nothing about capac-
itor quality issues such as ESR. For investigating these, more sophisticated
tester/analyzers are needed. Figure 10–30 shows two. The Smart Tweezers™
device of (a) is designed primarily for testing surface mount components
(such as that shown in Figure 10–19). It is a fully featured LCR tester that can
test capacitors, resistors, and inductors. For capacitor testing, it determines
capacitance, ESR, and dissipation factor, and also checks for shorts. As indi-
cated, values are displayed directly in standard units. The BK Precision 889B
bench mount instrument of (b) is an LCR/ESR component tester designed to
test inductors, capacitors, and resistors. In terms of capacitor testing, it mea-
sures capacitance, determines leakage, dielectric absorption, ESR, quality
factor Q and more—see Note. 
358
Chapter 10 | Capacitors and Capacitance
NOTES...
Quality factor and dissipation factor
as applied to capacitor quality are
specialized topics that are beyond
the scope of this book, and thus
they are not dealt with here.
Manuals (such as that for the 889B
as found on the manufacturer’s Web
site) are often good sources of infor-
mation. However, wait until you
have studied Chapter 21 of this
book before you try to understand
the concepts.
Photo courtesy of Advance Devices, Inc.
(a)These Smart Tweezers™ measure capacitance,
inductance, and resistance plus secondary
parameters such as capacitor ESR.
Courtesy of B & K Precision
(b) This LCR/ESR tester/analyzer features a USB interface
for connection to a computer.
FIGURE 10–30
Instruments for capacitor testing and troubleshooting.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
359
Problems
10.1
Capacitance
1. For Figure 10–31, determine the charge on the capacitor, its capacitance, or
the voltage across it as applicable for each of the following.
a. E  40 V, C  20 F
d. Q  3  104 C, C  10  106 F
b. V  500 V, Q  1000 C
e. Q  6 mC, C  40 F
c. V  200 V, C  500 nF
f. V  1200 V, Q  1.8 mC
2. Repeat Question 1 for the following:
a. V  2.5 kV, Q  375 C
d. Q  10 C, C  400 nF
b. V  1.5 kV, C  0.04  104 F
e. V  150 V, C  40  105 F
c. V  150 V, Q  6  105 C
f. Q  6  109 C, C  800 pF
3. The charge on a 50-F capacitor is 10  103 C. What is the potential
difference between its terminals?
4. When 10 C of charge is placed on a capacitor, its voltage is 25 V. What is
the capacitance?
5. You charge a 5-F capacitor to 150 V. Your lab partner then momentarily
places a resistor across its terminals and bleeds off enough charge that its
voltage falls to 84 V. What is the ﬁnal charge on the capacitor?
10.2
Factors Affecting Capacitance
6. A capacitor with circular plates 0.1 m in diameter and an air dielectric has
0.1 mm spacing between its plates. What is its capacitance?
7. A parallel-plate capacitor with a mica dielectric has dimensions of 1 cm 
1.5 cm and separation of 0.1 mm. What is its capacitance?
8. For the capacitor of Problem 7, if the mica is removed, what is its new
capacitance?
9. The capacitance of an oil-ﬁlled capacitor is 200 pF. If the separation between
its plates is 0.1 mm, what is the area of its plates?
10. A 0.01-F capacitor has ceramic with a dielectric constant of 7500. If the
ceramic is removed, the plate separation doubled, and the spacing between
plates ﬁlled with oil, what is the new value for C?
11. A capacitor with a Teﬂon dielectric has a capacitance of 33 F. A second
capacitor with identical physical dimensions but with a Mylar dielectric
carries a charge of 55  104 C. What is its voltage?
12. The plate area of a capacitor is 4.5 in.2 and the plate separation is 5 mils. 
If the relative permittivity of the dielectric is 80, what is C?
10.3
Electric Fields
13. a. What is the electric ﬁeld strength  at a distance of 1 cm from a 100-mC
charge in transformer oil?
b. What is  at twice the distance?
14. Suppose that 150 V is applied across a 100-pF parallel-plate capacitor whose
plates are separated by 1 mm. What is the electric ﬁeld intensity  between
the plates?
FIGURE 10–31
E
C
V
+
−
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10.4
Dielectrics
15. An air-dielectric capacitor has plate spacing of 1.5 mm. How much voltage
can be applied before breakdown occurs?
16. Repeat Problem 15 if the dielectric is mica and the spacing is 2 mils.
17. A mica-dielectric capacitor breaks down when E volts is applied. The mica is
removed and the spacing between plates doubled. If breakdown now occurs
at 500 V, what is E?
18. Determine at what voltage the dielectric of a 200 nF Mylar capacitor with a
plate area of 0.625 m2 will break down.
19. Figure 10–32 shows several gaps, including a parallel-plate capacitor, a set of
small spherical points, and a pair of sharp points. The spacing is the same for
each. As the voltage is increased, which gap breaks down for each case?
20. If you continue to increase the source voltage of Figures 10–32(a), (b), and
(c) after a gap breaks down, will the second gap also break down? Justify
your answer.
10.5
Nonideal Effects
21. A 25-F capacitor has a negative temperature coefﬁcient of 175 ppm/
 C. By
how much and in what direction might it vary if the temperature rises by
50
 C? What would be its new value?
22. If a 4.7-F capacitor changes to 4.8 F when the temperature rises 40
 C,
what is its temperature coefﬁcient?
10.7
Capacitors in Parallel and Series
23. What is the equivalent capacitance of 10 F, 12 F, 22 F, and 33 F
connected in parallel?
24. What is the equivalent capacitance of 0.10 F, 220 nF, and 4.7  107 F
connected in parallel?
25. Repeat Problem 23 if the capacitors are connected in series.
26. Repeat Problem 24 if the capacitors are connected in series.
27. Determine CT for each circuit of Figure 10–33.
28. Determine total capacitance looking at the terminals for each circuit of
Figure 10–34.
29. A 30-F capacitor is connected in parallel with a 60-F capacitor, and a 
10-F capacitor is connected in series with the parallel combination. What 
is CT?
30. For Figure 10–35, determine Cx.
31. For Figure 10–36, determine C3 and C4.
32. For Figure 10–37, determine CT.
33. You have capacitors of 22 F, 47 F, 2.2 F, and 10 F. Connecting these
any way you want, what is the largest equivalent capacitance you can get?
The smallest?
34. A 10-F and a 4.7-F capacitor are connected in parallel. After a third
capacitor is added to the circuit, CT  2.695 F. What is the value of the
third capacitor? How is it connected?
35. Consider capacitors of 1 F, 1.5 F, and 10 F. If CT  10.6 F, how are
the capacitors connected?
360
Chapter 10 | Capacitors and Capacitance
Plates
Points
(a)
(b)
(c)
Plates
Spheres
Spheres
Points
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–32
Source voltage is increased
until one of the gaps breaks down. (The
source has high internal resistance to limit
current following breakdown.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
361
FIGURE 10–34
FIGURE 10–33
C2
a
b
CT
C1
C3
12 μF
120 μF
80 μF
(a)
C2
a
b
C1
C3
CT
4 μF
1 μF
8 μF
(b)
4 F
5 F
CT
C1
C2
C3
6 F
a
b
(c)
(d)
C1
C2
C3
C4
C6
C5
3 F
2 F
CT
6 F
a
b
1 F
1 F
500 nF
© Cengage Learning 2013
a
b
CT
0.47 μF
0.22 μF
47 μF
0.15 μF
(a)
a
b
CT
0.0005 μF
100 pF
500 pF
100 pF
1000 pF
(b)
a
b
47 μF
0.1 μF
1 μF
CT
10 μF
100 000 pF
4.7
μF
(c)
2.2
μF
16
a
b
14
16
18
12
10
10
5
4
3.2
CT
(d) All values in F
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36. For the capacitors of Problem 35, if CT  2.304 F, how are the capacitors
connected?
37. For Figures 10–33(c) and (d), ﬁnd the voltage on each capacitor if 100 V is
applied to terminals a–b.
38. Use the voltage divider rule to ﬁnd the voltage across each capacitor of
Figure 10–38.
39. Repeat Problem 38 for the circuit of Figure 10–39.
40. For Figure 10–40, Vx  50 V. Determine Cx and CT.
41. For Figure 10–41, determine Cx.
42. A dc source is connected to terminals a–b of Figure 10–35. If Cx is 12 F
and the voltage across the 40-F capacitor is 80 V,
a. What is the source voltage?
b. What is the total charge on the capacitors?
c. What is the charge on each individual capacitor?
362
Chapter 10 | Capacitors and Capacitance
FIGURE 10–35
FIGURE 10–36
FIGURE 10–37
40 F
10 F
Cx
20 F
© Cengage Learning 2013
40 F
30 F
C4
20 F
C3 = 2C4
© Cengage Learning 2013
75 F
V = 10 V
50 F
CT
Q = 100 C


© Cengage Learning 2013
20 F
V3
60 F 
30 F
120 V
V1
V2






© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–39
FIGURE 10–40
FIGURE 10–41
FIGURE 10–38
25 F
40 F
16 F
60 V
V1
V2
35 F
V3






© Cengage Learning 2013
Cx
Vx
50 F
75 F
100 V


© Cengage Learning 2013
40 F
500 F
Cx
100 V
1200 F
100 F
16 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
10.8
Capacitor Current and Voltage During Charging
43. The voltage across the capacitor of Figure 10–42(a) is shown in (b). Sketch
current iC scaled with numerical values.
44. The current through a 1-F capacitor is shown in Figure 10–43. Sketch volt-
age vC scaled with numerical values. Voltage at t  0 s is 0 V.
45. If the voltage across a 4.7-F capacitor is vC  100e0.05t V, what is iC?
46. Current through a 0.1-F capacitor is iC  t et A. If the capacitor voltage is
0 V at t  0, determine the equation for vC. Hint: Integration of Equation 10–20
is required.
10.9
Energy Stored by a Capacitor
47. For Figure 10–42, determine the capacitor’s energy at each of the following
times: t  0, 1 ms, 4 ms, 5 ms, 7 ms, and 9 ms.
48. For the circuit of Figure 10–38, determine the energy stored in each capacitor.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10.10
Capacitor Failures and Troubleshooting
49. The capacitor tester in Figure 10–44 measures and displays capacitance. 
For each case, determine the likely fault.
Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
363
(a)
(b)
30
20
10
0
10
1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9
vC
t (ms)
5 F
iC
vC


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–42
40
20
0         1      2      3      4      5
i (mA)
t (mS)
-20
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–43
8.92 nF


(a)
0.068 μF
C3
0.015 μF
0.022 μF
C1
C2
(b)
0.033 μF
0.33 μF
C1
C2
C3
0.22 μF
(c)
0.47 F 0.1 F
C3
C2
C1
100 V
0.22 F


68.1 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 10–44
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. a. 2.12 nF
b. 200 V
2. It becomes six times larger.
3. 1.1 nF
4. Mica
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Capacitive Loading
Capacitive Transients
Continuous
Discontinuous
Duty Cycle
Exponential Functions
Final Condition Circuit
Initial Condition
Period
Pulse
Pulse Repetition
Frequency (PRF)
Pulse Repetition Rate
(PRR)
Pulse Train
Pulse Width
Rise and Fall Times
Square Wave
Steady State
Stray Capacitance
Time Constant
Transient
Transient Duration
Universal Time Constant
Curve
I OUTLINE
Introduction
Capacitor Charging
Equations
Capacitor with an Initial
Voltage
Capacitor Discharging
Equations
More Complex Circuits
An RC Timing Application
Pulse Response of RC
Circuits
Transient Analysis Using
Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• explain why transients occur in RC circuits,
• explain why an uncharged capacitor looks
like a short circuit when ﬁrst energized,
• describe why a capacitor looks like an open
circuit to steady state dc,
• describe charging and discharging of simple
RC circuits with dc excitation,
• determine voltages and currents in simple
RC circuits during charging and discharging,
• plot voltage and current transients,
• understand the part that time constants play
in determining the duration of transients,
• compute time constants,
• describe the use of charging and discharging
waveforms in simple timing applications,
• calculate the pulse response of simple RC
circuits,
• solve simple RC transient problems using
PSpice and Multisim.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11
CAPACITOR CHARGING, DISCHARGING, 
AND SIMPLE WAVESHAPING CIRCUITS
A
s you saw in Chapter 10, Figure 10–26, a capacitor does not charge instantaneously; instead,
voltages and currents take time to reach their new values.  As we show in this chapter, this
time depends on the capacitance of the circuit and the resistance through which it charges—
the larger the resistance and capacitance, the longer it takes. (Similar comments hold for dis-
charge.) Since the voltages and currents that exist during charging and discharging are
transitory in nature, they are called transients. Transients do not last very long, typically only a
fraction of a second. However, they are important to us for a number of reasons, some of which
you will learn in this chapter.
Transients occur in both capacitive and inductive circuits. In capacitive circuits, they occur
because capacitor voltage cannot change instantaneously; in inductive circuits, they occur
because inductor current cannot change instantaneously. In this chapter, we look at capacitive
transients; in Chapter 14, we look at inductive transients. As you will see, many of the basic
principles are the same. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

366
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
Putting It in Perspective
Desirable and Undesirable Transients
TRANSIENTS OCCUR IN CAPACITIVE AND inductive circuits whenever circuit conditions are changed, for
example, by the sudden application of a voltage, the switching in or out of a circuit element, or
the malfunctioning of a circuit component. Some transients are desirable and useful; others occur
under abnormal conditions and are potentially destructive in nature.
An example of the latter is the transient that results when lightning strikes a power line.
Following a strike, the line voltage, which may have been only a few thousand volts before the
strike, momentarily rises to many hundreds of thousands of volts or higher, then rapidly decays,
while the current, which may have been only a few hundred amps, suddenly rises to many times
its normal value. Although these transients do not last very long, they can cause serious damage.
While this is a rather severe example of a transient, it nonetheless illustrates that during transient
conditions, many of a circuit’s or system’s most difﬁcult problems may arise.
Some transient effects, on the other hand, are useful. For example, many electronic devices
and circuits (such as oscillators and timers) utilize transient effects due to capacitor charging and
discharging as the basis for their operation. You will see an example of such a usage in Section 11.6
of this chapter. I
Capacitor Charging
Capacitor charging and discharging may be studied using the simple circuit of
Figure 11–1. We will begin with charging. First, assume the capacitor is un-
charged and that the switch is open—see Note 1. Now move the switch to the
charge position, Figure 11–2(a). At the instant the switch is closed the current
jumps to E/R amps, then decays to zero, while the voltage, which is zero at the
instant the switch is closed, gradually climbs to E volts. This is shown in (b)
and (c). The shapes of these curves are easily explained.
First, consider voltage. In order to change capacitor voltage, electrons must be
moved from one plate to the other. Even for a relatively small capacitor, billions of
electrons must be moved. This takes time. Consequently, capacitor voltage cannot
11.1 Introduction
FIGURE 11–1
Circuit for studying capaci-
tor charging and discharging. Transient
voltages and currents result when the
circuit is switched.
vC


2
1
R
C
E
Discharge
position
Charge
position
iC
© Cengage Learning 2013
NOTES...
1. In textbooks, it is traditional to use switches to initiate transients. Although
transients in real life result from a variety of causes, the principles that govern
their behavior are the same no matter how they are created. In a learning
environment, the simplest way to create a transient is by means of a
switch—so that is what we do here.
2. For those with a calculus background, recall,
iC  C d
dv
t
C

If voltage is not continuous, the derivative yields an inﬁnite current spike.
Since inﬁnite current spikes are not possible, we conclude that voltage cannot
be discontinuous.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

change instantaneously, that is, it cannot jump abruptly from one value to another.
Instead, it climbs gradually and smoothly as illustrated in Figure 11–2(b). Stated
another way, capacitor voltage must be continuous at all times—see Note 2.
Section 11.1 | Introduction
367
(a)
E
R
iC
vC


1
t
vC
E
0
(b)
Transient
interval
Steady
state
(c)
t
iC
E
R
0
0 A
amps
E
R
Transient
interval
Steady
state
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–2
Capacitor voltage and current during charging. Time t  0 s is deﬁned as the instant the switch is moved to the 
charge position. The capacitor is initially uncharged. 
FIGURE 11–3
An uncharged capacitor
looks like a short circuit at the instant of
switching.
vC = 0


R
E
E
R
iC =
(a) Circuit as it looks just after the
switch is moved to the charge
position; vC is still zero
(b) Since vC = 0, 
iC = E/R
vC = 0


R
E
E
R
iC =
Looks like a short
© Cengage Learning 2013
iC = 0
E
vC = E


R
C
(a)  vC = E and iC = 0
(b) Equivalent circuit for the capacitor
iC = 0
E
vC = E


R
Open circuit
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–4
Charging circuit after it has reached steady state. Since the capacitor has
voltage across it but no current, it looks like an open circuit in steady state dc.
Now consider current. The movement of electrons noted previously is a
current. As indicated in Figure 11–2(c), this current jumps abruptly from 0 to
E/R amps, that is, the current is discontinuous. To understand why, consider
Figure 11–3(a). Since capacitor voltage cannot change instantaneously, its
value just after the switch is closed will be the same as it was just before the
switch is closed, namely 0 V. Since the voltage across the capacitor just after
the switch is closed is zero (even though there is current through it), the capac-
itor looks momentarily like a short circuit. This is indicated in (b). This is an
important observation and is true in general, that is, an uncharged capacitor
looks like a short circuit at the instant of switching. Applying Ohm’s law yields
iC  ER amps. This agrees with what we indicated in Figure 11–2(c).
Finally, note the trailing end of the current curve Figure 11–2(c). Since the
dielectric between the capacitor plates is an insulator, no current can pass
through it. This means that the current in the circuit, which is due entirely to
the movement of electrons from one plate to the other through the battery, must
decay to zero as the capacitor charges.
Steady State Conditions
When the capacitor voltage and current reach their ﬁnal values and stop chang-
ing [Figure 11–2(b) and (c)], the circuit is said to be in steady state.
Figure 11–4(a) shows the circuit after it has reached steady state. Note that 
vC  E and iC  0. Since the capacitor has voltage across it but no current
through it, it looks like an open circuit as indicated in (b). This is also an impor-
tant observation and one that is true in general, that is, a capacitor looks like an
open circuit while in steady state dc. [The circuit of Figure 11–4(b) is referred
to as a ﬁnal condition circuit.]
CircuitSim 11-1 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Capacitor Discharging
Now consider the discharge case, Figures 11–5 and 11–6. First, assume the
capacitor is charged to E volts prior to switching as indicated in Figure 11–5(a).
Now move the switch to discharge. Since the capacitor has E volts across it just
before the switch is moved, and since its voltage cannot change instantaneously,
it will still have E volts across it just after as well. This is indicated in (b). The
capacitor therefore looks momentarily like a voltage source [Figure 11–5(c)],
and the current thus jumps immediately to ER amps. (Note that the current is
negative since it is opposite in direction to the reference arrow.) The voltage and
current then decay to zero as indicated in Figure 11–6.
368
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
EXAMPLE 11–1       
For Figure 11–1, E  40 V, R  10 , and the capacitor is initially uncharged.
The switch is moved to the charge position and the capacitor allowed to charge
fully. Then the switch is moved to the discharge position and the capacitor
allowed to discharge fully. Sketch the voltages and currents and determine the
values at switching and in steady state.
Solution
The current and voltage curves are shown in Figure 11–7. Initially,
i  0 A since the switch is open. Immediately after it is moved to the charge
position, the current jumps to ER  40 V10   4 A; then it decays to zero.
At the same time, vC starts at 0 V and climbs to 40 V. When the switch is moved
to the discharge position, the capacitor looks momentarily like a 40-V source
and the current jumps to a negative value of 40 V10   4 A; then it decays
to zero. At the same time, vC also decays to zero.
t
vC
E
0
(a)
(b)
iC
 E
R
t
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–6
Voltage and current during discharge. Time t  0 s is deﬁned as the instant
the switch is moved to the discharge position.
FIGURE 11–5
According to the voltage/current reference convention that you learned in Chapter 4, the current reference arrow must 
be drawn such that the  sign for vC is at its tail end. Since the polarity of vC is already known from (a), this establishes the reference
direction for iC as in (b). Since the actual current is opposite in direction to this reference, iC is negative as indicated in (c). 


R
C
2
Discharge
position
vC = E


R
vC = E
iC
Actual
current
direction
Reference current
direction
E
(a) Voltage vC = E just before
      the switch is moved to
      discharge position.
(b) Immediately after the
 
switch is moved, vC 
 
still equals E. 
(c)  The capacitor therefore momentarily
   
looks like a voltage source. Ohm’s
 
law yields  iC = E /R.
2
1
R
iC
Actual
current
direction
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
CircuitSim 11-2  
CircuitSim 11-3  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.1 | Introduction
369
NOTES...
That vC(0) equals vC(0) is actually
a statement of continuity for capaci-
tor voltage. If switching occurs at
some time other than t  0 s, a
similar statement holds. For exam-
ple, if switching occurs at t  20 s,
and voltage has a value of 40 volts
at that instant, then the statement
of continuity becomes vC(20) 
vC(20)  40 V. 
The Meaning of Time in Transient Analysis
Time t used in transient analysis is measured from the instant of switching.
Thus, t  0 in Figure 11–2 is deﬁned as the instant the switch is moved to
charge, while in Figure 11–6, it is deﬁned as the instant the switch is moved to
discharge. Following switching, voltages and currents may be represented by
functions of time as vC (t) and iC (t). For example, the voltage across a capaci-
tor at t  0 s may be denoted as vC (0), while the voltage at t  10 ms may be
denoted as vC (10 ms), and so on. If you know numeric values, they can be
included. Thus, if a capacitor has a voltage of  9 V at t  5 ms and a current of
3 mA, these can be represented as vC (5 ms)  9 V and iC (5 ms)  3 mA,
respectively.
A problem seems to arise  when a quantity is discontinuous as is the cur-
rent of Figure 11–2(c). Since its value is changing at t  0 s, iC (0) cannot be
deﬁned. To get around this problem, we deﬁne two values for 0 s. We deﬁne 
t  0 s as t  0 s just prior to switching and t  0 s as t  0 s just after
switching. In Figure 11–2(c), therefore, iC (0)  0 A while iC (0)  ER
amps. For Figure 11–6, iC (0)  0 A and iC (0)  ER amps. Note that
capacitor voltage is continuous—thus, vC(0)  vC(0)—see Note.
Exponential Functions
As we will soon show, the waveforms of Figures 11–2 and 11–6 are exponen-
tial and vary according to ex or (1  ex), where e is the base of the natural
logarithm. Fortunately, exponential functions are easy to evaluate with
CircuitSim 11-4
CircuitSim 11-5
(b) The insets show what the circuit looks
      like during each time interval.
t
vC
0 V
0 V
40 V
0
(a)
t
iC
10 
iC
vC


10 
iC
vC


Charge
phase
Discharge
phase
4 A
4 A
0
40 V
0 A
0 A
0 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–7
A charge/discharge example.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

modern calculators using their ex function. You need to be able to evaluate
both ex and (1  ex) for any value of x. Table 11–1 shows a tabulation of
values for both cases. Note that as x gets larger, ex gets smaller and approaches
zero, while (1  ex) gets larger and approaches 1. These observations will be
important to you in what follows.
370
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
x
ex
1  ex
0
1
0
1
0.3679
0.6321
2
0.1353
0.8647
3
0.0498
0.9502
4
0.0183
0.9817
5
0.0067
0.9933
TABLE 11–1
Table of Exponentials
1. Use your calculator and verify the entries in Table 11–1. Be sure to change
the sign of x before using the ex function. Note that e0  e0  1 since any
quantity raised to the zeroth power is one. Use your calculator to conﬁrm this.
2. Plot the computed values on graph paper and verify that they yield curves
that look like those shown in Figure 11–2(b) and (c). 
3. Assume that the discharge portion of the curves of Figure 11–7 begin at 
t  10 ms. What are iC(10 ms) and iC(10 ms)? What is the statement of
continuity for vC at t  10 ms?
Answers
3. iC(10 ms)  0 A;
iC(10 ms)  4 A;
vC(10 ms)  vC(10 ms)  40 V
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
We will now develop equations for voltages and current during charging.
Consider Figure 11–8. Kirchhoff’s voltage law (KVL) yields
vR  vC  E
(11–1)
But vR  RiC and iC  CdvCdt (Equation 10–20). Thus, vR  RCdvCdt.
Substituting this into Equation 11–1 yields
RCd
d
v
t
C  vC  E
(11–2)
Equation 11–2 can be solved for vC using basic calculus (see ). The result is
vC  E(1  etRC)
(11–3)
where R is in ohms, C is in farads, t is in seconds, and etRC is the exponential
function discussed earlier. The product RC has units of seconds. (This is left as
an exercise for the student to show.)
Solving Equation 11–2 (Optional Derivation—See Notes)
First, rearrange Equation 11–2:
d
d
v
t
C  R
1
C
(E  vC)
Rearrange again:

E
d

vC
vC
  R
d
C
t

11.2 Capacitor
Charging
Equations
iC
E
vC


vR


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–8
Circuit for the charging
case. Capacitor is initially uncharged.
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now multiply both sides by 1 and integrate.

vC
0 
vC
d

vC
E
  R
1
C
 
t
0dt
ln(vC  E)0
vC
 R
t
C
0
t
Next, substitute integration limits,
ln(vC  E)  ln(E)  R
t
C

ln
vC


E
E
  R
t
C

Finally, take the inverse log of both sides. Thus,

vC


E
E
  etRC
When you rearrange this, you get Equation 11–3. That is,
vC  E(1 etRC)
Now consider the resistor voltage. From Equation 11–1, vR  E  vC.
Substituting vC from Equation 11–3 yields vR  E  E(1  etRC)  E  E 
EetRC. After cancellation, you get
vR  EetRC
(11–4)
Now divide both sides by R. Since iC  iR  vRR, this yields
iC  E
R
etRC
(11–5)
The waveforms are shown in Figure 11–9. Values at any time may be deter-
mined by substitution.
Section 11.2 | Capacitor Charging Equations
371
NOTES...
Optional problems and derivations
using calculus are marked by a 
icon. These may be omitted without
loss of continuity by those who do
not require calculus. 
t
vC
E
0
vC = E (1e           )
t
vR
E
0
t / RC
vR = E e t / RC
t
iC
0
iC =      e t / RC
E
R
E
R
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–9
Curves for the circuit 
of Figure 11–8.
EXAMPLE 11–2        
Suppose E  100 V, R  10 k, and C  10 F:
a. Determine the expression for vC.
b. Determine the expression for iC.
c. Compute the capacitor voltage at t  150 ms.
d. Compute the capacitor current at t  150 ms.
e. Locate the computed points on the curves.
Solution
a. RC  (10 	 103 )(10 	 106 F)  0.1 s. From Equation 11–3,
vC  E(1  etRC)  100(1  et0.1)  100(1  e10t) V.
b. From Equation 11–5, iC  (ER)etRC  (100V10 k)e10t  10e10t mA.
c. At t  0.15 s, vC  100(1  e10t)  100(1  e10(0.15))  100(1  e1.5) 
100(1  0.223)  77.7 V.
d. iC  10e10t mA  10e10(0.15) mA  10e1.5 mA  2.23 mA.
e. The corresponding points are shown in Figure 11–10.
(a)
t (ms)
vC
100 V
150
0
77.7 V
vC = 100 (1e       )V
10t
(b)
t (ms)
iC
10 mA
150
0
2.23 mA
iC = 10 e         mA
10t
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–10
The computed points plot-
ted on the vC and iC curves.
CircuitSim 11-6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In the preceding example, we expressed voltage as vC  100(1  et/0.1)
and as 100(1  e10t) V. Similarly, current can be expressed as iC  10et/0.1
or as 10e10t mA. Although some people prefer one notation over the other,
both are correct and you can use them interchangeably.
372
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
1. Determine additional voltage and current points for Figure 11–10 by com-
puting values of vC and iC at values of time from t  0 s to t  500 ms at
100-ms intervals. Plot the results.
2. The switch of Figure 11–11 is closed at t  0 s. If E  80 V, R  4 k,
and C  5 F, determine expressions for vC and iC. Plot the results from 
t  0 s to t  100 ms at 20-ms intervals. Note that charging takes less time
here than for Problem 1.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
E
C
vC
iC


R
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–11
Answers
1.
2. 80(1  e– 50t)V
20e– 50t mA
t(ms)
vC(V)
ic(mA)
0
0
20
20
50.6
7.36
40
69.2
2.70
60
76.0
0.996
80
78.6
0.366
100
79.4
0.135
t(ms)
vC(V)
iC(mA)
0
0
10
100
63.2
3.68
200
86.5
1.35
300
95.0
0.498
400
98.2
0.183
500
99.3
0.067
EXAMPLE 11–3       
For the circuit of Figure 11–11, E  60 V, R  2 k, and C  25 F. The switch
is closed at t  0 s, opened 40 ms later and left open. Determine equations for
capacitor voltage and current and plot.
Solution
RC  (2 k)(25 F)  50 ms. As long as the switch is closed 
(i.e., from t  0 s to 40 ms), the following equations hold:
vC  E (1 – e–tRC)  60(1 – e–t50 ms) V
iC  (ER)e–tRC  30e–t50 ms mA
Voltage starts at 0 V and rises exponentially. At t  40 ms, the switch is opened,
interrupting charging. At this instant, vC  60(1  e(4050))  60(1  e0.8) 
33.0 V. Since the switch is left open, the voltage remains constant at 33 V there-
after as indicated in Figure 11–12. (The dotted curve shows how the voltage
would have kept rising if the switch had remained closed.)
Now consider current. The current starts at 30 mA and decays to iC 
30e(4050) mA  13.5 mA at t  40 ms. At this point, the switch is opened, and
the current drops instantly to zero. (The dotted line shows how the current
would have decayed if the switch had not been opened.)
NOTES...
As you go through the examples
and problems of this chapter, you
will sometimes ﬁnd that you cannot
simply substitute numbers into
equations to get the correct 
solution—you may in fact have to
reason your way through several
steps. This may be seen in 
Example 11–3, where early switch-
ing prematurely stops charging.
CircuitSim 11-7  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Time Constant
The rate at which a capacitor charges depends on the product of R and C. This
product is known as the time constant of the circuit and is given the symbol t
(the Greek letter tau). As noted earlier, RC has units of seconds. Thus,
t  RC (seconds, s)
(11–6)
Using t, Equations 11–3 to 11–5 can be written as
vC  E(1  ett)
(11–7)
iC  E
R
ett
(11–8)
and
vR  Eett
(11–9)
Duration of a Transient
The length of time that a transient lasts (i.e., the transient duration) depends
on the exponential function et/t. As t increases, et/t decreases, and when it
reaches zero, the transient is gone. Theoretically, this takes inﬁnite time. In prac-
tice, however, over 99% of the transition takes place during the ﬁrst ﬁve time
constants (i.e., transients are within 1% of their ﬁnal value at t  5 t). This can
be veriﬁed by direct substitution. At t  5 t, vC  E(1  ett)  E(1  e5) 
E(1  0.0067)  0.993E, meaning that the transient has achieved 99.3% of its
ﬁnal value. Similarly, the current falls to within 1% of its ﬁnal value in ﬁve time
constants. Thus, for all practical purposes, transients can be considered to
last for only ﬁve time constants (Figure 11–13). Figure 11–14 summarizes how
Section 11.2 | Capacitor Charging Equations
373
t (ms)
vC
60 V
Capacitor voltage
stops changing when
the switch opens
0
40
33 V
(a)
(b)
t (ms)
iC (mA)
30
Current drops
to 0
0
40
13.5
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–12
Interrupted charging. The switch of Figure 11–11 was opened at t  40
ms, causing charging to cease.
t
vC
iC or vR
0
5
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–13
Transients last ﬁve time
constants.
t
 increasing
vC
(a)
(b)
t
 increasing
iC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–14
Illustrating how voltage and current in an RC circuit are affected by its
time constant. The larger the time constant, the longer the capacitor takes to charge.
CircuitSim 11-8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

transient voltages and currents are affected by the time constant of a circuit—
the larger the time constant, the longer the duration of the transient.
374
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
EXAMPLE 11–4      
For the circuit of Figure 11–11, how long will it take for the capacitor to charge
if R  2 k and C  10 F?
Solution
t  RC  (2 k)(10 F)  20 ms. Therefore, the capacitor charges
in 5 t  100 ms.
Universal Time Constant Curves
Let us now plot capacitor voltage and current with their time axes scaled as mul-
tiples of t and their vertical axes scaled in percent. The results, Figure 11–15,
are universal time constant curves.
Points are computed from vC  100(1  ett) and iC  100ett. For
example, at t  t, vC  100(1  ett)  100(1  ett)  100(1  e1)  63.2V,
that is, 63.2%, and iC  100ett  100e1  36.8 A, which is 36.8%, and so
on. These curves provide an easy method to determine voltages and currents
with a minimum of computation.
EXAMPLE 11–5      
The transient in a circuit with C  40 F lasts 0.5 s. What is R?
Solution
5 t  0.5 s. Thus, t  0.1 s and R  t/C  0.1 s/(40 	 10–6 F) 
2.5 k.
t
vC
60%
40%
50%
70%
80%
90%
100%
30%
20%

0
10%
0%
2 3 4 5
Percent of Full Voltage
95.0%
86.5%
63.2%
99.3%
98.2%
(a)
(b)
t
iC or vR
60%
40%
50%
70%
80%
90%
100%
30%
20%

0
10%
0%
2 3 4 5
Percent
36.8%
100%
4.98%
13.5%
1.83%
0.674%
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–15
Universal voltage and current curves for RC circuits.
EXAMPLE 11–6      
Using Figure 11–15, compute vC and iC at two time constants into charge for a
circuit with E  25 V, R  5 k, and C  4 F. What is the corresponding value
of time?
Solution
At t  2 t, vC equals 86.5% of E or 0.865(25 V)  21.6 V. Similarly, iC 
0.135I0  0.135 (ER)  0.675 mA. These values occur at t  2 t  2RC  40 ms.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.3 | Capacitor with an Initial Voltage
375
1. If the capacitor of Figure 11–16 is uncharged, what is the current immediately
after closing the switch?
2. Given iC  50e20t mA.
a. What is t?
b. Compute the current at t  0 s, 25 ms, 50 ms, 75 ms, 100 ms, and 250 ms
and sketch it. Verify answers using the universal time constant curves.
3. Given vC  100(1  e50t) V, compute vC at the same time points as in
Problem 2 and sketch.
4. For Figure 11–16, determine expressions for vC and iC. Compute capacitor
voltage and current at t  0.6 s. Verify answers using the universal time con-
stant curves.
5. Refer to Figure 11–10:
a. What are vC(0) and vC(0)?
b. What are iC(0) and iC(0)?
c. What are the steady state voltage and current?
6. For the circuit of Figure 11–11, the current just after the switch is closed is
2 mA. The transient lasts 40 ms and the capacitor charges to 80 V. Determine
E, R, and C.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
E
C
vC
iC


R = 200 
40 V
C = 1000 F
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–16
Suppose a previously charged capacitor has not been discharged and thus
still has voltage on it. Let this voltage be denoted as V0. (V0 is referred to as
an initial condition.) If the capacitor is now placed in a circuit like that in
Figure 11–16, the voltage and current during charging will be affected by
the initial voltage. In this case, Equations 11–7 and 11–8 become
vC  E  (V0  E)ett
(11–10)
iC  
E 
R
V0
 ett
(11–11)
A few comments are in order about these equations. Consider
Equation 11–10. When you set t  0, you get vC  E  (V0  E)  V0. This
agrees with our assertion that the capacitor was initially charged to V0. If you
now set t  
, you get vC  E, which conﬁrms that the capacitor charges to
E volts as expected. Consider Equation 11–11. When you set t  0, you get
iC  (E  V0)R. Recalling that an initially charged capacitor looks like a
voltage source [see Figure 11–5(c)], you can see that if you replace C in
Figure 11–16 with a source V0, the current at t  0 will be (E  V0)R as
noted. Note also that these revert to Equation 11–7 and Equation 11–8 when
you set V0  0 V.
11.3 Capacitor with
an Initial Voltage
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To determine the discharge equations, move the switch to the discharge posi-
tion (Figure 11–18). (Note carefully the reference direction for current iC.)
KVL yields vR  vC  0. Substituting vR  RCdvCdt from Section 11.2 yields
RCd
d
v
t
C  vC  0
(11–12)
This can be solved for vC using basic calculus. The result is
vC  V0etRC
(11–13)
376
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
Suppose the capacitor of Figure 11–16 has 25 volts on it with polarity shown at
the time the switch is closed.
a. Determine the expression for vC.
b. Determine the expression for iC.
c. Compute vC and iC at t  0.1 s.
d. Sketch vC and iC.
Solution
t  RC  (200 )(1000 F)  0.2 s
a. From Equation 11–10,
vC  E  (V0  E)ett  40  (25  40)et0.2  40  15e5t V
b. From Equation 11–11,
iC  
E 
R
V0
et/t  
40
2

00
25
e5t  75e5t mA
c. At t  0.1 s,
vC  40  15e5t  40  15e0.5  30.9 V
iC  75e5t mA  75e0.5 mA  45.5 mA
d. The waveforms are shown in Figure 11–17 with the preceding points plotted.
FIGURE 11–17
Capacitor with an initial
voltage.
1. For Example 11–7, compute voltage and current at t  0.25 s.
2. Repeat Example 11–7 for the circuit of Figure 11–16 if V0  150 V.
Answers
1. 35.7 V, 21.5 mA
2. a. 40  190e5t V
b. 0.95e5t A
c. 75.2 V; 0.576 A
d. Curves are similar to Figure 11–17 except that vC starts at 150 V and rises to
40 V while iC starts at 0.95 A and decays to zero.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
11.4 Capacitor
Discharging
Equations
(b)
t (s)
iC
75 mA
0.1 s
0
45.5 mA
0 A
iC = 75 e       mA
5t
© Cengage Learning 2013
t (s)
vC
0
(a) V0 = 25 V
30.9 V
40 V
25 V
vC = 40  15 e        V
5t
0.1 s
EXAMPLE 11–7      
CircuitSim 11-9  
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where V0 is the voltage on the capacitor at the instant the switch is moved to
discharge. Now consider the resistor voltage. Since vR  vC  0, vR  vC and
vR  V0etRC
(11–14)
Now divide both sides by R. Since iC  iR  vRR,
iC   V
R
0etRC
(11–15)
Note that this is negative, since, during discharge, the actual current is oppo-
site in direction to the reference arrow of Figure 11–18. Voltage vC and cur-
rent iC are shown in Figure 11–19. As in the charging case, discharge
transients last ﬁve time constants. You can also write these equations in terms
of t, for example, vC  V0et/t, and so forth.
In Equations 11–13 to 11–15, V0 represents the voltage on the capacitor at the
instant the switch is moved to the discharge position. If the switch has been in
the charge position long enough for the capacitor to fully charge, V0  E, and Equa-
tions 11–13 and 11–15 become vC  EetRC and iC  (ER)etRC, respectively.
Section 11.4 | Capacitor Discharging Equations
377
vC


iR
iC
vR


2
Actual
current
direction
for discharge
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–18
Discharge case. Initial
capacitor voltage is V0. Note the reference
for iC. (To conform to the standard voltage/
current reference convention, iC must be
drawn in this direction so that the  sign for
vC is at the tail of the current arrow.) Since
the actual current direction is opposite to the
reference direction, iC will be negative. This
is indicated in Figure 11–19(b).
EXAMPLE 11–8        
For the circuit of Figure 11–18, assume the capacitor is charged to 100 V before
the switch is moved to the discharge position. Suppose R  5 k and C  25 F.
After the switch is moved to discharge,
a. Determine the expression for vC.
b. Determine the expression for iC.
c. Compute the voltage and current at 0.375 s.
Solution
RC  (5 k)(25 F)  0.125 s and V0  100 V. Therefore,
a. vC  V0etRC  100et0.125  100e8t V.
b. iC  (V0R)etRC  20e8t mA.
c. At t  0.375 s,
vC  100e8t  100e3  4.98 V
iC  20e8t mA  20e3 mA  0.996 mA
Let us verify the answers of Example 11–8 using the appropriate universal
time constant curve. As noted, t  0.125 s, thus 0.375 s  3t. From Figure
11–15(b), we see that capacitor voltage has fallen to 4.98% of E at 3t. This is
(0.0498)(100 V)  4.98 V as we computed earlier. Current can be veriﬁed sim-
ilarly. I will leave this for you to do.
t
vC
V0
5
(a)
vC = V0 e t / RC
0
t
iC
iC =
e
(b) During discharge, iC is
negative as determined
in Figure 11–18
 V0
   R
 V0
   R
t / RC
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–19
Capacitor voltage and current for the discharge case.
NOTES...
The universal time constant curve 
of Figure 11–15(b) may also be used
for discharge problems since it has
the same shape as the discharge
waveforms.
CircuitSim 11-10
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The charge and discharge equations and the universal time constant curves apply
only to circuits of the forms shown in Figures 11–2 and 11–18. Fortunately, many
circuits can be reduced to these forms using standard circuit reduction techniques
such as series and parallel combinations, source conversions, Thévenin’s theorem,
and so on. Once a circuit has been reduced to its series equivalent, you can use any
of the techniques that we have developed so far.
378
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
11.5 More Complex
Circuits
EXAMPLE 11–9      
For the circuit of Figure 11–20(a), determine expressions for vC and iC. Capaci-
tors are initially uncharged.
C2
C1
I
I
R2
Req
Ceq
R1
E
iC
100 V
Req = 2 k
iC
vC


Ceq = 10 F
(c)
(b) Req  2 k, Ceq  10 F
(a)
© Cengage Learning 2013
Solution
Req  3 k||6 k  2 k, Ceq  8 F||2 F  10 F. The reduced
circuit is shown in (b). Converting to a voltage source representation yields (c). 
ReqCeq  (2 k)(10 	 106 F)  0.020 s
Thus,
vC  E(1  etReqCeq)  100(1  et0.02)  100(1  e50t) V
iC  R
E
eq
etReqCeq  
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
et0.02  50 e50t mA
FIGURE 11–20
I  50 mA, R1  3 k, R2  6 k, C1  8 F, C2  2 F.
EXAMPLE 11–10      
The capacitor of Figure 11–21 is initially uncharged. Close the switch at 
t  0 s.
a. Determine the expression for vC.
b. Determine the expression for iC.
c. Determine capacitor current and voltage at t  5 ms and t  10 ms.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.5 | More Complex Circuits
379
Solution
Reduce the circuit to its series equivalent using Thévenin’s theorem:
R2  R2R3  160 
From Figure 11–22(a),
RTh  R1R2  R4  240160  104  96  104  200 
From Figure 11–22(b),
V2 
R1
R

2
R2
 E 
240
1

60
160
 	 100 V  40 V
From KVL, ETh  V2  40 V. The resultant equivalent circuit is shown in
Figure 11–23.
t  RThC  (200 )(50 F)  10 ms
a. vC  ETh(1  et/t)  40(1  e100t) V
b. iC  
E
R
T
T
h
h
et/t  2
4
0
0
0
et/0.01  200e100t mA
c. At t  5 ms, iC  200e100(5 ms)  121 mA. Similarly, vC  15.7 V.
Similarly, at 10 ms, iC  73.6 mA and vC  25.3 V.
100 V
R1 = 240 
C = 50 F
R4
vC


104 
R3
200 
R2
R'2
800 
a
b
iC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–21
R1 = 240 
R4
RTh
104 
R'2
160 
a
b
(a) Finding RTh
100 V
E
V'2
R1 = 240 
R4
ETh




104 
R'2
160 
a
b
(b) Finding ETh
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–22
Determining the Thévenin equivalent of Figure 11–21 following switch
closure.
CircuitSim 11-11
RTh = 200 
iC
ETh
40 V 50 F
vC


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–23
The Thévenin equivalent
of Figure 11–21.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

380
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
1. For Example 11–10, determine vC and iC at 5 ms and 10 ms using the 
universal time constant curves and compare to above. (You will have to
estimate the point on the curves for t  5 ms.)
2. For Figure 11–21, if R1  400 , R2  1200 , R3  300 , R4  50 ,
C  20 F, and E  200 V, determine equations for vC and iC.
3. Using the values shown in Figure 11–21, determine equations for vC and
iC if the capacitor has an initial voltage of 60 V.
4. Using the values of Problem 2, determine equations for vC and iC if the
capacitor has an initial voltage of 50 V.
Answers
1. 1.57 V, 121 mA; 25.3 V, 73.6 mA
2. 75(1  e250t) V;
0.375e250t A
3. 40  20e100t V;
0.1e100t A
4. 75  125e250t V;
0.625e250t A
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
PRACTICAL NOTES...
Notes about Time References and Time Constants
1. So far, we have dealt with charging and discharging problems separately.
For these, we deﬁne t  0 s as the instant the switch is moved to the
charge position for charging problems and to the discharge position for 
discharging problems.
2. When you have both charge and discharge cases in the same example,
you need to establish clearly what you mean by “time.” We use the 
following procedure:
a. Deﬁne t  0 s as the instant the switch is moved to the ﬁrst position,
then determine corresponding expressions for vC and iC. These expres-
sions and the corresponding time scale are valid until the switch is moved
to its new position.
b. When the switch is moved to its new position, shift the time reference
and make t  0 s the time at which the switch is moved to its new posi-
tion, determine new expressions for vC and iC, then use continuity con-
siderations to link the two solutions together. (These new expressions are
only valid from the new t  0 s reference point. The old expressions are
not valid on the new time scale.)
c. We now have two time scales for the same graph. However, we gener-
ally only show the ﬁrst scale explicitly; the second scale is implied rather
than shown. Computations based on the new equations must use the
new scale.
d. Use tC to represent the time constant for charging and td to represent the
time constant for discharging. Since the equivalent resistance and capaci-
tance for discharging may be different than for charging, the time con-
stants may be different for the two cases.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 11.5 | More Complex Circuits
381
EXAMPLE 11–11        
The capacitor of Figure 11–24(a) is uncharged. The switch is moved to position 1
for 10 ms, then to position 2, where it remains.
a. Determine vC during charge.
b. Determine iC during charge.
c. Determine vC during discharge.
d. Determine iC during discharge.
e. Sketch the charge and discharge waveforms.
vC (V)
0 2 4 6 8
100
10 12 14
t (ms)
5c
(a)
0
2 4 6 8
100
100
200
10
14
t (ms)
iC  (mA)
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–25
Waveforms for the circuit
of Figure 11–24. Note that only the ﬁrst
time scale is shown explicitly.
CircuitSim 11-12
NOTES...
When solving a transient problem
with multiple switch operations, you
should always draw the circuit as it
looks during each time interval of
interest. (It doesn’t take long to do
this, and it helps clarify just what it
is you need to look at for each part
of the solution.) This is illustrated in
Example 11–11. Here, we have
drawn the circuit in Figure 11–24(b)
as it looks during charging and in (c)
as it looks during discharging. These
diagrams make clear which compo-
nents are relevant to the charging
phase and which are relevant to the
discharging phase.
(a) Full circuit
R1
R3
iC
100 V
2 F
vC


2
1
800 
R2
200 
300 
(b) Charging circuit
      RTc = R1 + R2
RTc = 1000 
iC
100 V
2 F
vC


vC


2 F
iC
500 
(c) Discharging circuit
V0 = 100 V at t = 0 s
RTd
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–24
RTc is the total resistance of the charge circuit, while RTd is the total
resistance of the discharge circuit.
Solution
Figure 11–24(b) shows the equivalent charging circuit. Here,
tC  (R1  R2)C  (1 k)(2 F)  2.0 ms.
a. vC  E(1  et/tc)  100(1  e500t) V
b. iC  R
E
Tc
et/tc  
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
e500t  100e500t mA
Since 5tc  10 ms, charging is complete by the time the switch is moved to
discharge. Thus, V0  100 V when discharging begins. (This is the continuity
linkage.)
c. Figure 11–24(c) shows the equivalent discharge circuit.
td  (500 )(2 F)  1.0 ms
vC  V0et/td  100e1000t V
where t  0 s has been redeﬁned for discharge as noted earlier.
d. iC  
R2
V

0
R3
et/td   1
5
0
0
0
0
e1000t  200e1000t mA
e. See Figure 11–25. Note that discharge is more rapid than charge since
td  tc.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

382
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
EXAMPLE 11–12      
The capacitor of Figure 11–26 is uncharged. The switch is moved to position 
1 for 5 ms, then to position 2 and left there.
a. Determine vC while the switch is in position 1.
b. Determine iC while the switch is in position 1.
c. Compute vC and iC at t  5 ms.
d. Determine vC while the switch is in position 2.
e. Determine iC while the switch is in position 2.
f. Sketch the voltage and current waveforms.
g. Determine vC and iC at t  10 ms.
Solution
tc  td  RC  (1 k)(4 F)  4 ms
a. vC  E1(1  et/tc)  10(1  e250t) V
b. iC  E
R
1et/tc  
1
1
0
0
00
e250t  10e250t mA
c. At t  5 ms,
vC  10(1  e250 	 0.005)  7.14 V
iC  10e250 	 0.005 mA  2.87 mA
d. In position 2, E2  30 V, and V0  7.14 V. (V0 is the continuity linkage.)
Use Equation 11–10:
vC  E2  (V0  E2)et/td  30  (7.14  30)e250t
 30  22.86e250t V
where t  0 s has been redeﬁned for position 2.
e. iC  
E2 
R
V0
 et/td  
30
1

00
7
0
.14
e250t  22.86e250t mA
f. See Figure 11–27.
g. t  10 ms is 5 ms into the new time scale. Thus, vC  30  22.86e250(5ms) 
23.5V and iC  22.86e250(5ms)  6.55 mA.Values are plotted on the graph.
E1
E2
iC
10 V
4 F
vC


2
1
1000 
30 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–26
t (ms)
30
vC  (V)
20
10
0
5
10
15
23.5 V
7.14 V
t (ms)
15
iC  (mA)
20
25
10
5
0
5
10
15
22.86 mA
2.87 mA
6.55 mA
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 11–13      
In Figure 11–28(a), the capacitor is initially uncharged. The switch is moved to
the charge position, then to the discharge position, yielding the current shown in
(b). The capacitor takes 1.75 ms to discharge. Determine the following:
a. E
b. R1
c. C
Solution
a. Since the capacitor charges fully, it has a value of E volts when switched
to discharge. The discharge current spike is therefore
 
10  
E
25 
  3 A
Thus, E  105 V.
FIGURE 11–27
Capacitor voltage and cur-
rent for the circuit of Figure 11–26.
CircuitSim 11-13 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RC Circuits in Steady State dc
When an RC circuit reaches steady state dc, its capacitors look like open circuits
and a transient analysis is not needed—see Note.
Section 11.5 | More Complex Circuits
383
b. The charging current spike has a value of

10 
E
 R1
  7 A
Since E  105 V, this yields R1  5 .
c. 5td  1.75 ms. Therefore, td  350 s. But td  (R2  R3)C. Thus,
C  350 s35   10 F.
(a)
R1
R3 = 10 
R2
25 
iC
E
2
1
C
(b)
3
7
0
t (s)
iC  (A)
Discharge
starts
here
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–28
EXAMPLE 11–14        
The circuit of Figure 11–29(a) has reached steady state. Determine the capaci-
tor voltages.
NOTES...
Since a capacitor consists of con-
ducting plates separated by an
insulator, there is no conductive
path from terminal to terminal
through the capacitor. Therefore,
when a capacitor is placed across 
a dc source, except for a brief 
transient surge, its current is zero.
Thus, as we concluded earlier, a
capacitor looks like an open circuit
to steady state dc.
(a)
40 
8 
12 
40 
90 V
60 
V1


V2


200 V
100 F
20 F
(b)
40 
8 
12 
40 
90 V
60 
I1
V1








120 V
200 V
18 V
12 V


I2
V2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–29
CircuitSim 11-14
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

384
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
Solution
Replace all capacitors with open circuits as in (b). Thus,
I1  
40 
20

0 V
60 
  2 A,
I2 
 1.5 A
KVL: V1  120  18  0. Therefore, V1  138 V. Further,
V2  (8 )(1.5 A)  12 V
90 V

40   8   12 
1. The capacitor of Figure 11–30(a) is initially uncharged. At t  0 s, the
switch is moved to position 1 and 100 ms later, to position 2. Determine
expressions for vC and iC for position 2.
2. Repeat for Figure 11–30(b). Hint: Use Thévenin’s theorem.
3. The circuit of Figure 11–31 has reached steady state. Determine source
currents I1 and I2.
Answers
1. 20e20t V; 0.2e20t A
2. 12.6e25t V; 6.3e25t mA
3. 0 A; 1.67 A
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
40 
30 
80 
20 
vC


20 V
1
2
iC
(a) C = 500 F
1 k
4 k
2 mA
2 k
12 V
1
2
iC
vC


(b) C = 20 F
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–30
10 V
4 
6 
30 V
11 F
1 F
50 F
12 
I2
I1
E2
E1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–31
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RC circuits are used to create delays for alarm, motor control, and timing appli-
cations. Figure 11–32 shows an alarm application. The alarm unit contains a
threshold detector, and when the input to this detector exceeds a preset value,
the alarm is turned on.
Section 11.6 | An RC Timing Application
385
11.6 An RC Timing
Application
EXAMPLE 11–15        
The circuit of Figure 11–32 is part of a building security system. When an armed
door is opened, you have a speciﬁed number of seconds to disarm the system
before the alarm goes off. If E  20 V, C  40 F, the alarm is activated when
vC reaches 16 V, and you want a delay of at least 25 s, what value of R is needed?
Solution
vC  E (1 – e–tRC). After a bit of manipulation, you get
etRC  
E 
E
vC

Taking the natural log of both sides yields (see Notes)
 R
t
C
  ln
E 
E
vC

At t  25 s, vC  16 V. Thus,
 R
t
C
  ln
20
2

0
16
  ln 0.2  1.6094
Substituting t  25 s and C  40 F yields
R  
1.60
t
94C
 
 388 k
Choose the next higher standard value, namely 390 k.
25 s

1.6094 	 40 	 106
vC
E
Delay
Threshold
Alarm
on
Input
from
sensor
vC


R
C
Delay circuit
Input
from
sensor
Audio
horn
Alarm
unit
(a) 
(b) 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–32
Creating a time delay with an RC circuit. Assume the alarm unit does not
load the RC circuit.
CircuitSim 11-15
NOTES...
The relationship between the expo-
nential function and natural logs is
discussed brieﬂy in Appendix B.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In previous sections, we looked at the response of RC circuits to switched 
dc inputs. In this section, we consider the effect that RC circuits have on
pulse waveforms. Since many electronic devices and systems utilize pulse or 
386
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
1. Suppose you want to increase the disarm time of Example 11–15 to at least
35 s. Compute the new value of R.
2. If, in Example 11–15, the threshold is 15 V and R  1 M, what is the
disarm time?
Answers
1. 544 k. Use 560 k.
2. 55.5 s
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
1. Refer to Figure 11–16:
a. Determine the expression for vC when V0  80 V. Sketch vC.
b. Repeat (a) if V0  40 V. Why is there no transient?
c. Repeat (a) if V0  60 V.
2. For part (c) of Question 1, vC starts at 60 V and climbs to 40 V. Determine
at what time vC passes through 0 V, using the technique of Example 11–15.
3. For the circuit of Figure 11–18, suppose R  10 k and C  10 F:
a. Determine the expressions for vC and iC when V0  100 V. Sketch vC and iC.
b. Repeat (a) if V0  100 V.
4. Repeat Example 11–12 if voltage source 2 is reversed, i.e., E2  30 V.
5. The switch of Figure 11–33(a) is closed at t  0 s. The Norton equivalent of
the circuit in the box is shown in (b). Determine expressions for vC and iC.
The capacitor is initially uncharged.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
(a)
iC
vC 


30 
C = 1000 F
Circuit
(b) Norton equivalent
10 
0.6 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–33
Hint: Use a source transformation.
11.7 Pulse Response
of RC Circuits
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

rectangular waveforms, including computers, communications systems, and
motor control circuits, these are important considerations.
Pulse Basics
A pulse is a voltage or current that changes from one level to the other and
back again as in Figure 11–34(a) and (b). A pulse train is a repetitive stream
of pulses, as in (c). If a waveform’s high time equals its low time, as in (d), it
is called a square wave.
The length of each cycle of a pulse train is termed its period, T, and the
number of pulses per second is deﬁned as its pulse repetition rate (PRR) or
pulse repetition frequency (PRF). For example, in (e), there are two complete
cycles in 1 second; therefore, the PRR  2 pulses/s. With two cycles every
second, the time for one cycle is T  1⁄2 s. Note that this is 1/PRR. This is true
in general. That is,
T  
PR
1
R

s
(11–16)
The width, tp, of a pulse relative to its period [Figure 11–34(c)] is its duty
cycle. Thus,
percent duty cycle  t
T
p
 	 100%
(11–17)
A square wave [Figure 11–34(d)] therefore has a 50% duty cycle, while a
waveform with tp  1.5 s and a period of 10 s has a duty cycle of 15%.
In practice, waveforms are not ideal, that is, they do not change from low
to high or high to low instantaneously. Instead, they have ﬁnite rise and fall
times. Rise and fall times are denoted as tr and tf and are measured between the
10% and 90% points as indicated in Figure 11–35(a). Pulse width is measured
at the 50% point. The difference between a real waveform and an ideal wave-
form is often slight. For example, rise and fall times of real pulses may be only
a few nanoseconds and when viewed on an oscilloscope, as in Figure 11–35(b),
Section 11.7 | Pulse Response of RC Circuits
387
(c) Pulse train. T is referred to as
the period of the pulse train
tp
T
V
0
T
Time
(e) PRR = 2 pulses/s
T
1 s
T
(d) Square wave
T
2
T
V
0
(b) Negative pulse
(a) Positive pulse
V
0
Time
V
0
Time
Time
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–34
Ideal pulses and pulse
waveforms.
(a) Pulse definitions
90%
10%
90%
10%
tp
tr
Pulse
width
Rise time
Fall time
tf
© Cengage Learning 2013
(b) Pulse waveform viewed on an oscilloscope
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–35
Practical pulse waveforms.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

appear to be ideal. While in what follows, we assume ideal waveforms, in
more advanced electronics courses, you often have to take rise and fall times
into account.
The Effect of Pulse Width
The width of a pulse relative to a circuit’s time constant determines how it is
affected by an RC circuit. Consider Figure 11–36. In (a), the circuit has been
drawn to focus on the voltage across C; in (b), it has been drawn to focus on
the voltage across R. (Otherwise, the circuits are identical.) An easy way to
visualize the operation of these circuits is to assume that the pulse is gener-
ated by a switch that is moved rapidly back and forth between V and common
as in (c). This alternately creates a charge and discharge circuit, and thus all
of the ideas developed in this chapter apply directly.
Pulse Width tp  5 
First, consider the output of circuit (a). When the pulse width and time between
pulses are very long compared with the circuit time constant, the capacitor
charges and discharges fully, Figure 11–37(b). (This case is similar to what we
have already seen in this chapter.) Note that charging and discharging occur at
the transitions of the pulse. The transients therefore increase the rise and fall
times of the output. In high-speed circuits, this may be a problem. (You will
learn more about this in your digital electronics courses.)
388
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
(a) Output across C
vC


vin


R
C
(b) Output across R
vR


vin


C
V
(c)  Modelling the pulse source
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–36
RC circuits with pulse input. Although we have modelled the source here as a battery and a switch, in practice, pulses are
usually created by electronic circuits.
Circuit a
T
2
T
2
vin V
0
vC V
0
5
5
Circuit b
vR V
V
0
(a)
(b)
(c)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–37
Pulse width much greater
than 5t. Note that the shaded areas indi-
cate where the capacitor is charging and
discharging. Spikes occur on the input
voltage transitions.
EXAMPLE 11–16      
A square wave is applied to the input of Figure 11–36(a). If R  1 k and C 
100 pF, estimate the rise and fall time of the output signal using the universal
time constant curve of Figure 11–15(a).
Solution
Here,t  RC  (1	 103)(100	 10–12)  100ns.FromFigure11–15(a),
note that vC reaches the 10% point at about 0.1 t, which is (0.1)(100 ns)  10 ns.
The 90% point is reached at about 2.3 t, which is (2.3)(100 ns)  230 ns. The
rise time is therefore approximately 230 ns – 10 ns  220 ns. The fall time will
be the same. (A theoretical analysis yields 2.197 RC. Use this relationship and
compare results.)
CircuitSim 11-16
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now consider the circuit in Figure 11–36(b). Here, current iC will be sim-
ilar to that of Figure 11–7(b), except that the pulse widths will be narrower.
Since voltage vR  RiC, the output will be a series of short, sharp spikes
that occur at input transitions as in Figure 11–37(c). Under the conditions
here (i.e., pulse width much greater than the circuit time constant), vR is an
approximation to the derivative of vin and the circuit is called a differentiator
circuit. Such circuits have important practical uses.
Pulse Width tp  5
These waveforms are shown in Figure 11–38. Since the pulse width is 5t, the
capacitor fully charges and discharges during each pulse. Thus, waveforms here
are again similar to what we have seen throughout this chapter.
Pulse Width tp  5
This case differs from what we have seen so far in this chapter only in that the
capacitor does not have time to charge and discharge signiﬁcantly between
pulses. The result is that switching occurs on the early (nearly straight line) part
of the charging and discharging curves and thus, vC is roughly triangular 
in shape, Figure 11–39(a). It has an average value of V/2. Under the condi-
tions here, vC is the approximate integral of vin and the circuit is called an
integrator circuit.
It should be noted that vC does not reach the steady state shown in
Figure 11–39 immediately. Instead, it works its way up over a period of ﬁve
time constants (Figure 11–40). To illustrate, assume an input square wave of
5 V with a pulse width of 0.1 s and t  0.1 s. Proceed as follows:
Section 11.7 | Pulse Response of RC Circuits
389
Circuit a
T
2
T
2
vin
V
vC V
V
0
Circuit b
vR V
V
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–38
Pulse width equal to 5t.
These waveforms are the same as
Figure 11–37, except that the transitions
last relatively longer.
Circuit a
T
2
T
2
vin
V
V 
2
vC
V
0
Circuit b
vR
V
V
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–39
Pulse width much less
than 5t. The circuit does not have time 
to charge or discharge substantially.
5 V
(b) Output voltage vC
(a) Input waveform
0
0.1
0.1
0
5 V
3.16
3.59
1.16
5t
steady state
1.32
1.34
3.65
3.65
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–40
Notice how the solution takes ﬁve time constants to reach its steady
state, after which it cycles between 1.34 and 3.65 V. You can easily see this using
Multisim or PSpice.
CircuitSim 11-17
Pulse 1
vC  E(1  ett). At the end of the ﬁrst pulse (t  0.1 s), vC has
climbed to vC  5(1  e0.10.1)  5(1  e1)  3.16 V. From the end of pulse
1 to the beginning of pulse 2 (i.e., over an interval of 0.1 s), vC decays from 3.16V
to 3.16e0.10.1  3.16e1  1.16 V.
Pulse 2
vC starts at 1.16 V and 0.1 s later has a value of vC  E 
(V0  E)ett  5  (1.16  5)e0.10.1  5  3.84e1  3.59 V. It then decays
to 3.59e1  1.32 V over the next 0.1 s.
Continuing in this manner, the remaining values for Figure 11–40(b) are
determined. After 5t, vC cycles between 1.34 and 3.65 V, with an average of
(1.34  3.65)2  2.5 V, or half the input pulse amplitude.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Multisim and PSpice are well suited for studying transients as they both incor-
porate easy-to-use graphing facilities. When plotting transients, you must spec-
ify the time duration for your plot—that is, the length of time that you expect
the transient to last. (This time is designated TSTOP by both Multisim and
PSpice.) A good value to use is 5t where t is the time constant of the circuit.
(For complex circuits, if you do not know t, make an estimate, run a simula-
tion, adjust the time scale, and repeat until you get an acceptable plot.)
Multisim
As a ﬁrst example, use Multisim to compute and plot capacitor voltage and cur-
rent waveforms for the circuit of Example 11–2, Section 11.2. Read the
Multisim notes and then, if you are a legacy software user, go to our Web site
for instructions; otherwise, proceed as follows:
• Create the circuit of Figure 11–42 on your screen. (Use a virtual capaci-
tor and rotate it once so that its “1” end is at the top as described in
Appendix A.) 
• Click Options/Sheet Properties and under Net Names, click Show All, then
OK. Node numbers will appear on your schematic—see Note 5. In what fol-
lows, we use the node numbers shown in Figure 11–42 in our discussion.
• Click Simulate/Analysis and select Transient Analysis. Compute the duration
of the transient (it is 0.5 s) and enter this value as TSTOP. From the Initial
Conditions box, choose Set to zero, then click the Output tab.
• Click V(2) to highlight it, then click Add. (This is capacitor voltage.)
• Click I(C1) to highlight it, then click Add. (This is capacitor current.)
• Click Simulate.
390
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
Verify the remaining points of Figure 11–40(b).
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 7
(b) Distorted signal
Load
(a) Unloaded driver
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–41
Distortion caused by
capacitive loading.
11.8 Transient
Analysis Using
Computers
PSPICE
MultiSim
Capacitive Loading
Capacitance occurs whenever conductors are separated by insulating material.
This means that capacitance exists between wires in cables, between traces on
printed circuit boards, and so on. In general, this capacitance is undesirable, but
it cannot be avoided. It is called stray capacitance. Fortunately, stray capaci-
tance is often so small that it can be neglected. However, in high-speed circuits,
it may cause problems.
To illustrate, consider Figure 11–41. The electronic driver of (a) produces
square pulses. However, when it drives a long line as in (b), stray capacitance
loads it and increases the signal’s rise and fall times (since capacitance takes
time to charge and discharge). This effect is referred to as capacitive loading.
If the rise and fall times become excessively long, the signal reaching the load
may be so degraded that the system malfunctions. (Capacitive loading is a seri-
ous issue, but we will leave it for future courses to deal with.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

• Grapher View opens.  Click View and ensure that Toolbar is selected.  Find
the icon that identiﬁes itself as Black Background, then click. Now ﬁnd the
Show Grid icon and click. Right-click the screen, ﬁnd Show Select Marks,
and click. 
Note that the current waveform appears as a ﬂat line along the zero axis.
You need to expand it so that you can see its detail. Proceed as follows (or see
Appendix A, Displaying Multiple Traces). 
• On Grapher, click Trace/Trace Properties. In the dialog box that opens, select
the Traces tab at the top of the box. The item marked Trace Label should indi-
cate I(C1). If it doesn’t, use the Trace ID up/down arrows to change it. 
• Near the bottom of the box (under Y-vertical axis), click the Right axis
button, then click Apply. Select the Right Axis tab at the top of the box, click
the Axis Enabled box, click Auto-range, click Apply then OK. (You should
have the voltage and current waveforms of Figure 11–42 on your screen,
although trace colors may not match.)
• Activate the cursors by clicking the Show Cursors icon.
• With your mouse pointer, drag #1 cursor into the display area. Place your
mouse pointer on it, right click, select Set X Value, type in 150m, then click
OK. The cursor moves to the 150 ms point and the Cursor display box shows
the results. Your display should show current  2.23 mA and voltage  77.69
volts at t  150 ms. Compare these to the answers indicated in Figure 11–10,
Example 11–2. 
Use your cursor to measure values at 100 ms intervals, then compare to the
answers from Practice Problems 2, Question 1.
Initial Conditions in Multisim
Let us change the preceding problem to include an initial voltage of 150 V on
the capacitor. Get the circuit of Figure 11–42 back on the screen, double-click
the capacitor symbol, and in the dialog box under Initial conditions, type in
150, ensure that units are set to V, and click OK. Select Transient Analysis;
from the Initial Conditions box, choose User-deﬁned. Run the simulation and
note that the transient starts at 150 V and decays to its steady state value of
100 V in ﬁve time constants as expected. 
Now expand the current trace scale as we did above. You should have the
waveforms of Figure 11–43 on your screen. With your cursor, measure values
at t  100 ms and verify using Equations 11–10 and 11–11. 
Section 11.8 | Transient Analysis Using Computers
391
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–42
Multisim solution of Example 11–2. (The left-hand graph scale is for the
voltage waveform.) The transient is initiated by software, so no switch is needed in the
simulation setup. 
NOTES...
Multisim Operational Notes
1. If you are a Multisim 9 or 10
user, go to our Web site at
cengagebrain.com and follow 
the links to Special Instructions
for Multisim 9 and 10 Users.
2. You don’t need a switch to initiate
a transient. Simply build the
circuit without a switch and select
transient analysis. Multisim then
performs the transient simulation
and plots the results.
3. These examples were prepared
using Multisim 11, the version
current at the time of writing.
Since software is updated
regularly, this may not be the
version that you are using.
4. To place your cursor at an 
exact time point on a Multisim
waveform, for example,at 
t  150 ms, place your mouse
pointer on the cursor and right-
click. Select Set X Value, type 
in 150m, then click OK.
5. Multisim assigns node numbers
according to the order in which
you wire your circuit. Thus, your
node numbers may be different
than the ones we show.
6. Multisim computes node voltages
with respect to ground. Thus, 
in Figure 11–42, the voltage at
Node 2 is the voltage across the
capacitor. Multisim 11 refers to 
it as V(2).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Another Example
Right-click View and ensure that the Signal Source Components toolbar is
selected. In its toolbin, locate and click Place Clock Voltage Source, then build
the circuit of Figure 11–44(a) on your screen. (The clock, with its default set-
tings, produces a square wave that cycles between 0 V and 5 V with a cycle
length of T  1 ms.) This means that its on time tp is T2  500 s. Since the
time constant of Figure 11–44 is t  RC  50 s, tp is greater than 5t, and
a waveform similar to that of Figure 11–37(c) should result. To verify, follow
the procedure of the previous example, except set End Time (TSTOP) to
0.0025 in the Analysis/Transient dialog box, choose Initial Conditions set to
zero, then select V(1) and V(2) for display. (Legacy users, select nodes 1 and
2 instead.) Click Simulate and the waveforms of Figure 11–44(b) appear.
Note that output spikes occur on the transitions of the input waveform as
predicted.
392
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–43
Solution for the circuit of Figure 11–42 with V0  150 V.
For the circuit of Figure 11–42, set the capacitor initial condition to –50 V,
then repeat the preceding simulation. Verify answers using Equations 11–10
and 11–11.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 8
© Cengage Learning 2013
(b) The red waveform is the output voltage.
(a)
R1
1.0 kΩ
V1
1 kHz
5 V
+
–
0.05 µF
C1
2
1
0
Voltage (V)
0.0
–5.0
–2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
500.0 µ
1.0 m
1.5 m
2.0 m
2.5 m
V(2)
V(1)
FIGURE 11–44
Multisim analysis of the circuit of Figure 11–36(b). Compare (b) to Figure 11–37(c).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PSpice
Section 11.8 | Transient Analysis Using Computers
393
NOTES...
PSpice Operational Notes
1. Do not use a space between a value and its unit. Thus, use 50ms, not 
50 ms, and so forth.
2. When instructed to enter data via a Property editor (e.g., initial conditions),
ﬁrst click the Parts tab at the bottom of the screen; scroll right until you ﬁnd
the cell that you want, type in its value, then click Apply. In the warning
box, click Yes, then click the Windows close button (the x beside the word
cadence) to close the Property Editor. (Don't click the large red boxed close
button above it because that will close PSpice.)
3. For transient problems you must specify an initial condition (IC) for each
capacitor and inductor, even if they are zero. The procedure is described in
the examples.
4. For most simple transient analysis problems, you don’t need a switch—
simply specify transient analysis at run time.
5. To select the waveform that you want the cursor to apply to, click the
applicable symbol at the bottom of the screen.
For the circuit of Figure 11–44, run simulations for R  500 , 2 k, and 
20 k. For each case, compute t , then note how the resulting waveform ﬁts
with the predicted waveforms of Figures 11–37 to 11–39.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 9
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–45
PSpice example. The voltage marker displays voltage with respect to ground,
which, in this case, is the voltage across C1.
As a ﬁrst example, consider Figure 11–2 with R  200 , C  50 F, and 
E  40 V. Let the capacitor be initially uncharged (i.e., V0  0 V). First, read
the PSpice Operational Notes, then proceed as follows:
• Create the circuit on the screen as in Figure 11–45—see Note 4. Remember
to rotate the capacitor as discussed in Appendix A, then set its initial condition
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(IC) to zero. To do this, double-click the capacitor symbol, type 0V into the
Property editor cell labeled IC—see Note 2—click Apply, then close the
editor. Click the New Simulation Proﬁle icon, enter a name (e.g., Figure 11–45)
then click Create. In the Simulation Settings box, click the Analysis tab,
select Time Domain (Transient) and in Options, select General Settings. Set
the duration of the transient (TSTOP) to 50ms, then click OK. Find the volt-
age marker on the toolbar and place as shown. (It will be gray, but will
change color after the simulation is run.)
• Click the Run icon. A trace of capacitor voltage appears. Click Plot, then
Add Y Axis. Click Trace/Add Trace, then double-click I(C1). This adds the
current trace, Figure 11– 46.
394
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
Current
Voltage
0 s
40 V
20 V
0 V
0 A
100 mA
200 mA
>>
10 ms
20 ms
30 ms
40 ms
50 ms
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–46
Waveforms for the circuits of Figures 11–45 and 11–47.
Analysis of Results
Click the Toggle cursor icon, then use the cursor to determine values from the
screen. For example, at t  5 ms, you should ﬁnd vC  15.7 V and iC  121 mA
as determined earlier in Example 11–10, part (c).
As a second example, consider the circuit of Figure 11–21 (shown as
Figure 11–47). Create the circuit using the same general procedure as in the
previous example, except do not rotate the capacitor. Be sure to set V0 (the ini-
tial capacitor voltage) to zero. In the Simulation Proﬁle box, set TSTOP to
50ms. Place differential voltage markers (found on the toolbar at the top of the
screen) across C (with marker V on the left) to graph the capacitor voltage.
Run the analysis, create a second axis, then add the current plot. You should get
the same graph (i.e., Figure 11–46) as you got for the previous example, since
its circuit is the Thévenin equivalent of this one.
For the circuit of Figure 11–45, set the capacitor initial condition to 100 V,
then repeat the preceding simulation. Verify answers using Equations 11–10
and 11–11.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 10
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

As a ﬁnal example, consider Figure 11–48(a), which shows double switch-
ing action.
Section 11.8 | Transient Analysis Using Computers
395
R2
800
R3
200
R4
104
C1
50u
V+
V–
V1
100
+
–
0
240
R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–47
The differential markers display the voltage across C1.
EXAMPLE 11–17        
The capacitor of Figure 11–48(a) has an initial voltage of 10 V. The switch is
moved to the charge position for 1 s, then to the discharge position where it
remains. Determine curves for vC and iC.
Solution
PSpice has no switch that implements the switching sequence of
Figure 11–48. However, moving the switch ﬁrst to charge then to discharge is
equivalent to placing 20 V across the RC combination for the charge time, then 
0 V thereafter as indicated in (b). You can do this with a pulse source (VPULSE)
as indicated in Figure 11–49(a). Note the parameters listed beside the symbol.
iC
20 V
C = 40 F
vC


R = 5 k
(a) Circuit to be modelled
20 V
1 s
(b) The applied pulse
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–48
Creating a charge/discharge waveform using PSpice.
(b)
(a)
0 s
8.0 mA
4.0 mA
0 A
>>
–4.0 mA
–10 V
0 V
10 V
20 V
0.5 s
1.0 s
1.5 s
2.0 s
Voltage
Current
R1
5 k
C1
40 u
v
V1
+
–
0
   V1 = 0
   V2 = 20
  TD = 0
  TR = 1us
   TF = 1u
 PW = 1 s
PER = 5 s
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–49
Modelling switching action using a pulse source.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Note that voltage starts at 10 V and climbs to 20 V while current starts
at (E  V0)/R  30 V/5 k  6 mA and decays to zero. When the switch is
turned to the discharge position, the current drops from 0 A to 20 V/5 k 
4 mA and then decays to zero while the voltage decays from 20 V to zero.
Thus, the solution checks.
396
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
Click each in turn and set as indicated; for example, click V1 and when its para-
meter box opens, type 0V. (This deﬁnes a pulse with a period of 5 s, a width of
1 s, rise and fall times of 1 s, amplitude of 20 V, and an initial value of 0 V.)
Double-click the capacitor symbol and set IC to –10V in the Property Editor;
click Apply then close. Click the New Simulation Proﬁle icon and set TSTOP
to 2s. Place a Voltage Marker as shown, then click Run. Add the second axis and
the current trace as described in the previous examples. You should have the
curves of (b) on your screen.
Putting It into Practice
A
n electronic device employs a timer circuit of the kind shown in Figure
11–32(a), that is, an RC charging circuit and a threshold detector. [Its timing
waveforms are thus identical to those of Figure 11–32(b).] The input to the RC
circuit is a 0 V to 5 V 4% step, R  680 k 10%, C  0.22 F 10%, the
threshold detector activates at vC  1.8 V 0.05 V, and the required delay is 
67 ms 18 ms. You test a number of units as they come off the production line
and ﬁnd that some do not meet the timing spec. Perform a design review and
determine the cause. Redesign the timing portion of the circuit in the most eco-
nomical way possible.
Problems
11.1
Introduction
1. The capacitor of Figure 11–50 is uncharged.
a. What are the capacitor voltage and current just after the switch is closed?
b. What are the capacitor voltage and current after the capacitor is fully
charged?
2. Repeat Problem 1 if the 20-V source is replaced by a 60-V source.
3. a. What does an uncharged capacitor look like at the instant of switching?
b. What does a charged capacitor look like at the instant of switching?
c. What does a capacitor look like to steady state dc?
d. What do we mean by i(0)? By i(0)?
iC
20 V
C
C = 10 F
vC


R
E
4 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–50
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4. For a charging circuit, E  25 V, R  2.2 k, and the capacitor is initially
uncharged. The switch is closed at t  0. What is i(0)?
5. For a charging circuit, R  5.6 k and vC(0)  0 V. If i(0)  2.7 mA,
what is E?
11.2
Capacitor Charging Equations
6. The switch of Figure 11–50 is closed at t  0 s. The capacitor is initially
uncharged.
a. Determine the equation for charging voltage vC.
b. Determine the equation for charging current iC.
c. By direct substitution, compute vC and iC at t  0 s, 40 s, 80 s, 120 s,
160 s, and 200 s.
d. Plot vC and iC on graph paper using the results of (c). Hint: See 
Example 11–2.
7. Repeat Problem 6 if R  500 , C  25 F, and E  45 V, except compute
and plot values at t  0 s, 20 ms, 40 ms, 60 ms, 80 ms, and 100 ms.
8. The switch of Figure 11–51 is closed at t  0 s. Determine the equations for
capacitor voltage and current. Compute vC and iC at t  50 ms.
9. Repeat Problem 8 for the circuit of Figure 11–52.
10. The capacitor of Figure 11–2 is uncharged at the instant the switch is closed.
If E  80 V, C  10 F, and iC(0)  20 mA, determine the equations for
vC and iC.
11. Determine the time constant for the circuit of Figure 11–50. How long (in
seconds) will it take for the capacitor to charge?
12. A capacitor takes 200 ms to charge. If R  5 k, what is C?
13. For Figure 11–50, the capacitor voltage with the switch open is 0 V. Close the
switch at t  0 and determine capacitor voltage and current at t  0, 40 s,
80 s, 120 s, 160 s, and 200 s using the universal time constant curves.
14. If iC  25e40t A, what is the time constant t and how long will the transient
last?
15. For Figure 11–2, the current jumps to 3 mA when the switch is closed. The
capacitor takes 1 s to charge. If E  75 V, determine R and C.
16. For Figure 11–2, if vC  100(1  e50t) V and iC  25e50t mA, what are E,
R, and C?
17. For Figure 11–2, determine E, R, and C if the capacitor takes 5 ms to charge,
the current at 1 time constant after the switch is closed is 3.679 mA, and the
capacitor charges to 45 volts steady state.
18. For Figure 11–2, vC(t)  41.08 V and iC(2t)  219.4 mA. Determine E and R.
11.3
Capacitor with an Initial Voltage
19. The capacitor of Figure 11–50 has an initial voltage. If V0  10 V, what is
the current just after the switch is closed?
20. Repeat Problem 19 if V0  10 V.
21. For the capacitor of Figure 11–51, V0  30 V.
a. Determine the expression for charging voltage vC.
b. Determine the expression for current iC.
c. Sketch vC and iC.
22. Repeat Problem 21 if V0  5 V.
Problems
397


20 V
vC
iC
10 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–51
V0  0 V, C  10 F.
40 V

 vC
iC
3.9 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–52
C  10 F, V0  0 V.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.4
Capacitor Discharging Equations
23. For the circuit of Figure 11–53, assume the capacitor is charged to 50 V before
the switch is closed.
a. Determine the equation for discharge voltage vC.
b. Determine the equation for discharge current iC.
c. Determine the time constant of the circuit.
d. Compute vC and iC at t  0 s, t  t, 2t, 3t, 4t, and 5t.
e. Plot the results of (d) with the time axis scaled in seconds and time constants.
24. The initial voltage on the capacitor of Figure 11–53 is 55 V. The switch is
closed at t  0. Determine capacitor voltage and current at t  0, 0.5 s, 1 s,
1.5 s, 2 s, and 2.5 s using the universal time constant curves.
25. A 4.7-F capacitor is charged to 43 volts. If a 39-k resistor is then con-
nected across the capacitor, what is its voltage 200 ms after the resistor is
connected?
26. The initial voltage on the capacitor of Figure 11–53 is 55 V. The switch is
closed at t  0 s and opened 1 s later. Sketch vC. What is the capacitor’s volt-
age at t  3.25 s?
27. For Figure 11–54, let E  200 V, R2  1 k, and C  0.5 F. After the
capacitor has fully charged in position 1, the switch is moved to position 2.
a. What is the capacitor voltage immediately after the switch is moved to
position 2? What is its current?
b. What is the discharge time constant?
c. Determine discharge equations for vC and iC.
28. For Figure 11–54, C is fully charged before the switch is moved to discharge.
Current just after it is moved is iC  4 mA and C takes 20 ms to discharge.
If E  80 V, what are R2 and C?
398
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
vC


C
C = 20 F
R
iC
25 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–53
iC
vC


1
2
R3
C
E
15 k
R1
10 k
R2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–54
11.5
More Complex Circuits
29. The capacitors of Figure 11–55 are uncharged. The switch is closed at t  0.
Determine the equation for vC. Compute vC at one time constant using the
equation and the universal time constant curve. Compare answers.
30. For Figure 11–56, the switch is closed at t  0. Given V0  0 V.
a. Determine the equations for vC and iC.
b. Compute the capacitor voltage at t  0 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12 ms.
c. Repeat (b) for the capacitor current.
d. Why does 225 V/30  also yield i(0)?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

31. Repeat Problem 30, parts (a) to (c) for the circuit of Figure 11–57.
Problems
399


45 V
vC
47 k
39 k
5.6 k
4.7 μF
2.2 μF
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–55
FIGURE 11–56
iC
225 V
C = 100 F
vC


10 
30 
50 
© Cengage Learning 2013
90 V
80 
30 
60 
4 
10 F
40 F
20 
vC


iC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–57
32. Consider again Figure 11–54. Suppose E  80 V, R2  25 k, and C  0.5 F:
a. What is the charge time constant?
b. What is the discharge time constant?
c. With the capacitor initially discharged, move the switch to position 1 and
determine equations for vC and iC during charge.
d. Move the switch to the discharge position. How long does it take for the
capacitor to discharge?
e. Sketch vC and iC from the time the switch is placed in charge to the time
that the capacitor is fully discharged. Assume the switch is in the charge
position for 80 ms.
33. For the circuit of Figure 11–54, the capacitor is initially uncharged. The
switch is ﬁrst moved to charge, then to discharge, yielding the current
shown in Figure 11–58. The capacitor fully charges in 12.5 s. Determine E,
R2, and C.
34. Refer to the circuit of Figure 11–59:
a. What is the charge time constant?
b. What is the discharge time constant?
c. The switch is in position 2 and the capacitor is uncharged. Move the
switch to position 1 and determine equations for vC and iC.
d. After the capacitor has charged for two time constants, move the switch to
position 2 and determine equations for vC and iC during discharge.
e. Sketch vC and iC.
t (s)
iC (mA)
12.5
5td
3.6
0
3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–58
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

35. Determine the capacitor voltages and the source current for the circuit of
Figure 11–60 after it has reached steady state.
400
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
80 V
10 F
20 F
80 F
20 
30 
110 
C1
C2
C3
IT
© Cengage Learning 2013
36. A black box containing dc sources and resistors has open-circuit voltage of
45 volts as in Figure 11–61(a). When the output is shorted as in (b), the
short-circuit current is 1.5 mA. A switch and an uncharged 500-F capacitor
are connected as in (c). Determine the capacitor voltage and current 25 s
after the switch is closed.
a
b
(a)
45 V

DC
sources
&
resistors

(b)
1.5 mA
(c)
iC
vC

© Cengage Learning 2013
11.6
An RC Timing Application
37. For the alarm circuit of Figure 11–32, if the input from the sensor is 
5 V, R  750 k, and the alarm is activated at 15 s when vC  3.8 V, what is C?
38. For the alarm circuit of Figure 11–32, the input from the sensor is 5 V,
C  47 F, and the alarm is activated when vC  4.2 V. Choose the nearest
standard resistor value to achieve a delay of at least 37 s.
15 k
0.22 F
10 k
iC
2 mA
vC


5 V 1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–59
FIGURE 11–60
FIGURE 11–61
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.7
Pulse Response of RC Circuits
39. Consider the waveform of Figure 11–62.
a. What is the period?
b. What is the duty cycle?
c. What is the PRR?
40. Repeat Problem 39 for the waveform of Figure 11–63.
Problems
401
1
0
0
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 12 14 16
t  (s)
© Cengage Learning 2013
1
0
2
7 8
11 12
5 6
9 10
t (ms)
3 4
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–62
FIGURE 11–63
1
10
0
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
20
30
t (s)
v
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–64
vout


C
R
10 V
10 ms
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
41. Determine the rise time, fall time, and pulse width for the pulse in 
Figure 11–64.
42. A single pulse is input to the circuit of Figure 11–65. Assuming that the
capacitor is initially uncharged, sketch the output for each of the following
sets of values:
a. R  2 k, C  1 F.
b. R  2 k, C  0.1 F.
43. A switch (not shown) is closed to apply E volts to the circuit of Figure 11–66.
If R  150  and C  20 pF, estimate the rise time of the output voltage.
44. A pulse train is input to the circuit of Figure 11–66. Assuming that the
capacitor is initially uncharged, sketch the output for each of the following
sets of values after the circuit has reached steady state:
a. R  2 k, C  0.1 F.
b. R  20 k, C  1.0 F.
vout


R
C
20 ms
10 ms
10 V
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–65
FIGURE 11–66
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11.8
Transient Analysis Using Computers
Read the Notes, then use Multisim or PSpice to solve the following problems.
(Note 4 applies only to Multisim users.) For Multisim current waveforms, you
will need to add a new scale to expand the trace as you did in the examples of
Section 11.8. 
45. Graph capacitor voltage and current for the circuit of Figure 11–2 with 
E  25 V, R  40 , V0  0 V, and C  400 F. Scale values from the 
plot at t  20 ms intervals using the cursor. Confirm your results using
Equations 11–3 and 11–5.
46. Obtain a plot of circuit current and resistor voltage for the circuit of 
Figure 11–67. Assume an initially uncharged capacitor. Use the cursor to
read values at t  50 ms and conﬁrm analytically. Repeat if V0  100 V.
47. For Figure 11–57, both capacitors are uncharged. Place your Multisim
ground at the bottom end of the capacitors and:
a. Plot capacitor voltage and ﬁnd vC at t  4 ms. 
b. Determine the current in the 4- resistor at t  3.5 ms.
48. Using Multisim, construct Figure 11–68 on your screen. (The source is
found in the Sources Group. Click Place/Component to ﬁnd it.) Repeat
Example 11–17 and plot capacitor voltage and current. You should get the
curves of Figure 11–49(b) as your solution.
49. Using PSpice, graph capacitor voltage and current for a charging circuit with
E  25 V, R  40 , V0  0 V, and C  400 F. Scale values from the
plot using the cursor. Compare to the results you get using Equations 11–3
and 11–5 or the curves of Figure 11–15.
50. Repeat the problem of Question 46 using PSpice.
51. The switch of Figure 11–69 is closed at t  0 s. Using PSpice, plot volt-
age and current waveforms. Use the cursor to determine vC and iC at 
t  10 ms.
402
Chapter 11 | Capacitor Charging, Discharging, and Simple Waveshaping Circuits
40 V
1000 
50 μF
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
1
2
5kΩ
40uF
C1
V1
0 V 20 V
1 sec 5 sec
0
+
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–67
FIGURE 11–68
2mA
5 V
V0 = 0 V
10 k
15 k
0.22 μF
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 11–69
52. Using PSpice, redo Example 11–17 with the switch in the charge position for
0.5 s and everything else the same. With your calculator, compute vC and iC
at 0.5 s and compare them to the PSpice plots. Repeat for iC just after
moving the switch to the discharge position.
53. For the circuit of Figure 11–60, use PSpice to determine and plot voltage and
current waveforms for capacitors C1 and C3, then from the waveforms, deter-
mine their steady state voltages and currents. Compare  to the answers of
Problem 35.
MultiSim
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
MultiSim
MultiSim
MultiSim
PSPICE
PSPICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
403
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. 0.2 A
2. a. 50 ms
b.
3.
4. 40(1  e5t) V, 200e5t mA, 38.0 V, 9.96 mA
5. a. vC(0)  vC(0)  0; b. iC(0)  0; iC(0)  10 mA; c. 100 V, 0 A
6. 80 V, 40 k, 0.2 F
t(ms)
ic(mA)
0
50
25
30.3
50
18.4
75
11.2
100
6.8
250
0.337
t(ms)
vc(V)
0
0
25
71.3
50
91.8
75
97.7
100
99.3
250
100
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
1. a. 40  40e5t V. vC starts at 80 V and decays exponentially to 40 V.
b. There is no transient since initial value  ﬁnal value.
c. 40  100e5t V. vC starts at 60 V and climbs exponentially to 40 V.
2. 0.1833 s
3. a. 100e10t V; 10e10t mA; vC starts at 100 V and decays to 0 in 0.5 s
(i.e., 5 time constants); iC starts at 10 mA and decays to 0 in 0.5 s.
b. 100e10t V; 10e10t mA; vC starts at 100 V and decays to 0 in 0.5 s
(i.e., 5 time constants); iC starts at 10 mA and decays to 0 in 0.5 s.
4. a., b., and c. Same as Example 11–12.
d. 30  37.14e250t V
e. 37.14e250t mA
f.
t (ms)
7.14 V
10
vC  (V)
0
20
5
5
15
30
25
5
10
15
20
25
37.14 mA
2.87 mA
t (ms)
10
iC  (mA)
0
20
5
5
10
15
30
35
40
25
5
10
15
20
25
© Cengage Learning 2013
g. 19.36 V; 10.64 mA
5. 6(1  e25t) V; 150e25t mA
NOTES...
1. Note the icon beside each prob-
lem, and use the corresponding
simulation software, Multisim or
PSpice for its solution.
2. Since current is discontinuous at
the instant of switching, you get
a meaningless value if you try to
use a cursor to measure current
at t  0.
3. Switches are generally shown in
the problem sets to denote tran-
sients, but since you use software
(i.e., the Run button), to initiate
Multisim and PSpice transients,
switches are not usually needed.
4. Multisim examples in this book
were created using Multisim 11
(the version current at the time of
writing). If you are using legacy
software, you may ﬁnd it awk-
ward to determine currents. In
this case, simulate voltage 
waveforms only.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Ampere’s Circuital Law
Ampere-Turns
B-H Curves
Domains 
Ferromagnetic
Flux Density (B) 
Hysteresis Loop
Magnetic Circuit
Magnetic Field
Magnetic Field Intensity (H) 
Magnetic Flux
Magnetomotive Force
(mmf)
Permeability
Reluctance ()
Residual Magnetism
Saturation
Tesla (T)
Weber (Wb)
I OUTLINE
The Nature of a Magnetic
Field
Electromagnetism
Magnetic Flux and Flux
Density
Magnetic Circuits and Their
Applications
Air Gaps, Fringing, and
Laminated Cores
Series Elements and Parallel
Elements
Magnetic Circuits with dc
Excitation
Magnetic Field Intensity and
Magnetization Curves
Ampere’s Circuital Law
Series Magnetic Circuits:
Given , Find NI
Series-Parallel Magnetic
Circuits
Series Magnetic Circuits:
Given NI, Find 
Force Due to an
Electromagnet
Properties of Magnetic
Materials
Sensing and Measuring
Magnetic Fields
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• represent magnetic ﬁelds using Faraday’s
ﬂux concept,
• describe magnetic ﬁelds quantitatively in
terms of ﬂux and ﬂux density,
• explain what magnetic circuits are and
why they are used,
• determine magnetic ﬁeld intensity 
or magnetic ﬂux density from a 
B-H curve,
• solve series magnetic circuits,
• solve series-parallel magnetic 
circuits,
• compute the attractive force of an
electromagnet,
• explain the domain theory of 
magnetism,
• describe the demagnetization process.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12
MAGNETISM AND MAGNETIC CIRCUITS
M
any common devices rely on magnetism. Familiar examples include computer disk drives,
audio system components such as headphones and speakers, transformers, generators,
motors, and medical devices such as MRI machines. To understand their operation, you need a
knowledge of magnetism and magnetic circuit principles. In this chapter, we look at fundamen-
tals of magnetism, relationships between electrical and magnetic quantities, magnetic circuit
concepts, and methods of analysis. In Chapter 13, we look at electromagnetic induction and
inductance, and in Chapter 24, we apply magnetic principles to the study of transformers. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Magnetism refers to the force that acts between magnets and magnetic materi-
als. We know, for example, that magnets attract pieces of iron, deﬂect compass
needles, attract or repel other magnets, and so on. This force acts at a distance
and without the need for direct physical contact. The region where the force is
felt is called the “ﬁeld of the magnet” or simply, its magnetic ﬁeld. Thus, a
magnetic ﬁeld is a force ﬁeld.
Magnetic Flux
Faraday’s ﬂux concept (recall Putting It in Perspective, Chapter 10) helps us
visualize this ﬁeld. Using Faraday’s representation, magnetic ﬁelds are drawn as
lines in space. These lines, called magnetic ﬂux lines or lines of force, show the
direction and intensity of the ﬁeld at all points. This is illustrated in Figure 12–1
for the ﬁeld of a bar magnet. As indicated, the ﬁeld is strongest at the poles of
the magnet (where ﬂux lines are most dense), its direction is from north (N) to
south (S) external to the magnet, and ﬂux lines never cross. The symbol for
magnetic ﬂux (Figure 12–1) is the Greek letter  (phi).
Figure 12–2 shows what happens when two magnets are brought close
together. In (a), unlike poles attract, and ﬂux lines pass from one magnet to the
other. In (b), like poles repel, and the ﬂux lines are pushed back as indicated by
the ﬂattening of the ﬁeld between the two magnets.
406
Chapter 12 | Magnetism and Magnetic Circuits
Putting It in Perspective
Magnetism and Electromagnetism
WHILE THE BASIC FACTS about magnetism have been known 
since ancient times, it was not until the early 1800s that 
the connection between electricity and magnetism was 
made and the foundations of modern electromagnetic theory
laid down.
In 1819, Hans Christian Oersted, a Danish scientist, 
demonstrated that electricity and magnetism were related 
when he showed that a compass needle was deﬂected by a 
current-carrying conductor. The following year, Andre Ampere
(1775–1836) showed that current-carrying conductors attract 
or repel each other just like magnets. However, it was Michael
Faraday (recall Chapter 10) who developed our present concept
of the magnetic ﬁeld as a collection of ﬂux lines in space that
conceptually represent both the intensity and the direction of the
ﬁeld. It was this concept that led to an understanding of magnet-
ism and the development of important practical devices such as
the transformer and the electric generator.
In 1873, James Clerk Maxwell (see photo), a Scottish scientist, tied the then known theoreti-
cal and experimental concepts together and developed a uniﬁed theory of electromagnetism that
predicted the existence of radio waves. Some 30 years later, Heinrich Hertz, a German physicist,
showed experimentally that such waves existed, thus verifying Maxwell’s theories and paving 
the way for modern radio and television. I
Photo Researchers/Photo Researchers/Getty Images
12.1 The Nature 
of a Magnetic
Field
NOTES...
Flux is perhaps an unfortunate
name to apply to a magnetic ﬁeld.
Flux suggests a ﬂow, but in a mag-
netic ﬁeld, nothing actually ﬂows; a
magnetic ﬁeld is simply a condition
of space, that is, a region in which
magnetic force exists. Nonetheless,
the concept of ﬂux is enormously
helpful as an aid to visualizing mag-
netic phenomena, and we will con-
tinue to use it for that purpose.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Ferromagnetic Materials
Magnetic materials (materials that are attracted by magnets such as iron, nickel,
cobalt, and their alloys) are called ferromagnetic materials. Ferromagnetic mate-
rials provide an easy path for magnetic ﬂux. This is illustrated in Figure 12–3
where the ﬂux lines take the longer (but easier) path through the soft iron, rather
than the shorter path (of Figure 12–1) that they would normally take. Note,
however, that nonmagnetic materials (plastic, wood, glass, and so on) have no
effect on the ﬁeld.
Section 12.1 | The Nature of a Magnetic Field
407
FIGURE 12–1
Field of a bar magnet. Magnetic ﬂux is denoted by the symbol .
N
S
Φ
© Cengage Learning 2013
(a) Attraction
N
S
N
S
Φ
(b) Repulsion
N
S
N
S
Φ
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–2
Field patterns due to attraction and repulsion.
Plastic
(no effect)
Soft
iron
N
S
Φ
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–3
Magnetic ﬁeld follows the longer (but easier) path through the iron. 
The plastic has no effect on the ﬁeld.
Figure 12–4 shows an application of these principles. Part (a) shows a sim-
pliﬁed representation of a loudspeaker, and part (b) shows expanded details of
its magnetic ﬁeld. The ﬁeld is created by the permanent magnet, and the iron
pole pieces guide the ﬁeld and concentrate it in the gap where the speaker coil
is placed. (For a description of how the speaker works, see Section 12.4.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Within the iron structure, the ﬂux crowds together at sharp interior corners,
spreads apart at exterior corners, and is essentially uniform elsewhere, as indi-
cated in (b). This is characteristic of magnetic ﬁelds in iron.
408
Chapter 12 | Magnetism and Magnetic Circuits
(a) Simplified representation of the magnetic field.
      Here, the complex field of (b) is represented
      symbolically by a single line.
N
S
N
S
Speaker
cone
Magnet
Magnet
Voice coils
(see Figure 12–10)            
Magnetic flux
(see expanded
detail below)
© Cengage Learning 2013
Magnetic gap:
Note the intense
ﬁeld.
Magnet
(b) Magnetic ﬁeld pattern for the loud speaker. The ﬁeld is symmetrical
     so only half the structure is shown.
Reproduced with permission from JBL/Harman International
FIGURE 12–4
Magnetic circuit of a loudspeaker. The magnetic structure and voice coil 
are called a “speaker motor.” The ﬁeld is created by the permanent magnet.
Most applications of magnetism involve magnetic effects due to electric cur-
rents. We look ﬁrst at some basic principles. Consider Figure 12–5. The cur-
rent, I, creates a magnetic ﬁeld that is concentric about the conductor, uniform
12.2 Electromagnetism
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

along its length, and whose strength is directly proportional to I. Note the
direction of the field. It may be remembered with the aid of the right-hand
rule. As indicated in (b), imagine placing your right hand around the con-
ductor with your thumb pointing in the direction of current. Your fingers
then point in the direction of the field. If you reverse the direction of the cur-
rent, the direction of the field reverses. If the conductor is wound into a coil,
the fields of its individual turns combine, producing a resultant field as in
Figure 12–6. The direction of the coil flux can also be remembered by
means of a simple rule: curl the fingers of your right hand around the coil in
the direction of the current and your thumb will point in the direction of the
field. If the direction of the current is reversed, the field also reverses.
Provided no ferromagnetic material is present, the strength of the coil’s field
is directly proportional to its current.
If the coil is wound on a ferromagnetic core as in Figure 12–7 (trans-
formers are built this way), almost all flux is confined to the core, although
a small amount (called stray or leakage flux) passes through the surround-
ing air. However, now that ferromagnetic material is present, the core flux
is no longer proportional to current. The reason for this is discussed in
Section 12.14.
Section 12.2 | Electromagnetism
409
I
(a) Magnetic field produced by current.
Field is proportional to I.
I
(b) Right-hand rule
Φ
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–5
Field about a current-carrying conductor. If current is reversed, the ﬁeld
remains concentric but the direction of the ﬂux lines reverses.
I
N
S
Φ
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–6
Field produced by a coil.
I
Leakage
flux
Core flux (simplified
representation)

Iron core
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–7
For ferromagnetic materials, most ﬂux is conﬁned to the core.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

As noted in Figure 12–1, magnetic ﬂux is represented by the symbol . In the
SI system, the unit of ﬂux is the weber (Wb), in honor of pioneer researcher
Wilhelm Eduard Weber, 1804–1891. However, we are often more interested in
ﬂux density (B) (i.e., ﬂux per unit area) than in total ﬂux . Since ﬂux  is
measured in Wb and area A in m2, ﬂux density is measured as Wbm2.
However, to honor Nikola Tesla (another early researcher, 1856–1943) the unit
of ﬂux density is called the tesla (T) where 1 T  1 Wbm2. Flux density is
found by dividing the total ﬂux passing perpendicularly through an area by the
size of the area, Figure 12–8. That is,
B  
A

(tesla, T)
(12–1)
Thus, if   600 Wb of ﬂux pass perpendicularly through an area A  20 
104 m2, the ﬂux density is B  (600  106 Wb)(20  104 m2)  0.3 T.
The greater the ﬂux density, the stronger the ﬁeld.
410
Chapter 12 | Magnetism and Magnetic Circuits
12.3 Magnetic Flux
and Flux Density
NOTES...
Although the weber appears at this
point to be just an abstract quantity,
it can in fact be linked to the familiar
electrical system of units. For
example, if you pass a conductor
through a magnetic ﬁeld such that
the conductor cuts the ﬂux lines at
the rate of 1 Wb per second, the
voltage induced is 1 V.
EXAMPLE 12–1       
For the magnetic core of Figure 12–9, the ﬂux density at cross section 1 is 
B1  0.4 T. Determine B2.
Solution
  B1  A1  (0.4 T)(2  10–2 m2)  0.8  10–2 Wb. Since all
ﬂux is conﬁned to the core, the ﬂux at cross section 2 is the same as at cross 
section 1. Therefore,
B2  A2  (0.8  102 Wb)(1  102 m2)  0.8 T
A1 = 2  102 m2
A2 = 1  102 m2
B
B
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–9
B =    teslas
A
Iron
A

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–8
Concept of ﬂux density. 1 T  1 Wbm2.
1. Refer to the core of Figure 12–8:
a. If A is 2 cm  2.5 cm and B  0.4 T, compute  in webers.
b. If A is 0.5 inch by 0.8 inch and B  0.35 T, compute  in webers.
2. In Figure 12–9, if   100  104 Wb, compute B1 and B2.
Answers
1. a. 2  104 Wb; b. 90.3 Wb; 2. 0.5 T; 1.0 T
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To gain a feeling for the size of magnetic units, note that the strength of the
earth’s ﬁeld is approximately 50 T near the earth’s surface, the ﬁeld of a large
generator or motor is on the order of 1 T or 2 T, and the largest ﬁelds yet pro-
duced (using superconducting magnets) are on the order of 45 T.
Other systems of units (now largely outdated) are the CGS system and the
English systems. In the CGS system, ﬂux is measured in maxwells and ﬂux
density in gauss. In the English system, ﬂux is measured in lines and ﬂux den-
sity in lines per square inch. Conversion factors are given in Table 12–1. We
use only the SI system in this book.
Section 12.4 | Magnetic Circuits and Their Applications
411
System
Flux ()
Flux Density (B)
SI
webers (Wb)
teslas (T)
1 T  1 Wbm2
English
lines
linesin2
1 Wb  108 lines
1 T  6.452  104 linesin2
CGS
maxwells
gauss
1 Wb  108 maxwells
1 gauss  1 maxwellcm2
1 T  104 gauss
TABLE 12–1
Magnetic Units Conversion Table
© Cengage Learning 2013
1. A magnetic ﬁeld is a _____ ﬁeld.
2. With Faraday’s ﬂux concept, the density of lines represents the _____ of the
ﬁeld and their direction represents the _____ of the ﬁeld.
3. Three ferromagnetic materials are _____, _____, and _____.
4. The direction of a magnetic ﬁeld is from _____ to _____ outside a magnet.
5. For Figures 12–5 and 12–6, if the direction of current is reversed, sketch
what the ﬁelds look like.
6. If the core shown in Figure 12–7 is plastic, sketch what the ﬁeld will look like.
7. Flux density B is deﬁned as the ratio A, where A is the area ——— [parallel,
perpendicular] to .
8. For Figure 12–9, if A1 is 2 cm  2.5 cm, B1 is 0.5 T, and B2  0.25 T, what
is A2?
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Many practical applications of magnetism use magnetic structures to guide and
shape magnetic ﬁelds by providing well-deﬁned paths for ﬂux. Such structures
are called magnetic circuits. Magnetic circuits are found in motors, generators,
audio speakers, transformers, and so on. While most magnetic circuit applica-
tions involve magnetic ﬁelds created by electric currents, some involve a com-
bination of ﬁelds created by electric currents and ﬁxed (permanent) magnets.
The speaker structure of Figure 12–4 illustrates the latter. It uses a power-
ful magnet to create ﬂux and an iron structure to guide this ﬂux to the air gap
to provide the intense ﬁeld in which the voice coil is suspended. Figure 12–10
illustrates how the speaker actually works. First note that a source of audio
12.4 Magnetic Circuits
and Their
Applications
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

412
Chapter 12 | Magnetism and Magnetic Circuits
(radio, sound reinforcement systems, etc.—recall Figure 1–5 of Chapter 1) out-
puts a current (proportional to the audio sound) to the speaker. The speaker uti-
lizes a ﬂexible cone to reproduce this sound. A coil of ﬁne wire, wound around
the cylindrical apex of this cone, is suspended in the ﬁxed ﬁeld of the air gap.
Current from the ampliﬁer passes through this coil, creating a varying magnetic
ﬁeld that interacts with the ﬁxed ﬁeld, creating varying forces that vibrate the
cone. Since the current output by the ampliﬁer is an ampliﬁed audio signal, the
cone’s vibrations correspond to this signal and thus, reproduce the original
sound (in ampliﬁed form).
Figure 12–11 shows another example. Bank ATM cards, credit cards,
library cards, travel reward cards, and a host of others feature a magnetic stripe
that contains information encoded in the form of magnetic patterns. As the user
swipes the card through the reader (past the read head), the varying magnetic
ﬁeld induces a voltage in the pickup winding. This tiny voltage is ampliﬁed,
then sent to decoding circuitry where the data is recovered. As indicated, the
pickup part of this system is a magnetic circuit. 
FIGURE 12–10
Audio speaker, conceptual representation.
N
S
S
Frame mount
Permanent
magnet
Coil
vibrates
Voice
coil
Sound
waves
Vibrating
cone
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–11
The read head of a magnetic stripe reader is a magnetic circuit.
(b) Pick-up head
Magnetic
Strip
(a) Scanning the card
Amplifier
Magnetic Strip
To speak
© Cengage Learning 2013
Another example of the use of magnetism is depicted by the magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) machine of Figure 1–2, Chapter 1. Utilizing super-
conductor coils to create an intense magnetic ﬁeld into which the patient is
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

placed, it uses radio waves that interact with this ﬁeld to produce detailed
images of internal organs of the body. The result is noninvasive, radiation-free
body scanning. The particular MRI suite illustrated in Figure 1–2 utilizes a 3
T strength magnet as the heart of the system.
Section 12.5 | Air Gaps, Fringing, and Laminated Cores
413
Consider again Figures 12–10 and 12–11. Note that both structures have gaps in
their magnetic ﬂux paths. This is typical—most practical magnetic circuits have
air gaps that are essential to their operation. However, at such gaps, fringing
occurs. This fringing results in a slight weakening of the ﬁeld in the gap as
depicted in Figure 12–12(a). For short gaps, this weakening can often be
neglected. Alternatively, you can estimate the effect of fringing in your calcula-
tions by increasing each cross-sectional dimension of the core by the length of
the gap as illustrated in Example 12–2.
12.5 Air Gaps,
Fringing, and
Laminated Cores
(a) Fringing at gap
Φ
(b) Laminated section.
 Effective magnetic area is
less than the physical area.
A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–12
Fringing and laminations.
EXAMPLE 12–2        
A core with cross-sectional dimensions of 2.5 cm by 3 cm has a 0.1-mm gap. If
ﬂux density B  0.86 T in the iron, what is the approximate uncorrected and
corrected ﬂux density in the gap?
Solution
Neglecting fringing, gap area is the same as the core area. Thus,
Bg  0.86 T. Correcting for fringing yields
  BA  (0.86 T)(2.5  102 m)(3  102 m)  0.645 mWb
Ag  (2.51  102 m)(3.01  102 m)  7.555  104 m2
Thus,
Bg  0.645 mWb7.555  104 m2  0.854 T
Now consider laminations. Many practical magnetic circuits (such as trans-
formers) use thin sheets of stacked iron or steel as in Figure 12–12(b). Since the
core is not a solid block, its effective cross-sectional area (i.e., the actual area of
iron) is less than the core’s physical cross-sectional area. A stacking factor,
deﬁned as the ratio of the actual area of ferrous material to the physical area of
the core cross section, permits you to determine the core’s effective area.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

414
Chapter 12 | Magnetism and Magnetic Circuits
A product data sheet states that a laminated section of core has cross-sectional
dimensions of 0.03 m by 0.05 m and a stacking factor of 0.9.
a. What is the effective area of the core?
b. Given   1.4  103 Wb, what is the ﬂux density, B?
Answers
a. 1.35  103 m2; b. 1.04 T
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
12.6 Series Elements 
and Parallel
Elements
Magnetic circuits may have sections of different materials. For example, the
circuit of Figure 12–13 has sections of cast iron, sheet steel, and an air gap. For
this circuit, ﬂux  is the same in all sections. Such a circuit is called a series
magnetic circuit. Although the ﬂux is the same in all sections, the ﬂux density
in each section may vary, depending on its effective cross-sectional area as you
saw earlier.
A circuit may also have elements in parallel (Figure 12–14). At each
junction, the sum of ﬂuxes entering is equal to the sum leaving. This is the
counterpart of Kirchhoff’s current law (KCL). Thus, for Figure 12–14, if
1  25 Wb and 2  15 Wb, then 3  10 Wb. For cores that are
symmetrical about the center leg, 2  3.
I

N turns
Cast iron
Laminated
sheet
steel
Air gap
© Cengage Learning 2013
I
1
2
3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–13
Series magnetic circuit.
Flux  is the same throughout.
FIGURE 12–14
The sum of the ﬂux enter-
ing a junction equals the sum leaving.
Here, 1  2 	 3.
1. Why is the ﬂux density in each section of Figure 12–13 different?
2. For Figure 12–13,   1.32 mWb, the cross section of the core is 3 cm by
4 cm, the laminated section has a stacking factor of 0.8, and the gap is
1 mm. Determine the ﬂux density in each section, taking fringing into
account.
3. If the core of Figure 12–14 is symmetrical about its center leg, B1  0.4 T,
and the cross-sectional area of the center leg is 25 cm2, what are 2 and 3?
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We now look at the analysis of magnetic circuits with dc excitation. There are
two basic problems to consider: (1) given the ﬂux, to determine the current
required to produce it and (2) given the current, to compute the ﬂux produced.
To help visualize how to solve such problems, we ﬁrst establish an analogy
between magnetic circuits and electric circuits.
MMF: The Source of Magnetic Flux
Current through a coil creates magnetic ﬂux. The greater the current or the
greater the number of turns, the greater will be the ﬂux. This ﬂux-producing
ability of a coil is called its magnetomotive force (mmf) and is measured in
ampere-turns. Given the symbol , it is deﬁned as
  NI
(ampere-turns, At)
(12–2)
Thus, a coil with 100 turns and 2.5 amps will have an mmf of 250 ampere-turns,
while a coil with 500 turns and 4 amps will have an mmf of 2000 ampere-turns.
Reluctance, : Opposition to Magnetic Flux
Flux in a magnetic circuit also depends on the opposition that the circuit pre-
sents to it. Termed reluctance (), this opposition depends on the dimensions
of the core and the material of which it is made. Like the resistance of a wire,
reluctance is directly proportional to length and inversely proportional to cross-
sectional area. In equation form,
  m

A

(AtWb)
(12–3)
where  is a property of the core material called its permeability (discussed in
Section 12.8). Permeability is a measure of how easy it is to establish ﬂux in a
material. Ferromagnetic materials have high permeability and hence low ,
while nonmagnetic materials have low permeability and high .
Ohm’s Law for Magnetic Circuits
The relationship between ﬂux, mmf, and reluctance is
  
(Wb)
(12–4)
This relationship is similar to Ohm’s law and is depicted symbolically in
Figure 12–15. (Remember however that ﬂux, unlike electric current, does not
ﬂow—see note in Section 12.1.)
Section 12.7 | Magnetic Circuits with dc Excitation
415
12.7 Magnetic 
Circuits with 
dc Excitation



© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–15
Electric circuit analogy of
a magnetic circuit.   .
EXAMPLE 12–3        
For Figure 12–16, if the reluctance of the magnetic circuit is   12 
104 AtWb, what is the ﬂux in the circuit?
Solution
  NI  (300)(0.5 A)  150 At
    (150 At)(12  104 AtWb)  12.5  104 Wb
0.5 A

N = 300 turns
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–16
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Example 12–3, we assumed that the reluctance of the core was constant.
This is only approximately true under certain conditions. In general, it is not
true, since  is a function of ﬂux density. Thus Equation 12–4 is not really very
useful, since for ferromagnetic material,  depends on ﬂux, the very quantity
that you are trying to ﬁnd. The main use of Equations 12–3 and 12–4 is to pro-
vide an analogy between electric and magnetic circuit analysis.
416
Chapter 12 | Magnetism and Magnetic Circuits
12.8 Magnetic Field
Intensity and
Magnetization
Curves
We now look at a more practical approach to analyzing magnetic circuits. First,
we require a quantity called magnetic ﬁeld intensity, H (also known as mag-
netizing force). It is a measure of the mmf per unit length of a circuit.
To get at the idea, suppose you apply the same mmf (say 600 At) to two cir-
cuits with different path lengths (Figure 12–17). In (a), you have 600 ampere-turns
of mmf to “drive” ﬂux through 0.6 m of core; in (b), you have the same mmf but
it is spread across only 0.15 m of path length. Thus, the mmf per unit length in the
second case is more intense. Based on this idea, one can deﬁne magnetic ﬁeld
intensity as the ratio of applied mmf to the length of path that it acts over. Thus,
H    NI
(Atm)
(12–5)
For the circuit of Figure 12–17(a), H  600 At0.6 m  1000 Atm, while for 
the circuit of (b), H  600 At0.15 m  4000 Atm. Thus, in (a) you have 
1000 ampere-turns of “driving force” per meter of length to establish ﬂux in the
core, whereas in (b) you have four times as much. (However, you won’t get four
times as much ﬂux, since the opposition to ﬂux varies with the density of the ﬂux.)
Rearranging Equation 12–5 yields an important result:
NI  H
(At)
(12–6)
In an analogy with electric circuits (Figure 12–18), the NI product is an mmf
source, while the H product is an mmf drop.
The Relationship between B and H
From Equation 12–5, you can see that magnetizing force, H, is a measure of
the ﬂux-producing ability of the coil (since it depends on NI). You also know
that B is a measure of the resulting ﬂux (since B  A). Thus, B and H are
related. The relationship is
B  H
(12–7)
where  is the permeability of the core (recall Equation 12–3).
It was stated earlier that permeability is a measure of how easy it is to
establish ﬂux in a material. To see why, note from Equation 12–7 that the larger
the value of , the larger the ﬂux density for a given H. However, H is propor-
tional to current; therefore, the larger the value of , the larger the ﬂux density
for a given magnetizing current. From this, it follows that the larger the per-
meability, the more ﬂux you get for a given magnetizing current.
In the SI system,  has units of webers per ampere-turn-meter. The per-
meability of free space is 0  4p  107. For all practical purposes, the per-
meability of air and other nonmagnetic materials (e.g., plastic) is the same as
for a vacuum. Thus, in air gaps,
Bg  m0Hg  4p  107  Hg
(12–8)
(a) A long path
(b) A short path
Coil
I
mmf = NI
I
l = 0.15 m
mmf = NI
l = 0.6 m
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–17
By deﬁnition,
H  mmflength  NI.
NI
Hl
NI = Hl
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–18
Circuit analogy, H model.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Rearranging Equation 12–8 yields
Hg  
4p 
Bg
107
  7.96  105Bg
(Atm)
(12–9)
Section 12.8 | Magnetic Field Intensity and Magnetization Curves
417
For Figure 12–16, the core cross section is 0.05 m  0.08 m. If a gap is cut in
the core and H in the gap is 3.6  105 Atm, what is the ﬂux  in the core?
Neglect fringing.
Answer
1.81 mWb
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
B-H Curves
For ferromagnetic materials,  is not constant but varies with ﬂux density, and
there is no easy way to compute it. In reality, however, it isn’t  that you are inter-
ested in: What you really want to know is, given B, what is H, and vice versa. A
set of curves, called B-H curves, provides this information. (These curves, also
called magnetization curves, are obtained experimentally and are available in
handbooks. A separate curve is required for each material.) Figure 12–19 shows
typical curves for cast iron, cast steel, and sheet steel.
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0              500            1000         1500           2000          2500           3000          3500          4000          4500           5000
B (T)
H (At/m)
Sheet steel
Cast steel
Cast iron
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–19
B-H curves for selected materials.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

418
Chapter 12 | Magnetism and Magnetic Circuits
EXAMPLE 12–4       
If B  1.4 T for sheet steel, what is H?
Solution
Enter Figure 12–19 on the axis at B  1.4 T, continue across until
you encounter the curve for sheet steel, then read the corresponding value for H
as indicated in Figure 12–20: H  1000 Atm.
1.4
1000
Sheet steel
B (T)
H (At/m)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–20
For sheet steel, H  1000 Atm when B  1.4 T.
1. The cross section of a sheet steel core is 0.1 m  0.1 m and its stacking
factor is 0.93. If  13.5 mWb, what is H?
2. Sketch the B-H curves for both air and plastic.
Answers
1. 1500 Atm
2. B  H. For air,  is constant (recall o  4
  107). Thus, B is proportional to
H, and the curve is a straight line. Choose two arbitrary points to establish it. When
H  0, B  0; thus, it passes through the origin. When H  5000, B  (4
 
107)(5000)  6.28  103 T. The curve for plastic is the same.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
12.9 Ampere’s
Circuital Law
One of the key relationships in magnetic circuit theory is Ampere’s circuital
law, Equation 12–10. This law was determined experimentally and is a gener-
alization of the relationship   NI  H that we developed earlier. Ampere
showed that the algebraic sum of mmfs around a closed loop in a magnetic cir-
cuit is zero, regardless of the number of sections or coils. That is,

  0
(12–10)
This can be rewritten as

NI  
H
At
(12–11)
which states that the sum of applied mmfs around a closed loop equals the sum
of the mmf drops. The summation is algebraic and terms are additive or sub-
tractive, depending on the direction of ﬂux and how the coils are wound. To
illustrate, consider again Figure 12–13. Here,
NI  Hironiron  Hsteelsteel  Hgg  0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Thus,
NI  Hironiron 	 Hsteelsteel 	 Hgg
Applied
sum of mmf drops
mmf
The path to use for the H terms is the mean (average) path.
You now have two magnetic circuit models (Figure 12–21). While the
reluctance model (a) is not very useful for solving problems, it helps relate
magnetic circuit problems to familiar electrical circuit concepts. The Ampere’s
law model, on the other hand, permits us to solve practical problems. We look
at how to do this in the next section.
{
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
Section 12.9 | Ampere’s Circuital Law
419
(a) Reluctance model


iron
steel
g
(b) Ampere’s circuital law model

Hiron liron
Hsteel lsteel
Hg lg
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–21
Two models for the magnetic circuit of Figure 12–13.
1. If the mmf of a 200-turn coil is 700 At, the current in the coil is _____ amps.
2. For Figure 12–17, if H  3500 Atm and N  1000 turns, then for (a), I is
_____ A, while for (b), I is _____ A.
3. For cast iron, if B  0.5 T, then H  _____ Atm.
4. A series circuit consists of one coil, a section of iron, a section of steel, and
two air gaps (of different sizes). Draw the Ampere’s law model.
5. Which is the correct answer for the circuit of Figure 12–22?
a. Ampere’s law around loop 1 yields (NI  H11 	 H22, or NI 
H11  H22).
b. Ampere’s law around loop 2 yields (0  H22 	 H33, or 0 
H22  H33).
6. For the circuit of Figure 12–23, the length  to use in Ampere’s law 
is ——— [0.36 m, 0.32 m, 0.28 m]. Why?
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Path l1 = labc
H = H1
Path l3 = lcda
H = H3
Path l2 = lca
H = H2
a
b
c
d
© Cengage Learning 2013
1 cm
1 cm
1 cm
1 cm
6 cm
8 cm
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–22
FIGURE 12–23
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

You now have the tools needed to solve basic magnetic circuit problems. We
will begin with series circuits where  is known and we want to ﬁnd the exci-
tation to produce it. Problems of this type can be solved using four basic steps:
1. Compute B for each section using B  A.
2. Determine H for each magnetic section from the B-H curves. Use Hg 
7.96  105Bg for air gaps.
3. Compute NI using Ampere’s circuital law.
4. Use the computed NI to determine coil current or turns as required.
(Circuits with more than one coil are handled as in Example 12–6.)
Be sure to use the mean path through the circuit when applying Ampere’s law.
Unless directed otherwise, neglect fringing.
420
Chapter 12 | Magnetism and Magnetic Circuits
12.10 Series Magnetic
Circuits: Given
, Find NI
PRACTICAL NOTE...
Magnetic circuit analysis is not as precise as electric circuit analysis
because (1) the assumption of uniform flux density breaks down at sharp
corners as you saw in Figure 12–4, and (2) the B-H curve is a mean curve
and has considerable uncertainty as discussed later (Section 12–14).
Although the answers are approximate, they are adequate for many purposes.
EXAMPLE 12–5       
If the core of Figure 12–24 is cast iron and   0.1  103 Wb, what is the coil
current?
Mean path length = 0.25 m

Area A
B = 
A
N = 500 turns
A = 0.2  103 m2
I

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–24
Solution
Following the four basic steps:
1. The ﬂux density is
B  
A
  
0
0
.
.
1
2


1
1
0
0


3
3
  0.5 T
2. From the B-H curve (cast iron), Figure 12–19, H  1550 Atm.
3. Apply Ampere’s law. There is only one coil and one core section. Length 
0.25 m. Thus,
H  1550  0.25  388 At  NI
4. Solve for I:
I  HN  388500  0.78 amps
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

More Examples
If a magnetic circuit contains an air gap, add another element to the con-
ceptual models (recall Figure 12–21). Since air represents a poor magnetic
path, its reluctance will be high compared with that of iron. Recalling our
analogy to electric circuits, this suggests that the mmf drop across the gap
will be large compared with that of the iron. You can see this in the follow-
ing example.
Section 12.10 | Series Magnetic Circuits: Given , Find NI
421
EXAMPLE 12–6        
A second coil is added as shown in Figure 12–25. If   0.1  103 Wb as
before, but I1  1.5 amps, what is I2?
I1
I2
N1 = 500
N2 = 200
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–25
Solution
From the previous example, you know that a current of 0.78 amps in
coil 1 produces   0.1  10–3 Wb. But you already have 1.5 amps in coil 1.
Thus, coil 2 must be wound in opposition so that its mmf is subtractive.
Applying Ampere’s law yields N1I1 – N2I2  H. Hence,
(500)(1.5 A)  200I2  388 At
and so I2  1.8 amps.
NOTES...
Since magnetic circuits are nonlin-
ear, you cannot use superposition;
that is, you cannot consider each
coil of Figure 12–25 by itself, then
sum the results. You must consider
them simultaneously as we do in
this example.
EXAMPLE 12–7        
The core of Figure 12–24 has a 0.008-m gap cut as shown in Figure 12–26.
Determine how much the current must increase to maintain the original core
ﬂux. Neglect fringing.
Solution
Iron
iron  0.25  0.008  0.242 m. Since  does not change, B and H will be the
same as before. Thus, Biron  0.5 T and Hiron  1550 Atm.
Air Gap
Bg is the same as Biron. Thus, Bg  0.5 T and Hg  7.96  105Bg  3.98  105Atm.
Ampere’s Law
NI  Hironiron 	 Hgg  (1550)(0.242) 	 (3.98  105)(0.008)  375 	 3184 
3559 At. Thus, I  3559500  7.1 amps. Note that the current had to increase
from 0.78 amp to 7.1 amps in order to maintain the same ﬂux, over a ninefold
increase.
(a)
I

lg = 0.008 m
Cast
iron
(b)
NI
Hiron liron
Hg lg
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–26
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

422
Chapter 12 | Magnetism and Magnetic Circuits
EXAMPLE 12–8       
The laminated sheet steel section of Figure 12–27 has a stacking factor of 0.9.
Compute the current required to establish a ﬂux of   1.4  104 Wb. Neglect
fringing. All dimensions are shown in inches.
I
N = 150
Cast iron
Laminated
sheet steel
(SF = 0.9)
e
d
c
b
f g
h
a
lg = 0.2"
0.5"
0.8"
lef  = 2.5"
lde = 2"
Cross section = 0.5"  0.8" (all members)
 = 1.4  104 Wb
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–27
Solution
Convert all dimensions to metric.
Cast Iron
iron  adef  g  2.5 	 2 	 2.5  0.2  6.8 in  0.173 m
Airon  (0.5 in)(0.8 in)  0.4 in2  0.258  103 m2
Biron  Airon  (1.4  104)(0.258  103)  0.54 T
Hiron  1850 Atm
(from Figure 12–19)
Sheet Steel
steel  fg 	 gh 	 ha  0.25 	 2 	 0.25  2.5 in  6.35  102 m
Asteel  (0.9)(0.258  103)  0.232  103 m2
Bsteel  Asteel  (1.4  104)(0.232  103)  0.60 T
Hsteel  125 Atm
(from Figure 12–19)
Air Gap
g  0.2 in  5.08  103 m
Bg  Biron  0.54 T
Hg  (7.96  105)(0.54)  4.3  105 Atm
Ampere’s Law
NI  Hironiron 	 Hsteelsteel 	 Hgg
 (1850)(0.173) 	 (125)(6.35  102) 	 (4.3  105)(5.08  103)
 320 	 7.9 	 2184  2512 At
I  2512N  2512150  16.7 amps
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 12.10 | Series Magnetic Circuits: Given , Find NI
423
EXAMPLE 12–9        
Figure 12–28 shows a portion of a solenoid. Flux   4  104 Wb when 
I  2.5 amps. Find the number of turns on the coil.
I
lg
Gap
Spring
Plunger
0.4 cm
Yoke


Coil
2 cm
2.5 cm
l plunger = 0.1 m
Cross section
2.5 cm  2.5 cm
lyoke = 0.2 m
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–28
Solenoid. All parts are cast steel.
Material
Section
Length (m)
A (m2)
B (T)
H (At/m)
H (At)
Cast steel
yoke
0.2
6.25  104
0.64
410
82
Cast steel
plunger
0.1
5  104
0.8
500
50
Air
gap
0.4  102
6.25  104
0.64
5.09  105
2036
TABLE 12–2
Solution
Yoke
Ayoke  2.5 cm  2.5 cm  6.25 cm2  6.25  104 m2
Byoke  
A

yoke
  
6.
4
25


10
1

0
4
4
  0.64 T
Hyoke  410 Atm
(from Figure 12–19)
Plunger
Aplunger  2.0 cm  2.5 cm  5.0 cm2  5.0  104 m2
Bplunger  

Ap

lunger
  
5
4
.0


1
1
0
0


4
4
  0.8 T
Hplunger  500 Atm
(from Figure 12–19)
Air Gap
There are two identical gaps. For each,
Bg  Byoke  0.64 T
Thus,
Hg  (7.96  105)(0.64)  5.09  105 Atm
The results are summarized in Table 12–2.
Ampere’s Law
NI  Hyokeyoke 	 Hplungerplunger 	 2Hgg  82 	 50 	 2(2036)  4204 At
N  42042.5  1682 turns
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Series-parallel magnetic circuits are handled using the sum of ﬂuxes principle
(Figure 12–14) and Ampere’s law.
424
Chapter 12 | Magnetism and Magnetic Circuits
12.11 Series-Parallel
Magnetic Circuits
EXAMPLE 12–10       
The core of Figure 12–29 is cast steel. Determine the current to establish an air-
gap ﬂux g  6  103 Wb. Neglect fringing.
I
1
3
2
e
a
b
c
d
N = 200
1
2
lab  =  lcd  =  0.25 m    lda  =  0.2 m
ldea  =  0.35 m
Cast steel
A = 2  102 m2
lg =  lbc =  0.25  103 m
g = 3
lg
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–29
Solution
Consider each section in turn.
Air Gap
Bg  gAg  (6  103)(2  102)  0.3 T
Hg  (7.96  105)(0.3)  2.388  105 Atm
Sections ab and cd
Bab  Bcd  Bg  0.3 T
Hab  Hcd  250 Atm (from Figure 12–19)
Ampere’s Law (Loop 2)

NI  
H. Since you are going opposite to ﬂux in leg da, the corre-
sponding term (i.e., Hdada) will be subtractive. Also, NI  0 for loop 2. Thus,
0  
loop2 H
0  Habab 	 Hgg 	 Hcdcd  Hdada
 (250)(0.25) 	 (2.388  105)(0.25  103) 	 (250)(0.25)  0.2Hda
 62.5 	 59.7 	 62.5  0.2Hda  184.7  0.2Hda
Thus, 0.2Hda  184.7 and Hda  925 Atm. From Figure 12–19, Bda  1.12 T.
2  BdaA  1.12  0.02  2.24  102 Wb
1  2 	 3  2.84  102 Wb.
Bdea  1A  (2.84  102)0.02  1.42 T
Hdea  2125 Atm
(from Figure 12–19)
Ampere’s Law (Loop 1)
NI  Hdeadea 	 Hadad  (2125)(0.35) 	 184.7  929 At
I  929200  4.65 A
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 12.12 | Series Magnetic Circuits: Given NI, Find 
425
In previous problems, you were given the ﬂux and asked to ﬁnd the current. We
now look at the converse problem: given NI, ﬁnd the resultant ﬂux. For the spe-
cial case of a core of one material and constant cross section (Example 12–11)
this is straightforward. For all other cases, trial and error must be used.
12.12 Series Magnetic
Circuits: Given
NI, Find 
EXAMPLE 12–11        
For the circuit of Figure 12–31, NI  250 At. Determine .
I

Cast steel
N turns
l = 0.2 m
Cross-sectional
area A = 0.01 m2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–31
Solution
H  NI. Thus, H  NI  2500.2  1250 Atm. From the B-H
curve of Figure 12–19, B  1.24 T. Therefore,   BA  1.24  0.01  1.24 
10–2 Wb.
The cast-iron core of Figure 12–30 is symmetrical. Determine current I. Hint:
To ﬁnd NI, you can write Ampere’s law around either loop. Be sure to make
use of symmetry.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
I
1
a
b
c
d
2
lab = lbc = lcd = 4 cm
Gap: lg = 0.5 cm
lek = 3 cm
Core dimensions: 1 cm  1 cm
k
2  =  30 Wb
N = 400
1
2
e
f
m
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–30
Answer
6.5 A
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For circuits with two or more sections, the process is not so simple. Before
you can ﬁnd H in any section, for example, you need to know the ﬂux density.
However, in order to determine ﬂux density, you need to know H. Thus, neither
 nor H can be found without knowing the other ﬁrst.
To get around this problem, use trial and error. First, take a guess at the
value for ﬂux, compute NI using the 4-step procedure of Section 12.10, then
compare the computed NI against the given NI. If they agree, the problem is
solved. If they don’t, adjust your guess and try again. Repeat the procedure
until you are within 5% of the given NI.
The problem is how to come up with a good ﬁrst guess. For circuits of the
type of Figure 12–32, note that NI  Hsteelsteel 	 Hgg. As a ﬁrst guess, assume
that the reluctance of the air gap is so high that the full mmf drop appears
across the gap. Thus, NI  Hgg, and
Hg  NIg
(12–12)
You can now apply Ampere’s law to see how close to the given NI your trial
guess is (see Notes).
426
Chapter 12 | Magnetism and Magnetic Circuits
I
lg
 = Hsteel lsteel  Hg lg
   Hg lg if Hg lg >> Hsteel lsteel
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–32
EXAMPLE 12–12       
The core of Figure 12–32 is cast steel, NI  1100 At, the cross-sectional area
everywhere is 0.0025 m2, g  0.002 m, and steel  0.2 m. Determine the ﬂux
in the core. 
Solution
Initial Guess
Assume that 90% of the mmf appears across the gap. The applied mmf is 1100
At. Ninety percent of this is 990 At. Thus, Hg  0.9NI  9900.002  4.95 
105 Atm and Bg  m0Hg  (4p  107)(4.95  105)  0.62 T.
Trial 1
Since the area of the steel is the same as that of the gap, the ﬂux density is the
same, neglecting fringing. Thus, Bsteel  Bg  0.62 T. From the B-H curve,
Hsteel  400 Atm. Now apply Ampere’s law:
NI  Hsteelsteel 	 Hgg  (400)(0.2) 	 (4.95  105)(0.002)
 80 	 990  1070 At
This answer is 2.7% lower than the given NI of 1100 At and is therefore accept-
able. Thus,   BA  0.62  0.0025  1.55  103 Wb.
NOTES...
Since you know that some of the
mmf drop appears across the
steel, you can start at less than
100% for the gap. Some basic
knowledge and a bit of experience
help. The relative size of the mmf
drops depends on the core mater-
ial. For cast iron, the percentage
drop across the iron is larger than
the percentage across a similar
piece of sheet steel or cast steel.
This is illustrated in Examples
12–12 and 12–13.
The initial guess in Example 12–12 yielded an acceptable answer on the
ﬁrst trial. (You are seldom this lucky.)
EXAMPLE 12–13       
If the core of Example 12–12 is cast iron instead of steel, compute .
Solution
Because cast iron has a larger H for a given ﬂux density (Figure 12–19),
it will have a larger H drop, and less will appear across the gap. Assume 75%
across the gap.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 12.13 | Force Due to an Electromagnet
427
Initial Guess
Hg  0.75 NI  (0.75)(1100)0.002  4.125  105 Atm.
Bg  m0Hg  (4m  107)(4.125  105)  0.52 T.
Trial 1
Biron  Bg. Thus, Biron  0.52 T. From the B-H curve, Hiron  1700 Atm.
Ampere’s Law
NI  Hironiron 	 Hgg  (1700)(0.2) 	 (4.125  105)(0.002)
 340 	 825  1165 At
(high by 5.9%)
Trial 2
Reduce the guess by 5.9% to Biron  0.49 T. Thus, Hiron  1500 Atm (from the
B-H curve) and Hg  7.96  105 Bg  3.90  105 Atm.
Ampere’s Law
NI  Hironiron 	 Hgg  (1500)(0.2) 	 (3.90  105)(0.002)
 300 	 780  1080 At
The error is now 1.82%, which is excellent. Thus,   BA  (0.49)(2.5  103) 
1.23  103 Wb. If the error had been larger than 5%, a third trial would have
been needed.
Electromagnets are used in relays, door bells, lifting magnets, and so on. For
an electromagnetic relay as in Figure 12–33, it can be shown that the force cre-
ated by the magnetic ﬁeld is
F  
B
2
2g
m
A
0
g

(12–13)
where Bg is ﬂux density in the gap in teslas, Ag is gap area in square meters,
and F is force in newtons.
12.13 Force Due to an
Electromagnet
EXAMPLE 12–14        
Figure 12–33 shows a typical relay. The force due to the current-carrying coil
pulls the pivoted arm against spring tension to close the contacts and energize
the load. If the pole face is 1⁄4 inch square and   0.5  104 Wb, what is the
pull on the armature in pounds?
Contacts
Coil
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–33
A typical relay.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Figure 12–34 shows how a relay may be used in practice. When the switch is
closed, the energized coil pulls the armature down. This closes the contacts and
energizes the load. When the switch is opened, the spring pulls the contacts
open again. Schemes like this use relatively small currents to control large
loads. In addition, they permit remote control, as the relay and load may be a
considerable distance from the actuating switch.
428
Chapter 12 | Magnetism and Magnetic Circuits
Solution
Convert to metric units.
Ag  (0.25 in)(0.25 in)  0.0625 in2  0.403  104 m2
Bg  Ag  (0.5  104)(0.403  104)  1.24 T
Thus,
F  
B
2
2g
m
A
0
 
 24.66 N  5.54 lb
(1.24)2(0.403  104)

2(4p  107)
I
Contacts
Spring
Pivot point
Insulation
Armature
Coil




E
Load
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–34
Controlling a load with a relay.
12.14 Properties 
of Magnetic
Materials
Magnetic properties are related to atomic structure. Each atom of a substance,
for example, produces a tiny atomic-level magnetic ﬁeld because its moving
(i.e., orbiting) electrons constitute an atomic-level current, and currents create
magnetic ﬁelds. For nonmagnetic materials, these ﬁelds are randomly oriented
and cancel. However, for ferromagnetic materials, the ﬁelds in small regions,
called domains (Figure 12–35), do not cancel. (Domains are of microscopic
size, but are large enough to hold from 1017 to 1021 atoms.) If the domain ﬁelds
in a ferromagnetic material line up, the material is magnetized; if they are ran-
domly oriented, the material is not magnetized.
Magnetizing a Specimen
A nonmagnetized specimen can be magnetized by making its domain fields
line up. Figure 12–36 shows how this can be done. As current through the
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 12.14 | Properties of Magnetic Materials
429
coil is increased, the field strength increases and more and more domains
align themselves in the direction of the field. If the field is made strong
enough, almost all domain fields line up, and the material is said to be in
saturation (the almost flat portion of the B-H curve). In saturation, the flux
density increases slowly as magnetization intensity increases. This means
that once the material is in saturation, you cannot magnetize it much further
no matter how hard you try. Path 0-a of Figure 12–36 (traced from the non-
magnetized state to the saturated state) is termed the dc curve or normal
magnetization curve. (This is the B-H curve that you used earlier when you
solved magnetic circuit problems.)
Hysteresis
If you now reduce the current to zero, you will ﬁnd that the curve does not
track back to zero. Instead, it follows a different path (Figure 12–37), with the
result that the specimen retains some magnetism (called residual magnetism)
as indicated by point b. If now you reverse the current, the ﬂux reverses and
you trace the path to c. If you again decrease the current to zero, you trace the
path to d. Reversing the current and increasing it takes you back to a. The
result is called a hysteresis loop. A major source of uncertainty in magnetic
circuit behavior should now be apparent: As you can see, ﬂux density depends
not just on current; it also depends on which arm of the curve the sample is
magnetized on, that is, it depends on the circuit’s past history. For this reason,
B-H curves are the average of the two arms of the hysteresis loop, as in the
curve of Figure 12–36.
The Demagnetization Process
As indicated previously, simply turning the current off does not demagnetize
ferromagnetic material. To demagnetize it, you must successively decrease
its hysteresis loop to zero as in Figure 12–38. You can place the specimen
inside a coil that is driven by a variable ac source and gradually decrease the
coil current to zero, or you can use a ﬁxed ac supply and gradually withdraw
the specimen from the ﬁeld. Such procedures are referred to as “degaussing.”
(“Degauss” is a term that dates back to the earlier use of gauss as the unit of
magnetic ﬂux density—recall Table 12–1.)
Ferromagnetic
material
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–35
Random orientation of
microscopic ﬁelds in a nonmagnetized
ferromagnetic material. The small regions
are called domains.
(a) The magnetizing
circuit
Ferromagnetic
material
E
I
(b) Progressive change in the domain
orientations as the field is increased.
H is proportional to current I.
B
0
a
Saturation
H
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–36
The magnetization process.
B
H
a
c
b
d
Residual
magnetism
Residual
magnetism
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–37
Hysteresis loop.
B
H
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–38
Demagnetization by suc-
cessively shrinking the hysteresis loop.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

One way to sense and measure magnetic ﬁeld strength is to use the Hall effect
(after E. H. Hall). The basic idea is illustrated in Figure 12–39. When a strip
of semiconductor material such as indium arsenide is placed in a magnetic
ﬁeld, a small voltage, called the Hall voltage, VH, appears across opposite
edges. For a ﬁxed current I, VH is proportional to magnetic ﬁeld strength B.
Instruments using this principle are known as Hall-effect gaussmeters. To
measure a magnetic ﬁeld with such a meter, insert its probe into the ﬁeld per-
pendicular to the ﬁeld (Figure 12–40). The meter indicates ﬂux density
directly in teslas.
430
Chapter 12 | Magnetism and Magnetic Circuits
12.15 Sensing and
Measuring
Magnetic Fields
I
Current source
VH


–
Flux
© Cengage Learning 2013
I
Hall-effect
probe
Gaussmeter
4 7 3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–39
The Hall effect.
FIGURE 12–40
Magnetic ﬁeld measurement.
Problems
12.3
Magnetic Flux and Flux Density
1. Refer to Figure 12–41:
a. Which area, A1 or A2, do you use to calculate ﬂux density?
b. If   28 mWb, what is ﬂux density in teslas?
2. For Figure 12–41, if   250 Wb, A1  1.25 in2, and A2  2.0 in2, what is
the ﬂux density in the English system of units?
3. The toroid of Figure 12–42 has a circular cross section and   628 Wb. 
If r1  8 cm and r2  12 cm, what is the ﬂux density in teslas?
4. If r1 of Figure 12–42 is 3.5 inches and r2 is 4.5 inches, what is the ﬂux den-
sity in the English system of units if   628 Wb?
A1
0.02 m2
0.024 m2
A2
Portion of
magnetic
circuit
(cast steel)

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–41
I

r1
r2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–42
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12.5
Air Gaps, Fringing, and Laminated Cores
5. If the section of core in Figure 12–43 is 0.025 m by 0.04 m, has a stacking
factor of 0.85, and B  1.45 T, what is  in webers?
12.6
Series Elements and Parallel Elements
6. For the iron core of Figure 12–44, ﬂux density B2  0.6 T. Compute B1 and B3.
7. For the section of iron core of Figure 12–45, if 1  12 mWb and 3 
2 mWb, what is B2?
8. For the section of iron core of Figure 12–45, if B1  0.8 T and B2  0.6 T,
what is B3?
Problems
431
F
FIGURE 12–43
A1 = 0.02 m2
A3 = 0.01 m2
A2 = 0.015 m2
B2 = 0.6 T
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–44
A1 = 0.02 m2
A2 = 0.01 m2
A3 = 0.016 m2
2
1
3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–45
12.8
Magnetic Field Intensity and Magnetization Curves
9. A core with dimensions 2 cm  3 cm has a magnetic intensity of 1200 Atm.
What is  if the core is cast iron? If it is cast steel? If it is sheet steel with
stacking factor  0.94?
10. Figure 12–46 shows the two electric circuit equivalents for magnetic circuits.
Show that  in   A is the same as  in B  H.
11. Consider again Figure 12–42. If I  10 A, N  40 turns, r1  5 cm, and r2 
7 cm, what is H in ampere-turns per meter?
12.9
Ampere’s Circuital Law
12. Let H1 and 1 be the magnetizing force and path length, respectively, where
ﬂux 1 exists in Figure 12–47 and similarly for 2 and 3. Write Ampere’s
law around each of the windows.
13. Assume that a coil N2 carrying current I2 is added on leg 3 of the core shown
in Figure 12–47 and that it produces ﬂux directed upward. Assume, however,
that the net ﬂux in leg 3 is still downward. Write the Ampere’s law equations
for this case.
14. Repeat Problem 13 if the net ﬂux in leg 3 is upward but the directions of 1
and 2 remain as in Figure 12–47.
12.10
Series Magnetic Circuits: Given , Find NI
15. Find the current I in Figure 12–48 if   0.16 mWb.
16. Let everything be the same as in Problem 15 except that the cast steel portion
is replaced with laminated sheet steel with a stacking factor of 0.85.
(b) B = H

Hl



(a)  =   l  
     A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–46
  NI.
I1
N1
H1 and l1
this path
H3 and l3
this path
H2 and l2
this path
1
2
3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–47
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

17. A gap of 0.5 mm is cut in the cast steel portion of the core in Figure 12–48.
Find the current for   0.128 mWb. Neglect fringing.
18. Two gaps, each 1 mm, are cut in the circuit of Figure 12–48, one in the cast
steel portion and the other in the cast iron portion. Determine current for 
  0.128 mWb. Neglect fringing.
19. The cast iron core of Figure 12–49 measures 1 cm  1.5 cm, g  0.3 mm,
the air-gap ﬂux density is 0.426 T, and N  600 turns. The end pieces are
half circles. Taking into account fringing, ﬁnd current I.
20. For the circuit of Figure 12–50,   141 Wb and N  400 turns. The
bottom member is sheet steel with a stacking factor of 0.94, while the
remainder is cast steel. All pieces are 1 cm  1 cm. The length of the cast
steel path is 16 cm. Find current I.
432
Chapter 12 | Magnetism and Magnetic Circuits
© Cengage Learning 2013
l steel =
0.14 m
l iron =
0.06 m
Cast
iron
Cast steel
I
A = 3.2  104 m2
N = 300 turns
FIGURE 12–49
I
N
1.5 cm
1 cm
3.2 cm
lg
© Cengage Learning 2013
I
N
10 cm
Sheet steel

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–50
21. For the circuit of Figure 12–51,   30 Wb and N  2000 turns.
Neglecting fringing, ﬁnd current I.
22. For the circuit of Figure 12–52,   25,000 lines. The stacking factor for the
sheet steel portion is 0.95. Find current I.
23. A second coil of 450 turns with I2  4 amps is wound on the cast steel por-
tion of Figure 12–52. Its ﬂux is in opposition to the ﬂux produced by the
original coil. The resulting ﬂux is 35,000 lines in the counterclockwise direc-
tion. Find the current I1.
I
Cast iron
Cast steel
lg = 2 mm
l iron = 3 cm
l steel = 8 cm
A (everywhere) = 0.5 cm2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–51
FIGURE 12–48
I
Area of all sections (except A1) = 2 in2
N = 600
Sheet
steel
Cast steel
l1 = 2 in   A1 = 1 in2
l4
l3
l2
l1
Cast iron
l2 = 3.5 in
lg = 0.2 in
l3 = 5.8 in
l4 = 7.5 in
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–52
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12.11
Series-Parallel Magnetic Circuits
24. For Figure 12–53, if g  80 Wb, ﬁnd I.
25. If the circuit of Figure 12–53 has no gap and 3  0.2 mWb, ﬁnd I.
12.12
Series Magnetic Circuits: Given NI, Find 
26. A cast steel magnetic circuit with N  2500 turns, I  200 mA, and a cross-
sectional area of 0.02 m2 has an air gap of 0.00254 m. Assuming 90% of the
mmf appears across the gap, estimate the ﬂux in the core.
27. If NI  644 At for the cast steel core of Figure 12–54, ﬁnd the ﬂux, .
28. A gap   0.004 m is cut in the core of Figure 12–54. Everything else
remains the same. Find the ﬂux, .
12.13
Force Due to an Electromagnet
29. For the relay of Figure 12–34, if the pole face is 2 cm by 2.5 cm and a force
of 2 pounds is required to close the gap, what ﬂux (in webers) is needed?
30. For the solenoid of Figure 12–28,   4  104 Wb. Find the force of
attraction on the plunger in newtons and in pounds.
12.15
Sensing and Measuring Magnetic Fields
31. Computers store information on hard disk drives using magnetic means.
This data is read back by read heads. One of the latest read-head technolo-
gies is magnetoresistance technology. The earliest versions of this technol-
ogy were known as AMR (sometimes shortened to MR). A more advanced
version is known as GMR. Go to the Internet and research these read-head
technologies.
Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
433
I
1
a
3
b
c
d
2
    lg = lxy = 0.001 m
labc = 0.14 m
lcda = 0.16 m
  lax = lcy = 0.039 m
   A = 4 cm2 everywhere
x
y
100 turns
Cast steel
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–53
I

Diameter = 2 cm
Cast steel
N
Radius = 6 cm
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 12–54
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. Force
2. Strength, direction
3. Iron, nickel, cobalt
4. North, south
5. Same except direction of ﬂux reversed
6. Same as Figure 12–6, since plastic does not affect the ﬁeld.
7. Perpendicular
8. 10 cm2
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
1. While ﬂux is the same throughout, the effective area of
each section differs.
2. Biron  1.1 T; Bsteel  1.38 T; Bg  1.04 T
3. 2  3  0.5 mWb
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
1. 3.5 A
2. a. 2.1 A
b. 0.525 A
3. 1550 Atm
4. Same as Figure 12–21(b) except add Hg2g2.
5. a. NI  H11 	 H22
b. 0  H22  H33
6. 0.32 m; use the mean path length.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Choke (Reactor)
Counter EMF (Back
Voltage)
Faraday’s Law
Flux Linkage
Henry (H)
Induced Voltage
Inductance
Inductor
Lenz’s Law
Self-Inductance
I OUTLINE
Electromagnetic Induction
Induced Voltage and
Inductance
Self-Inductance
Computing Induced
Voltage
Inductances in Series 
and Parallel
Practical Considerations
Inductance and Steady
State dc
Energy Stored by an
Inductance
Inductor Troubleshooting
Hints
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• describe what an inductor is and what its
effect on circuit operation is,
• explain Faraday’s law and Lenz’s law,
• compute induced voltage using Faraday’s law,
• deﬁne inductance,
• compute voltage across an 
inductance,
• compute inductance for series and parallel
conﬁgurations,
• compute inductor voltages and currents for
steady state dc excitation,
• compute energy stored in an inductance,
• describe common inductor problems and
how to test for them.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13
INDUCTANCE AND INDUCTORS
I
n this chapter, we look at self-inductance (usually just called inductance) and inductors. To
get at the idea, recall that when current ﬂows through a conductor, it creates a magnetic
ﬁeld; as you will see in this chapter, this ﬁeld affects circuit operation. To describe this effect,
we introduce a circuit parameter called inductance. Inductance is due entirely to the mag-
netic ﬁeld created by the current, and its effect is to slow the buildup and collapse of the cur-
rent and—in general—oppose its change. Thus, in a sense, inductance can be likened to
inertia in a mechanical system. The advantage of using inductance in our analyses is that we
can dispense with all considerations of magnetism and magnetic ﬁelds—and just concentrate
on familiar circuit quantities, voltage, current, and the newly introduced circuit parameter,
inductance. 
A circuit element built to possess inductance is called an inductor. In its simplest form an
inductor is simply a coil of wire, Figure 13–1(a). Ideally, inductors have only inductance. However,
since they are made of wire, practical inductors also have some resistance. Initially, however, we
assume that this resistance is negligible and treat inductors as ideal (i.e., we assume that they
have no property other than inductance). (Coil resistance is considered in Sections 13.6 and 13.7.)
In practice, inductors are also referred to as chokes (because they try to limit or “choke” current
change) or as reactors (for reasons to be discussed in Chapter 16). In this chapter, we refer to
them mainly as inductors.
On circuit diagrams and in equations, inductance is represented by the letter L. Its circuit
symbol is a coil as shown in Figure 13–1(b). The unit of inductance is the henry.
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

436
Chapter 13 | Inductance and Inductors
Putting It in Perspective
The Discovery of Electromagnetic Induction
MOST OF OUR IDEAS CONCERNING INDUCTANCE and induced volt-
ages are due to Michael Faraday (recall Chapter 12) and
Joseph Henry (1797–1878). Working independently (Faraday
in England and Henry—shown at left—in the USA), they 
discovered, almost simultaneously, the fundamental laws 
governing electromagnetic induction.
While experimenting with magnetic ﬁelds, Faraday
developed the transformer. He wound two coils on an iron
ring and energized one of them from a battery. As he closed 
the switch energizing the ﬁrst coil, Faraday noticed that a
momentary voltage was induced in the second coil, and
when he opened the switch, he found that a momentary
voltage was again induced but with opposite polarity. When
the current was steady, no voltage was produced at all.
Faraday explained this effect in terms of his magnetic
lines of the ﬂux concept. When current was ﬁrst turned on,
he visualized the lines as springing outward into space;
when it was turned off, he visualized the lines as collapsing inward. He then visualized that volt-
age was produced by these lines as they cut across circuit conductors. Companion experiments
showed that voltage was also produced when a magnet was passed through a coil or when a
conductor was moved through a magnetic ﬁeld. Again, he visualized these voltages in terms of
ﬂux cutting a conductor.
Working independently in the United States, Henry discovered essentially the same results.
In fact, Henry’s work preceded Faraday’s by a few months, but because he did not publish them
ﬁrst, credit was given to Faraday. However, Henry is credited with the discovery of self-induction,
and in honor of his work the unit of inductance was named the henry. I
Inductors are used in many places. In electronics, for example, they are used in switched-
mode power supplies as energy storage devices, in electrical power systems they are used to
help control short circuit currents during fault conditions, and in telecommunication systems
they are used for electrical noise reduction in communication circuits. I
(a) A basic inductor
I
(b) Ideal inductor
      symbol
L
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–1
Inductance is due to the magnetic ﬁeld created by an electric current.
Hulton Archive/Hulton Archive/Getty Images
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Inductance depends on induced voltage. Thus, we begin with a review of elec-
tromagnetic induction. First, we look at Faraday’s and Henry’s results. Consider
Figure 13–2. In (a), a magnet is moved through a coil of wire, and this action
induces a voltage in the coil. When the magnet is thrust into the coil, the meter
deflects upscale; when it is withdrawn, the meter deflects downscale, indicat-
ing that polarity has changed. The voltage magnitude is proportional to how
fast the magnet is moved. In (b), when the conductor is moved through the
field, voltage is induced. If the conductor is moved to the right, its far end is
positive; if it is moved to the left, the polarity reverses and its far end becomes
negative. Again, the voltage magnitude is proportional to how fast the wire is
moved. In (c), voltage is induced in coil 2 due to the magnetic field created by
the current in coil 1. At the instant the switch is closed, the meter kicks upscale;
at the instant it is opened, the meter kicks downscale. In (d) voltage is induced
in a coil by its own current. At the instant the switch is closed, the top end of
the coil becomes positive, while at the instant it is opened, the polarity reverses
Section 13.1 | Electromagnetic Induction
437
13.1 Electromagnetic
Induction
NOTES...
Since we work with time-varying
ﬂux linkages in this chapter, we use
f rather than  for ﬂux (as we did
in Chapter 12). This is in keeping
with the standard practice of using
lowercase symbols for time-varying
quantities and uppercase symbols
for dc quantities.


0
(a) Motional EMF
S
N
Motion


0
S
N
(b) Motional EMF


0


N
S
Motion


0


N
S
Motion
(c) Mutually induced voltage
φ
Coil 1
Coil 2
i1
E




0
(d) Self-induced voltage
i
E
}


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–2
Illustrating Faraday’s experiments. Voltage is induced only while the ﬂux linking a circuit is changing.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and the top end becomes negative. Note that no voltage is induced in any of
these cases when the flux linking the circuit is unchanging—that is, when the
magnet is stationary in (a), when the wire is unmoving in (b), or when the cur-
rent has reached a steady state in (c) and (d).
Faraday’s Law
Based on these observations, Faraday concluded that voltage is induced in a cir-
cuit whenever the ﬂux linking (i.e., passing through) the circuit is changing and
that the magnitude of the voltage is proportional to the rate of change of the ﬂux
linkages. This result, known as Faraday’s law, is also sometimes stated in terms
of the rate of cutting ﬂux lines. We look at this viewpoint in Chapter 15.
Lenz’s Law
Heinrich Lenz (a Russian physicist, 1804–1865) determined a companion
result. He showed that the polarity of the induced voltage is such as to oppose
the cause producing it. This result is known as Lenz’s law.
438
Chapter 13 | Inductance and Inductors
13.2 Induced Voltage
and Inductance
We now focus on inductors, Figure 13–2(d). As noted earlier, inductance is
due entirely to the magnetic field created by current. Consider Figure 13–3
(which shows the inductor at three instants of time). In (a) the current is con-
stant, and since the magnetic field is due to this current, the magnetic field is
also constant. Applying Faraday’s law, we note that, because the flux linking
the coil is not changing, the induced voltage is zero. Now consider (b). Here,
the current (and hence the field) is increasing. According to Faraday’s law, a
voltage is induced that is proportional to how fast the field is changing, and
according to Lenz’s law, the polarity of this voltage must be such as to oppose
the increase in current. Thus, the polarity of the voltage is as shown. Note that
the faster the current increases, the larger the opposing voltage. Now consider
(c). Since the current is decreasing, Lenz’s law shows that the polarity of the
induced voltage reverses, that is, the collapsing field produces a voltage that
tries to keep the current going. Again, the faster the rate of change of current,
the larger is this voltage.
Counter EMF
Because the induced voltage in Figure 13–3 tries to counter (i.e., opposes) changes
in current, it is called a counter EMF or back voltage. Note carefully, however,
(a) Steady current:  Induced
voltage is zero.
i
Constant
current
OV
(b) Increasing current:  The
induced voltage opposes
the current buildup.


i
Increasing
current
Induced
voltage
(c) Decreasing current:  The
induced voltage opposes
the current decay.


i
Decreasing
current
Induced
voltage
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–3
Self-induced voltage due to a coil’s own current. The induced voltage opposes the current change. Note carefully the polarities
in (b) and (c).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

that this voltage does not oppose current, it opposes only changes in current. It
also does not prevent the current from changing; it only prevents it from changing
abruptly. The result is that current in an inductor changes gradually and smoothly
from one value to another as indicated in Figure 13–4(b). The effect of inductance
is thus similar to the effect of inertia in a mechanical system. The ﬂywheel used
on an engine, for example, prevents abrupt changes in engine speed but does not
prevent the engine from gradually changing from one speed to another.
Section 13.2 | Induced Voltage and Inductance
439
(a) Current cannot jump from one
value to another like this
Time
0
Current
(b) Current must change smoothly
with no abrupt jumps
Time
Current
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–4
Current in inductance.
i
e


N turns
Iron core
φ
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–5
When ﬂux f passes through
all N turns, the ﬂux linking the coil is Nf.
EXAMPLE 13–1        
If the ﬂux through a 200-turn coil changes steadily from 1 Wb to 4 Wb in 
1 second, what is the voltage induced?
Solution
The ﬂux changes by 3 Wb in 1 second. Thus, its rate of change is
3 Wbs.
e  N  rate of change of ﬂux
 (200 turns)(3 Wbs)  600 volts
Iron-Core and Air-Core Inductors
As Faraday discovered, the voltage induced in a coil depends on ﬂux linkages,
and ﬂux linkages depend on core materials. Coils with ferromagnetic cores
(called iron-core coils) have their ﬂux almost entirely conﬁned to their cores,
while coils wound on nonferromagnetic materials do not. (The latter are some-
times called air-core coils because all nonmagnetic core materials have the
same permeability as air and thus behave magnetically the same as air.)
First, consider the iron-core case, Figure 13–5. Ideally, all ﬂux lines are
conﬁned to the core and hence pass through (link) all turns of the winding. The
product of ﬂux times the number of turns that it passes through is deﬁned as
the ﬂux linkage of the coil. For Figure 13–5, f lines pass through N turns
yielding a ﬂux linkage of Nf. By Faraday’s law, the induced voltage is pro-
portional to the rate of change of Nf. In the SI system, the constant of propor-
tionality is 1, and Faraday’s law for this case may therefore be stated as
e  N  the rate of change of f
(13–1)
In calculus notation,
e  Nd
d
f
t

(volts, V)
(13–2)
where f is in webers, t in seconds, and e in volts. Thus, if the ﬂux changes at
the rate of 1 Wbs in a 1-turn coil, the voltage induced is 1 volt.
NOTES...
Equation 13–2 is sometimes shown
with a minus sign. However, the
minus sign is unnecessary. In circuit
theory, we use Equation 13–2 to
determine the magnitude of the
induced voltage and Lenz’s law to
determine its polarity.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now consider an air-core inductor (Figure 13–6). Since not all ﬂux lines pass
through all windings, you cannot determine ﬂux linkages as above. However,
(since no ferromagnetic material is present) ﬂux is directly proportional to current.
In this case, then, since induced voltage is proportional to the rate of change of
ﬂux, and since ﬂux is proportional to current, induced voltage will be proportional
to the rate of change of current. Let the constant of proportionality be L. Thus,
e  L  rate of change of current
(13–3)
In calculus notation, this can be written as
e  Ld
d
i
t

(volts, V)
(13–4)
L is called the self-inductance (or usually, just inductance) of the coil, and in the
SI system its unit is the henry. (This is discussed in more detail in Section 13.3.)
We now have two equations for coil voltage. Equation 13–4 is the more
useful form for this chapter, while Equation 13–2 is needed for some of the cir-
cuits of Chapter 24. We look at Equation 13–4 in the next section.
440
Chapter 13 | Inductance and Inductors
13.3 Self-Inductance
In the preceding section, we showed that the voltage induced in a coil is e 
Ldidt, where L is the self-inductance of the coil (usually referred to simply as
inductance as noted previously) and didt is the rate of change of its current. In
the SI system, L is measured in henries. As can be seen from Equation 13–4, it
is the ratio of voltage induced in a coil to the rate of change of current producing
it. From this, we get the definition of the henry (H). By definition, the inductance
of a coil is one henry if the voltage created by its changing current is one volt
when its current changes at the rate of one ampere per second.
In practice, the voltage across an inductance is usually denoted by vL rather
than by e (Figure 13–8). Thus,
vL  Ld
d
i
t

(V)
(13–5)
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
1. Which of the current graphs shown in Figure 13–7 cannot be the current in
an inductor? Why?
(a)
(b)
(c)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–7
2. Compute the ﬂux linkage for the coil of Figure 13–5, given f  500 mWb
and N  1200 turns.
3. If the ﬂux f of Question 2 changes steadily from 500 mWb to 525 mWb in
1 s, what is the voltage induced in the coil?
4. If the ﬂux f of Question 2 changes steadily from 500 mWb to 475 mWb in
100 ms, what is the voltage induced?
5. If the ﬂux for the 200-turn coil of Figure 13–5 is given by f  25 t et mWb,
what is the equation for its induced voltage?
vL = L


i
L
di
dt
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–8
Voltage-current reference
convention. As usual, the plus sign for
voltage goes at the tail of the current arrow.
e


i
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–6
The ﬂux linking the coil is
proportional to current. Flux linkage is LI.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Inductance Formulas
Inductance for some simple shapes can be determined using the principles of
Chapter 12. For example, the approximate inductance of the air core coil of
Figure 13–9 can be shown to be
L  
N

2A

(H)
(13–6)
where  is in meters, A is in square meters, N is the number of turns, and  is
the permeability of the core. (Details can be found in many physics books.)
Section 13.3 | Self-Inductance
441
EXAMPLE 13–2        
If the current through a 5-mH inductance changes at the rate of 1000 As, what
is the voltage induced?
Solution
vL  L  rate of change of current
 (5  103 H)(1000 As)  5 volts
1. The voltage across an inductance is 250 V when its current changes at the
rate of 10 mAs. What is L?
2. If the voltage across a 2-mH inductance is 50 volts, how fast is the current
changing?
Answers
1. 25 mH; 2. 25  103 As
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
EXAMPLE 13–3        
A 0.15-m-long air-core coil has a radius of 0.006 m and 120 turns. Compute its
inductance.
Solution
A  pr2  1.131  104 m2
  0  4p  107
Thus,
L  4p  107 (120)2 (1.131  104)0.15  13.6 H
The accuracy of Equation 13–6 breaks down for small d ratios. (If d is
greater than 10, the error is less than 4%.) Improved formulas may be found on
the Internet or in design handbooks, such as the Radio Amateur’s Handbook
published by the American Radio Relay League (ARRL).
A
l
d
L =               H
mN2A
l
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–9
Approximate inductance
formula for a single-layer air coil.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To provide greater inductance in smaller spaces, iron cores are sometimes
used. Unless the core ﬂux is kept below saturation, however, permeability
varies and inductance is not constant. To get relatively constant inductance, an
air gap may be used (Figure 13–10). If the gap is wide enough to dominate, coil
inductance is approximately
L  
0N
g
2Ag

(H)
(13–7)
where 0 is the permeability of air, Ag is the area of the air gap, and g is its
length. (See end-of-chapter Problem 11.) Another way to increase inductance
is to use a ferrite core (Section 13.6).
442
Chapter 13 | Inductance and Inductors
lg
Laminated
core
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–10
Iron-core coil with air gap.
The gap keeps the core from going into
saturation.
EXAMPLE 13–4       
The inductor of Figure 13–10 has 1000 turns, a 5-mm gap, and a cross-sectional
area at the gap of 5  104 m2. What is its inductance?
Solution
L  (4p  107)(1000)2(5  104)(5  103)  0.126 H
1. The voltage across an inductance whose current changes uniformly by 10 mA
in 4 s is 70 volts. What is its inductance?
2. If you triple the number of turns in the inductor of Figure 13–10, but every-
thing else remains the same, by what factor does the inductance increase?
PRACTICAL NOTES...
1. Since inductance is due to a conductor’s magnetic ﬁeld, it depends on the
same factors that the magnetic ﬁeld depends on. The stronger the ﬁeld for
a given current, the greater the inductance. Thus, a coil of many turns will
have more inductance than a coil of a few turns (L is proportional to N2) and
a coil wound on a magnetic core will have greater inductance than a coil
wound on a nonmagnetic form.
2. However, if a coil is wound on a magnetic core, the core’s permeability 
may change with ﬂux density. Since ﬂux density depends on current, L
becomes a function of current. For example, the inductor of Figure 13–11
has a nonlinear inductance due to core saturation. All inductors encountered
in this book are assumed to be linear, that is, of constant value.
B
H
Iron core
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–11
This coil does not have a
ﬁxed inductance because its ﬂux is not
proportional to its current.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
13.4 Computing
Induced Voltage
Earlier, we determined that the voltage across an inductance is given by vL 
Ldidt, where the voltage and current references are shown in Figure 13–8.
Note that the polarity of vL depends on whether the current is increasing or
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

decreasing. For example, if the current is increasing, didt is positive and so vL
is positive, while if the current is decreasing, didt is negative and vL is negative.
To compute voltage, we need to determine didt. In general, this requires
calculus. However, since didt is slope, you can determine voltage without cal-
culus for currents that can be described by straight lines, as in Figure 13–12.
For any 	t segment, slope  	i	t, where 	i is the amount that the current
changes during time interval 	t.
Section 13.4 | Computing Induced Voltage
443
EXAMPLE 13–5        
Figure 13–12 is the current through a 10-mH inductance. Determine voltage vL
and sketch it.
For currents that are not linear functions of time, you need to use calculus
as illustrated in the following example.
t (ms)
i (A)
0
1
2
3
4
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
i
t
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–12
Solution
Break the problem into intervals over which the slope is constant,
determine the slope for each segment, then compute voltage using vL  L 
slope for that interval:
0 to 1 ms:
Slope  0. Thus, vL  0 V.
1 ms to 2 ms:
Slope  	i	t  4 A(1  103 s)  4  103 As. 
Thus, vL  L	i	t  (0.010 H)(4  103 As)  40 V.
2 ms to 4 ms:
Slope  	i	t  8 A(2  103 s)  4  103 As.
Thus, vL  L	i	t  (0.010 H)(4  103 As)  40 V.
4 ms to 5 ms:
Slope  0. Thus, vL  0 V.
5 ms to 6 ms:
Same slope as from 1 ms to 2 ms. Thus, vL  40 V.
The voltage waveform is shown in Figure 13–13.
t (ms)
vL (V)
0
40
40
1
2
3
4
5
6
t (ms)
i (A)
0
4
4
1
2
3
4
5
6
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–13
CircuitSim 13-1 
EXAMPLE 13–6        
What is the equation for the voltage across a 12.5-H inductance whose current
is i  tet amps?
Solution
Differentiate by parts using

d(
d
u
t
v)
  ud
d
v
t
 
 v d
d
u
t
 with u  t and v  et
Thus,
vL  Ld
d
i
t
  Ld
d
t
(tet)  L[t(et) 
 et]  12.5et (1  t) volts
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1. An inductance L1 of 50 mH is in series with an inductance L2 of 35 mH. If
the voltage across L1 at some instant is 125 volts, what is the voltage across
L2 at that instant? Hint: Since the same current passes through both induc-
tances, the rate of change of current is the same for both.
2. Current through a 5-H inductance changes linearly from 10 A to 12 A in
0.5 s. Suppose now the current changes linearly from 2 mA to 6 mA in 1 ms.
Although the currents are signiﬁcantly different, the induced voltage is the
same in both cases. Why? Compute the voltage.
3. If the current for a 5-H coil is given by i  4 t3 e2t 
 4 A, what is the
equation for voltage vL?
4. Repeat Question 3 if i  50 sin 1000 t mA.
444
Chapter 13 | Inductance and Inductors
1. Figure 13–14 shows the current through a 5-H inductance. Determine 
voltage vL and sketch it.
2. If the current of Figure 13–12 is applied to an unknown inductance and the
voltage from 1 ms to 2 ms is 28 volts, what is L?
3.
The current in a 4-H inductance is i  t2e5t A. What is voltage vL?
Answers
1. vL is a square wave. Between 0 ms and 2 ms, its value is 15 V; between 2 ms and 4 ms,
its value is 15 V, and so on.
2. 7 mH; 3. 4e5t (2t  5t2) V
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
FIGURE 13–14
t (ms)
i (mA)
0
0
6
2
8
4
6
© Cengage Learning 2013
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
13.5 Inductances 
in Series and
Parallel
For inductances in series or parallel, the equivalent inductance is found by using
the same rules that you used for resistance. For the series case (Figure 13–15)
the total inductance is the sum of the individual inductances—see Practice
Problems 3, Question 2. Thus, 
LT  L1 
 L2 
 L3 
 … 
 LN
(13–8)
LT
L1
L2
L3
LN
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–15
LT  L1 
 L2 
    
 LN.
LT
L1
LN
L2
L3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–16
L
1
T
  L
1
1
 
 L
1
2
 
 … 
 
L
1
N
.
CircuitSim 13-2
For the parallel case (Figure 13–16),
L
1
T
  L
1
1
 
 L
1
2
 
 L
1
3
 
 … 
 L
1
N

(13–9)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For two inductances, Equation 13–9 reduces to
LT  
L1
L

1L2
L2

(13–10)
Section 13.6 | Practical Considerations
445
EXAMPLE 13–7        
Find LT for the circuit of Figure 13–17.
Solution
The parallel combination of L2 and L3 is
Leq  
L2
L

2L3
L3
  
6
6


2
2
  1.5 H
This is in series with L1 and L4. Thus, LT  2.5 
 1.5 
 11  15 H.
L1
L2
L3
L4
6 H
2.5 H
LT
2 H
11 H
Leq = 1.5 H
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–17
Calculator Hint: Using the
inverse key on your calculator,
you can determine the parallel
equivalent of inductances using
the same procedure you used
for parallel resistances. Typically,
your calculator steps would
look something like the follow-
ing (depending on the particular
calculator you are using):
1. For Figure 13–18, LT  2.25 H. Determine Lx.
2. For Figure 13–15, the current is the same in each inductance and 
v1  L1didt, v2  L2didt, and so on. Apply Kirchhoff’s voltage law (KVL)
and show that LT  L1 
 L2 
 L3 
 … 
 LN.
Answer
1. 3 H
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
Lx
3 H
7 H
2.25 H
3 H
3 H
1 H
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–18
13.6 Practical
Considerations
Core Types
The type of core used in an inductor depends to a great extent on its intended
use and frequency range. (Although you have not studied frequency yet, you
can get a feel for frequency by noting that the electrical power system operates
at low frequency [60 cycles per second, called 60 hertz], while radio and TV
systems operate at high frequency [hundreds of megahertz].) Inductors used in
audio or power supply applications generally have laminated iron cores
(because they need large inductance values). (Laminations reduce core loss—
see Chapter 23, Section 23.6.) Inductors used for radio-frequency circuits gen-
erally have air or ferrite (or similar) cores. (Ferrite is a mixture of iron oxide in
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a ceramic binder. It has characteristics that make it suitable for high-frequency
work.) Iron cores cannot be used in high-frequency applications, however,
since they have large power losses at high frequencies (for reasons discussed in
Chapter 17).
Variable Inductors
Inductors can be made so that their inductance is variable. In one approach,
inductance is varied by changing coil spacing with a screwdriver adjustment—
see Note. In another approach, a threaded core slug is screwed in or out of
the coil to vary its inductance. Inductors of the latter type are shown in 
Figure 13–19. The units illustrated are low-proﬁle tunable inductors designed
for mounting on printed circuit boards. 
446
Chapter 13 | Inductance and Inductors
NOTES...
Plastic or similar screwdrivers should
be used so as not to disturb the
coil's magnetic ﬁeld and upset its
value while making the adjustments.
Photo courtesy of Coilcraft Inc.
FIGURE 13–19
A selection of color-coded, tunable, low-proﬁle, high-frequency inductors.
A threaded core slug is used to adjust inductance.
Circuit Symbols
Figure 13–20 shows inductor symbols. Iron cores are identiﬁed by double solid
lines, while dashed lines denote a ferrite core. Air-core inductors have no core
symbol. An arrow indicates a variable inductor.
Coil Resistance
Ideally, inductors have only inductance. However, since inductors are made of
imperfect conductors (e.g., copper wire), they also have resistance. [We can
view this resistance as being in series with the coil’s inductance as indicated in
Figure 13–21(a). Also shown is stray capacitance, considered next.] Although
coil resistance is generally small, it cannot always be ignored, and thus it must
(a) Iron core
(b) Ferrite core
(c) Variable
(d) Air core
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–20
Circuit symbols for 
inductors.
FIGURE 13–21
A ferrite-core choke.
(a) Real inductors have stray capacitance
 and winding resistance
Rl
Cw
L
(b) Separating coil into sections helps
reduce stray capacitance
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

sometimes be included in the analysis of a circuit. In Section 13.7, we show
how this resistance is taken into account in dc analysis; in later chapters, you
will learn how to take it into account in ac analysis.
Stray Capacitance
Because the turns of an inductor are separated from each other by insulation, a
small amount of capacitance exists from winding to winding. This capacitance
is called stray or parasitic capacitance. Although this capacitance is distributed
from turn to turn, its effect can be approximated by lumping it as in
Figure 13–21(a). The effect of stray capacitance depends on frequency. At low
frequencies, it can usually be neglected; at high frequencies, it may have to be
taken into account as you will see in later courses. Some coils are wound in
multiple sections, as in Figure 13–21(b), to reduce stray capacitance.
Stray Inductance
Because inductance is due entirely to the magnetic effects of electric current,
all current-carrying conductors have inductance. This means that leads on cir-
cuit components such as resistors, capacitors, transistors, and so on, all have
inductance, as do traces on printed circuit boards and wires in cables. We call
this inductance “stray inductance.” Fortunately, in many cases, the stray induc-
tance is so small that it can be neglected (see Practical Notes).
Section 13.7 | Inductance and Steady State dc
447
PRACTICAL NOTES...
Although stray inductance is small,
it is not always negligible. In gen-
eral, stray inductance will not be a
problem for short wires at low to
moderate frequencies. However,
even a short piece of wire can be a
problem at high frequencies, or a
long piece of wire at low frequen-
cies. For example, the inductance
of just a few centimeters of con-
ductor in a high-speed logic system
may be nonnegligible because the
current through it changes at such a
high rate.
13.7 Inductance and
Steady State dc
We now look at inductive circuits with constant dc current. Consider Figure 13–22.
The voltage across an ideal inductance with constant dc current is zero because the
rate of change of current is zero. This is indicated in (a). Since the inductor has cur-
rent through it but no voltage across it, it looks like a short circuit, (b). This is true
in general, that is, an ideal inductor looks like a short circuit in steady state dc.
(This should not be surprising since it is just a piece of wire to dc.) For a nonideal
inductor, its dc equivalent is its coil resistance (Figure 13–23). For steady state dc,
problems can be solved using simple dc circuit analysis techniques.
(a) Since the ﬁeld is constant,
     induced voltage is zero
vL = 0
Constant dc current


(b) Equivalent of inductor to
dc is a short circuit
vL = 0
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–22
Inductance looks like a short circuit to steady state dc.
FIGURE 13–23
Steady state dc equivalent of a coil with winding resistance.
(a) Coil
Coil
Rl
L
(b) dc Equivalent
Coil
Rl
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

448
Chapter 13 | Inductance and Inductors
EXAMPLE 13–8       
In Figure 13–24(a), the coil resistance is 14.4 . What is the steady state current I?
Solution
Reduce the circuit as in (b).
ETh  (915)(120)  72 V
RTh  6 9   3.6 
Now replace the coil with its dc equivalent circuit as in (b). Thus,
I  EThRT  72(3.6 
 14.4)  4A
(b) Coil replaced by its
dc equivalent
Coil equivalent
14.4 
RTh
ETh
I
3.6 
Thévenin equivalent
72 V
(a)
Coil
Rl
L
I
9 
6 
Rl = 14.4 
120 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–24
EXAMPLE 13–9      
The resistance of coil 1 in Figure 13–25(a) is 30  and that of coil 2 is15 .
Find the voltage across the capacitor assuming steady state dc.
Solution
Replace each coil inductance with a short circuit and the capacitor
with an open circuit. As you can see from (b), the voltage across C is the same
as the voltage across R2. Thus,
VC  
R1
R

2
R2
E 
1
4
5
5


(60 V)  20 V
(b) dc Equivalent
R2
R1
60 V
E
VC
1
2
15 V
30 V
15 V
Coil 2
Coil 1
30 V
60 V
VC
1
2
L2
L1
(a)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–25
CircuitSim 13-3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

When power flows into an inductor, energy is stored in its magnetic field.
When the field collapses, this energy is returned to the circuit. For an ideal
inductor, R  0 ohm and hence no power is dissipated; thus, an ideal inductor
has zero power loss.
To determine the energy stored by an ideal inductor, consider Figure 13–27.
Power to the inductor is given by p  vLi watts, where vL  Ldidt. By summing
this power (see next ), the energy is found to be
W  1
2
Li2
(J)
(13–11)
where i is the instantaneous value of current. When current reaches its steady
state value I, W  1⁄2LI2 J. This energy remains stored in the ﬁeld as long as
the current continues. When the current goes to zero, the ﬁeld collapses and
the energy is returned to the circuit. (We look at this idea in more detail in
Chapter 17 when we consider ac.)
Section 13.8 | Energy Stored by an Inductance
449
For Figure 13–26, ﬁnd I, VC1, and VC2 in the steady state.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
L2
Coil 2
Coil 1
15 
15 
150 V
20 V
VC1


VC2


5 
10 
I
L1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–26
Answers
10.7 A; 63 V; 31.5 V
CircuitSim 13-4
13.8 Energy Stored 
by an Inductance
i
p
W  =     Li2


vL
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–27
Energy is stored in the
magnetic ﬁeld of an inductor.
EXAMPLE 13–10        
The coil of Figure 13–28(a) has a resistance of 15 . When the current reaches
its steady state value, the energy stored is 12 J. What is the inductance of the coil?
(a)
15 V
L
10 V
W = 12 J
100 V
I
15 V
10 V
100 V
I
Coil
(b) dc Equivalent
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–28
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Deriving Equation 13–11
The power to the inductor in Figure 13–27 is given by p  vLi, where vL 
Ldidt. Therefore, p  Lididt. However, p  dWdt. Equating the two expres-
sions for power, then integrating both sides yields
W 
t
0pdt 
t
0Lid
d
i
t
dt  L
i
0idi  1
2
Li2
450
Chapter 13 | Inductance and Inductors
Solution
From (b),
I  100 V25   4 A
W  1
2
LI2 J
12 J  1
2
L(4 A)2
Thus,
L  2(12)42  1.5 H
13.9 Inductor
Troubleshooting
Hints
Inductors may fail by either opening or shorting. Failures may be caused by
misuse, defects in manufacturing, or faulty installation.
Open Coil
Opens can be the result of poor solder joints or broken connections. First, make
a visual inspection. If nothing wrong is found, disconnect the inductor and
check it with an ohmmeter. An open-circuited coil has inﬁnite resistance.
Shorts
Shorts can occur between windings or between the coil and its core (for an
iron-core unit). A short may result in excessive current and overheating. Again,
check visually. Look for burned insulation, discolored components, an acrid
odor, and other evidence of overheating. An ohmmeter can be used to check for
shorts between windings and the core. However, checking coil resistance for
shorted turns is often of little value, especially if only a few turns are shorted.
This is because the shorting of a few windings may not change the overall
resistance enough to be measurable. The LCR testers of Chapter 10 may also
prove useful. Sometimes, however, the only conclusive test is to substitute a
known good inductor for the suspected bad one.
Problems
Unless otherwise indicated, assume ideal inductors and coils.
13.2
Induced Voltage and Inductance
1. If the ﬂux linking a 75-turn coil (Figure 13–29) changes at the rate of 3 Wbs,
what is the voltage across the coil?
2. If 80 volts is induced when the ﬂux linking a coil changes at a uniform rate
from 3.5 mWb to 4.5 mWb in 0.5 ms, how many turns does the coil have?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3. Flux changing at a uniform rate for 1 ms induces 60 V in a coil. What is the
induced voltage if the same ﬂux change takes place in 0.01 s?
13.3
Self-Inductance
4. The current in a 0.4-H inductor (Figure 13–30) is changing at the rate of
200 As. What is the voltage across it?
5. The current in a 75-mH inductor (Figure 13–30) changes uniformly by
200 A in 0.1 ms. What is the voltage across it?
6. The voltage across an inductance is 25 volts when the current changes at
5 As. What is L?
7. The voltage induced when current changes uniformly from 3 amps to 5 amps
in a 10-H inductor is 180 volts. How long did it take for the current to
change from 3 amps to 5 amps?
8. Current changing at a uniform rate for 1 ms induces 45 V in a coil. What is
the induced voltage if the same current change takes place in 100 s?
9. Compute the inductance of the air-core coil of Figure 13–31, given   20 cm,
N  200 turns, and d  2 cm.
10. The iron-core inductor of Figure 13–32 has 2000 turns, a cross section of 
1.5  1.2 inches, and an air gap of 0.2 inch. Compute its inductance.
Problems
451
e


i
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–29
FIGURE 13–30
vL


i
L
© Cengage Learning 2013
l
d
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–31
FIGURE 13–32
I
N

lg
© Cengage Learning 2013
11. The iron-core inductor of Figure 13–32 has a high-permeability core.
Therefore, by Ampere’s law, NI  Hgg. Because the air gap dominates, satu-
ration does not occur, and the core ﬂux is proportional to the current, that is,
the ﬂux linkage equals LI. In addition, since all ﬂux passes through the coil,
the ﬂux linkage equals N. By equating the two values of ﬂux linkage and
using ideas from Chapter 12, show that the inductance of the coil is
L  
0N
g
2Ag

13.4
Computing Induced Voltage
12. Figure 13–33 shows the current in a 0.75-H inductor. Determine vL and plot
its waveform.
13. Figure 13–34 shows the current in a coil. If the voltage from 0 ms to 2 ms is
100 volts, what is L?
14. Why is Figure 13–35 not a valid inductor current? Sketch the voltage across
L to show why. Pay particular attention to t  10 ms.
15. Figure 13–36 shows the graph of the voltage across an inductance. The current
changes from 4 A to 5 A during the time interval from 4 s to 5 s.
a. What is L?
b. Determine the current waveform and plot it.
c. What is the current at t  10 s?
t (ms)
i (mA)
0
30
20
10
10
20
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
10
9
© Cengage Learning 2013
t (ms)
i (mA)
0
20
50
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
10
9
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–33
FIGURE 13–34
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16. If the current in a 25-H inductance is iL  20e12t mA, what is vL?
13.5
Inductances in Series and Parallel
17. What is the equivalent inductance of 12 mH, 14 mH, 22 mH, and 36 mH
connected in series?
18. What is the equivalent inductance of 0.010 H, 22 mH, 86  103 H, and 
12 000 H connected in series?
19. Repeat Problem 17 if the inductances are connected in parallel.
20. Repeat Problem 18 if the inductances are connected in parallel.
21. Determine LT for the circuits of Figure 13–37.
452
Chapter 13 | Inductance and Inductors
t (ms)
i (A)
0
10
5
5
10
© Cengage Learning 2013
t (s)
vL (V)
0
8
4
4
8
1
2
3
4
5
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–35
FIGURE 13–36
(a)
LT
L1 = 10 H
5 H
6 H
L2
L3
(b)
LT
6 H
L2
3 H
L1
18 H
LT
9 H
14 H
(c)
1.6 H
2 H
LT
4 H
4 H
(d)
(e)
600 H
6 mH
28.5 mH
LT
19 mH
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–37
22. Determine LT for the circuits of Figure 13–38.
23. A 30-H inductance is connected in series with a 60-H inductance, and
a 10-H inductance is connected in parallel with the series combination.
What is LT?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24. For Figure 13–39, determine Lx.
25. For the circuits of Figure 13–40, determine L3 and L4.
26. You have inductances of 24 mH, 36 mH, 22 mH, and 10 mH. Connecting
these any way you want, what is the largest equivalent inductance you can
get? The smallest?
Problems
453
1.5 H
L3 = 4L4
6 H
L4
11.25 H
(a)
18 H
12.4 H
L4 = 4L3
L3
27 H
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–40
FIGURE 13–38
FIGURE 13–39
FIGURE 13–41
27. A 6-H and a 4-H inductance are connected in parallel. After a third induc-
tance is added, LT  4 H. What is the value of the third inductance and how
was it connected?
28. Inductances of 2 H, 4 H, and 9 H are connected in a circuit. If LT  3.6 H,
how are the inductors connected?
29. Inductances of 8 H, 12 H, and 1.2 H are connected in a circuit. If LT  6 H,
how are the inductors connected?
30. For inductors in parallel (Figure 13–41), the same voltage appears across
each. Thus, v  L1di1dt, v  L2di2dt, and so on. Apply KCL and show that
1LT  1L1 
 1L2 
 … 
 1LN.
L2
L1
L3
LN
i
i1
i2
i3
iN
v


v


v


v


v


© Cengage Learning 2013
14 H
LT
1.2 H
18 H
12 H
1.8 H
1.4 H
4 H
18.7 H
4 H
1 H
11 H
(b)
6 H
6 H
27 H
LT
1 H
4 H
2 H
18 H
2 H
(a)
© Cengage Learning 2013
18 H
2 H
LT = 6 H
Lx
6 H
5 H
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

31. By combining elements, reduce each of the circuits of Figure 13–42 to their
simplest form.
454
Chapter 13 | Inductance and Inductors
(a)
1 H
4.5 μF
7 μF
2 μF
(c)
(b)
3 H
6 H
2 μF
8 μF
4 H
6 H
10 μF
10 μF
5 μF
10 
(d)
40 H
10 H
60 μF
30 μF
10 
40 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–42
13.7
Inductance and Steady State dc
32. For each of the circuits of Figure 13–43, the voltages and currents have
reached their ﬁnal (steady state) values. Solve for the quantities indicated.
(a) Find E
3 H
1 H
11 
6 
4 
E
4 A
(b) Find Rx
6 H
3 H
6 
Rx
9 
4.5 
18 V
13.5 V
+
−
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–43
13.8
Energy Stored by an Inductance
33. Find the energy stored in the inductor of Figure 13–44.
34. In Figure 13–45, L1  2L2. The total energy stored is WT  75 J. Find L1 and L2.
13.9
Inductor Troubleshooting Hints
35. In Figure 13–46, an inductance meter measures 7 H. What is the likely fault?
36. Referring to Figure 13–47, an inductance meter measures LT  8 mH. What
is the likely fault?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. Both a and b. Current cannot change instantaneously.
2. 600 Wb turns
3. 30 V
4. 300 V
5. 5et(1  t) V
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
1. 28 mH
2. 9 times
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
1. 87.5 V
2. Rate of change of current is the same; 20 V
3. 20t2 e2t(3  2t) V
4. 250 cos 1000t
Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
455
Rl 
10 
L
4 H
20 
5 
6 
Coil
40 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
4 
L2
11 
5 
L1
100 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 13–44
FIGURE 13–45
FIGURE 13–46
FIGURE 13–47
2 H
7 H
3 H
5 H
L2
L4
L3
L1


H
© Cengage Learning 2013
5 mH
11 mH
2 mH
6 mH
L1
L4
L2
L3
LT
© Cengage Learning 2013
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Continuity of Current 
for Inductance
De-Energizing Transient
Inductive Kick
Inductive Transients
Initial Condition Circuit
I OUTLINE
Introduction
Current Buildup Transients
Interrupting Current in an
Inductive Circuit
De-Energizing Transients
More Complex Circuits
RL Transients Using
Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter you will be able to
• explain why transients occur in RL circuits,
• explain why an inductor with zero initial
conditions looks like an open circuit when
ﬁrst energized,
• compute time constants for RL circuits,
• compute voltage and current transients in 
RL circuits during the current buildup phase,
• compute voltage and current transients in 
RL circuits during the current decay phase,
• explain why an inductor with nonzero initial
conditions looks like a current source when
disturbed,
• solve moderately complex RL transient
problems using circuit simpliﬁcation
techniques,
• solve RL transient problems using Multisim
and PSpice.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14
INDUCTIVE TRANSIENTS
I
n Chapter 11, you learned that transients occur in capacitive circuits because capacitor volt-
age cannot change instantaneously. In this chapter, you will learn that transients occur in
inductive circuits because inductor current cannot change instantaneously. Although the
details differ, you will ﬁnd that many of the basic ideas are the same.
Inductive transients (also called RL transients) result when circuits containing induc-
tance are disturbed. More so than capacitive transients, inductive transients are potentially
destructive and dangerous. For example, if you break the current in an inductive circuit, a
voltage spike of a few hundred or more volts may result. Such a spike can easily injure per-
sonnel or damage sensitive electronic components if proper precautions are not taken.
(Current turn-on transients do not create such spikes.)
In this chapter, you study basic RL transients. You look at transients during current buildup
and decay and learn how to calculate the voltages and currents that result. In later studies, you
will learn how to both control and safeguard circuits from the effects of those transients that
might be potentially destructive. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

458
Chapter 14 | Inductive Transients
As you saw in Chapter 11, when a circuit containing capacitance is disturbed,
voltages and currents do not change to their new values immediately, but
instead pass through a transitional phase as the circuit capacitance charges or
discharges. The voltages and currents during this transitional interval are called
transients. In a dual fashion, transients occur when circuits containing induc-
tances are disturbed. In this case, however, transients occur because current in
inductance cannot change instantaneously.
To get at the idea, consider Figure 14–1. In (a), we see a purely resistive
circuit. At the instant the switch is closed, current jumps from 0 to ER as
required by Ohm’s law. Thus, no transient (i.e., transitional phase) occurs
because current reaches its ﬁnal value immediately. Now consider (b). Here,
we have added inductance. At the instant the switch is closed, a counter EMF
appears across the inductance. This voltage attempts to stop the current from
changing and consequently slows its rise. Current thus does not jump to ER
immediately as in (a), but instead climbs gradually and smoothly as in (b). The
larger the inductance, the longer the transition takes.
Continuity of Current
As Figure 14–1(b) illustrates, current through an inductance cannot change
instantaneously, that is, it cannot jump abruptly from one value to another, but
must be continuous at all values of time. This observation is known as the state-
ment of continuity of current for inductance (see Notes). You will ﬁnd this
statement of great value when analyzing circuits containing inductance. We
will use it numerous times in what follows.
Putting It in Perspective
Inductance, the Dual of Capacitance
INDUCTANCE IS THE DUAL of capacitance. This means that the effect that inductance has on circuit
operation is identical with that of capacitance if you interchange the term current for voltage,
open circuit for short circuit, and so on. For example, for simple dc transients, current in an RL
circuit has the same form as voltage in an RC circuit: they both rise to their ﬁnal value in an 
exponential fashion according to 1  ett. Similarly, voltage across inductance decays in the
same manner as current through capacitance, that is, according to ett. In fact, as you will see,
there is complete duality between all the equations that describe transient voltage and current
behavior in capacitive and inductive circuits.
Duality applies to steady state and initial condition representations as well. To steady state dc,
for example, a capacitor looks like an open circuit, while an inductor looks like a short circuit.
Similarly, the dual of a capacitor that looks like a short circuit at the instant of switching is an
inductor that looks like an open circuit. Finally, the dual of a capacitor that has an initial condition
of V0 volts is an inductance with an initial condition of I0 amps.
The principle of duality is helpful in circuit analysis as it lets you transfer the principles and 
concepts learned in one area directly into another. You will ﬁnd, for example, that many of the
ideas you learned in Chapter 11 reappear here in their dual form. I
14.1 Introduction
NOTES...
The continuity statement for induc-
tor current has a sound mathemati-
cal basis. Recall, induced voltage is
proportional to the rate of change of
current. In calculus notation,
vL  Ld
d
i
t

This means that the faster the cur-
rent changes, the larger the induced
voltage. If inductor current could
change from one value to another
instantaneously as in Figure 14–1(a),
its rate of change (i.e., didt) would
be inﬁnite and hence the induced
voltage would be inﬁnite. But inﬁ-
nite voltage is not possible. Thus,
we conclude that inductor current
cannot change instantaneously.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Inductor Voltage
Now consider inductor voltage. With the switch open as in Figure 14–2(a), the
current in the circuit and voltage across L are both zero. Now close the switch.
Immediately after the switch is closed, the current is still zero (since it cannot
change instantaneously). Since vR  Ri, the voltage across R is also zero and
thus the full source voltage appears across L as shown in (b). The inductor
voltage therefore jumps from 0 V just before the switch is closed to E volts just
after. It then decays to zero, since, as we saw in Chapter 13, the voltage across
inductance is zero for steady state dc. This is indicated in (c).
Section 14.1 | Introduction
459
(a) No transient occurs in a purely
resistive circuit
R
E
i
i
t
0
E
R
(b)
R
E
vL = L


L
di
dt
i
i
t
0
E
R
Final (steady state) value
Increasing L
© Cengage Learning 2013
Adding inductance causes a
transient to appear. R is
held constant here.
FIGURE 14–1
Transient due to inductance. Adding inductance to a resistive circuit as in
(b) slows the current rise and fall, thus creating a transient.
CircuitSim 14-1 
CircuitSim 14-2 
(a) Circuit before switch is
     closed. Current i = 0
R
E
vL = 0


i = 0
R
E
L
vL = E
t = 0
(b) Circuit just after the
switch has been closed.
Current is still equal to zero.
Thus, vL = E.


vR = Ri = 0


i = 0
(c) Voltage across L
vL
0 V
0
t
E
Voltage
transient
0 V in
steady state
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–2
Voltage across L.
Open-Circuit Equivalent of an Inductance
Consider again Figure 14–2(b). Note that just after the switch is closed, the
inductor has voltage across it but no current through it. It therefore momentar-
ily looks like an open circuit. This is indicated in Figure 14–3. This observation
is true in general, that is, an inductor with zero initial current looks like an open
circuit at the instant of switching. (In Section 14.3, we extend this statement to
include inductors with nonzero initial currents.)
E
vL = E


i = 0
vR = 0


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–3
Inductor with zero initial
current looks like an open circuit at the
instant the switch is closed.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Initial Condition Circuits
Voltages and currents in circuits immediately after switching must sometimes be
calculated. These can be determined with the aid of the open-circuit equivalent.
By replacing inductances with open circuits, you can see what a circuit looks
like just after switching. Such a circuit is called an initial condition circuit.
460
Chapter 14 | Inductive Transients
EXAMPLE 14–1       
A coil and two resistors are connected to a 20-V source as in Figure 14–4(a).
Determine source current i and inductor voltage vL at the instant the switch is closed.
R2
4 
E
6 
vL
20 V


i
R1
(a) Original circuit
4 
6 
i
vL
8 V
20 V


v2

8 V
(b) Initial condition network
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–4
Solution
Replace the inductance with an open circuit. This yields the network
shown in (b). Thus, i  ERT  20 V10   2 A, and the voltage across R2 is
v2  (2 A)(4 )  8 V. Since vL  v2, vL  8 volts as well.
Initial condition circuits yield voltages and currents only at the instant
of switching, that is, at t  0 s. Thus, the value of 8 V calculated in
Example 14–1 is only a momentary value as illustrated in Figure 14–5.
Sometimes such an initial value is all that you need. In other cases, you need
the complete solution. This is considered next, in Section 14.2.
Determine all voltages and currents in the circuit of Figure 14–6 immediately
after the switch is closed and in steady state.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
vL
0
t
8 V
This is the value
determined by the
initial condition
network.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–5
The initial condition network
yields only the value at t  0 s.
CircuitSim 14-3 
CircuitSim 14-4 
20 
30 
5 
60 
iT
160 V
i2
i1
i3
i4
L2
L1
+ vR2  −
+
−
vR1
+
+
−
−
vL1
+
−
vR3
+
−
vR4
vL2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Current
We will now develop equations to describe voltages and current during ener-
gization. Let us start with current. Consider Figure 14–7. Kirchhoff’s voltage
law (KVL) yields
vL  vR  E
(14–1)
Substituting vL  Ldidt and vR  Ri into Equation 14–1 yields
L d
d
i
t
  Ri  E
(14–2)
Equation 14–2 can be solved using basic calculus in a manner similar to what
we did for RC circuits in Chapter 11. The result is
i  E
R
 (1  eRtL)
(A)
(14–3)
where R is in ohms, L is in henries, and t is in seconds. Equation 14–3
describes current buildup. Values of current at any point in time can be found
by direct substitution as we illustrate next. Note that ER is the ﬁnal (steady
state) current since the inductor looks like a short circuit to steady state dc
(recall Section 13.7).
Section 14.2 | Current Buildup Transients
461
14.2 Current Buildup
Transients
R
E
vL
vR


i
L


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–7
KVL yields vL  vR  E.
EXAMPLE 14–2        
For the circuit of Figure 14–7, suppose E  50 V, R  10 , and L  2 H:
a. Determine the expression for i.
b. Compute and tabulate values of i at t  0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.0 s.
c. Using these values, plot the current.
d. What is the steady state current?
Solution
a. Substituting the values into Equation 14–3 yields
i  E
R
 (1  eRtL)  
1
5
0
0

V
 (1  e10t2)  5(1  e5t) amps
Answers
Initial: vR1  0 V; vR2  40 V; vR3  120 V; vR4  0 V; vL1  160 V; vL2  120 V; 
iT  2 A; i1  0 A; i2  2 A; i3  2 A; i4  0 A
Steady State: vR1  160 V; vR2  130 V; vR3  vR4  30 V; vL1  vL2  0 V; iT  11.83 A; 
i1  5.33 A; i2  6.5 A; i3  0.5 A; i4  6.0 A
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Circuit Voltages
With i known, circuit voltages can be determined. Consider voltage vR. Since
vR  Ri, when you multiply R times Equation 14–3, you get
vR  E(1  eRtL)
(V)
(14–4)
Note that vR has exactly the same shape as the current. Now consider vL.
Voltage vL can be found by subtracting vR from E as per Equation 14–1:
vL  E  vR  E  E(1  eRtL)  E  E  EeRtL
Thus,
vL  EeRtL
(14–5)
An examination of Equation 14–5 shows that vL has an initial value of E at 
t  0 s and then decays exponentially to zero. This agrees with our earlier
observation in Figure 14–2(c).
462
Chapter 14 | Inductive Transients
b. At t  0 s, i  5(1  e5t)  5(1  e0)  5(1  1)  0 A.
At t  0.2 s, i  5(1  e5(0.2))  5(1  e1)  3.16 A.
At t  0.4 s, i  5(1  e5(04))  5(1  e2)  4.32 A.
Continuing in this manner, you get Table 14–1.
c. Values are plotted in Figure 14–8. Note that this curve looks exactly like
the curves we determined intuitively in Figure 14–1(b).
d. Steady state current is ER  50 V10   5 A. This agrees with the
current plot of Figure 14–8.
Time
Current
0
0
0.2
3.16
0.4
4.32
0.6
4.75
0.8
4.91
1.0
4.97
TABLE 14–1
i (A)
t (s)
1.0
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
Final value =       = 5 A
i = 5(1 − e−5t)A
E
R
3.16
4.324.75
4.91
4.97
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–8
Current buildup transient.
CircuitSim 14-5 
EXAMPLE 14–3       
Repeat Example 14–2 for voltage vL.
Solution
a. From Equation 14–5,
vL  EeRtL  50e5t volts
b. At t  0 s, vL  50e5t  50e0  50(1)  50 V.
At t  0.2 s, vL  50e5(0.2)  50e1  18.4 V.
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Time Constant
In Equations 14–3 to 14–5 LR is the time constant of the circuit.
t  R
L

(s)
(14–6)
Section 14.2 | Current Buildup Transients
463
At t  0.4 s, vL  50e5(0.4)  50e2  6.77 V.
Continuing in this manner, you get Table 14–2.
c. The waveform is shown in Figure 14–9.
d. Steady state voltage is 0 V, as you can see in Figure 14–9.
Time (s)
Voltage (V)
0
50.0
0.2
18.4
0.4
6.77
0.6
2.49
0.8
0.916
1.0
0.337
TABLE 14–2
© Cengage Learning 2013
vL (V)
t (s)
10
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
20
30
40
50
Initial value = E
vL = 50e−5t V
18.4
6.77
2.49 0.916 0.337
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–9
Inductor voltage transient.
CircuitSim 14-6 
For the circuit of Figure 14–7, with E  80 V, R  5 k, and L  2.5 mH:
a. Determine expressions for i, vL, and vR.
b. Compute and tabulate values at t  0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5 s.
c. At each point in time, does vL  vR  E?
d. Plot i, vL, and vR using the values computed in (b).
Answers
a. i  16(1  e2 	 106t) mA; vL  80e2 	 106t V; vR  80(1  e2 	 106t)
b.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
t (s)
vL (V)
iL (mA)
vR (V)
0
80
0
0
0.5
29.4
10.1
50.6
1.0
10.8
13.8
69.2
1.5
3.98
15.2
76.0
2.0
1.47
15.7
78.5
2.5
0.539
15.9
79.5
c. Yes
d. i and vR have the shape shown in Figure 14–8, while vL has the shape shown in
Figure 14–9, with values according to the table shown in b.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Note that t has units of seconds. (This is left as an exercise for the student.)
Equations 14–3, 14–4, and 14–5 may now be written as
i  E
R
 (1  ett)
(A)
(14–7)
vL  Eett
(V)
(14–8)
vR  E(1  ett)
(V)
(14–9)
Curves are plotted in Figure 14–10 versus time constant. As expected, transi-
tions take approximately 5t; thus, for all practical purposes, inductive tran-
sients last ﬁve time constants.
464
Chapter 14 | Inductive Transients
Percent
t

2
3
4
5
0
100
i or vR
vL
99.3
98.2
63.2
95.0
86.5
13.5
4.98 1.83 0.674
36.8
Final value
Final value
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–10
Universal time constant
curves for the RL circuit.
EXAMPLE 14–4       
In a circuit where L  2 mH, transients last 50 s. What is R?
Solution
Transients last ﬁve time constants. Thus, t  50 s5  10 s. Now 
t  LR. Therefore, R  Lt  2 mH10 s  200 .
EXAMPLE 14–5       
For an RL circuit, i  40(1  e5t) A and vL  100e5t V.
a. What are E and t?
b. What is R?
c. Determine L.
Solution
a. From Equation 14–8, vL  Eett  100e5t. Therefore, E  100 V and
t  1
5
  0.2 s.
b. From Equation 14–7,
i  E
R
 (1  ett)  40(1  e5t).
Therefore, ER  40 A and R  E40 A  100 V40 A  2.5 .
c. t  LR. Therefore, L  Rt  (2.5)(0.2)  0.5 H.
You can use the universal time constant curves to solve problems. (Be sure
to convert curve percentages to a decimal value ﬁrst, e.g., 63.2% to 0.632.) To
illustrate, consider the problem of Examples 14–2 and 14–3. From Figure 14–10
at t  t  0.2 s, i  0.632ER and vL  0.368E. Thus, i  0.632(5 A)  3.16 A
and vL  0.368(50 V)  18.4 V as we found earlier.
The effect of inductance and resistance on transient duration is shown in
Figure 14–11. The larger the inductance, the longer the transient for a given
resistance. Resistance has the opposite effect: for a ﬁxed inductance, the larger
vL
t
Increasing L (fixed R)
Increasing R (fixed L)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–11
Effect of R and L on 
transient duration.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the resistance, the shorter the transient. [This is not hard to understand. As R
increases, the circuit looks more and more resistive. If you get to a point where
inductance is negligible compared with resistance, the circuit looks purely
resistive, as in Figure 14–1(a), and virtually no transient occurs.]
Section 14.3 | Interrupting Current in an Inductive Circuit
465
1. For the circuit of Figure 14–12, the switch is closed at t  0 s.
a. Determine expressions for vL and i.
b. Compute vL and i at t  0, 10 s, 20 s, 30 s, 40 s, and 50 s.
c. Plot curves for vL and i.
2. For the circuit of Figure 14–7, E  85 V, R  50 , and L  0.5 H. Use the
universal time constant curves to determine vL and i at t  20 ms.
3. For a certain RL circuit, transients last 25 s. If L  10 H and steady state
current is 2 A, what is E?
4. An RL circuit has E  50 V and R  10 . The switch is closed at t  0 s.
What is the current at the end of 1.5 time constants?
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
8 k
2 k
20 V
vL


i
L = 100 mH
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–12
We now look at what happens when inductor current is interrupted. Consider
Figure 14–13. At the instant the switch is opened, the field begins to collapse,
which induces a voltage in the coil. If inductance is large and current is high, a
great deal of energy is released in a very short time, creating a huge voltage that
may damage equipment and create a shock hazard. (This induced voltage is
referred to as an inductive kick.) For example, abruptly breaking the current
through a large inductor (such as a motor or generator field coil) can create
voltage spikes up to several thousand volts, a value large enough to draw long
arcs as indicated in Figure 14–13. Even moderate-sized inductances in elec-
tronic systems can create enough voltage to cause damage if protective cir-
cuitry is not used.
14.3 Interrupting
Current in an
Inductive Circuit
E
Collapsing
field
i
Spark
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–13
The sudden collapse of the magnetic ﬁeld when the switch is opened
causes a large induced voltage across the coil. (Several thousand volts may result.) The
switch arcs over due to this voltage.
The dynamics of the switch ﬂashover are not hard to understand. When the
ﬁeld collapses, the voltage across the coil rises rapidly. Part of this voltage
appears across the switch. As the switch voltage rises, it quickly exceeds the
breakdown strength of air, causing a ﬂashover between its contacts. Once struck,
CircuitSim 14-7 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the arc is easily maintained, as it creates ionized gases that provide a relatively
low-resistance path for conduction. As the contacts spread apart, the arc elon-
gates and eventually extinguishes as the coil energy is dissipated and coil volt-
age drops below that required to sustain the arc—see Notes.
There are several important points to note here:
1. Flashovers, as in Figure 14–13, are generally undesirable. However, they
can be controlled through proper engineering design. (One way is to use a
discharge resistor, as in the next example; another way is to use a diode or
a varistor, as you will see in your electronics course.)
2. On the other hand, the large voltages created by breaking inductive currents
have their uses. One is in the ignition system of automobiles, where current
in the primary winding of a transformer coil is interrupted at the appropri-
ate time by a control circuit to create the spark needed to ﬁre the engine.
3. It is not possible for us to rigorously analyze the circuit of Figure 14–13
because the resistance of the arc changes as the switch opens. However,
the main ideas can be established by studying circuits using ﬁxed resistors.
(Here, we assume the switch does not arc over.)
The Basic Ideas
We begin with the circuit of Figure 14–14. Assume the switch is closed and
the circuit is in steady state. Since the inductance looks like a short circuit
[Figure 14–15(a)], its pre-switching current is iL  120 V30   4 A.
466
Chapter 14 | Inductive Transients
NOTES...
The intuitive explanation here has a
sound mathematical basis. Recall,
back EMF (induced voltage) across 
a coil is given by
vL  Ld
d
i
t
  L

i
t

where 
i is the change in current
and 
t is the time interval over
which the change takes place. When
you open the switch, current begins
to drop immediately toward zero.
Since 
i is ﬁnite, and 
t →0 the
ratio 
i
t is very large and thus, the
voltage across L rapidly rises to a
very large value, causing a ﬂashover
to occur. After the ﬂashover, current
has a path through which to decay
and thus 
t, although small,
no longer approaches zero.The
result is a large but ﬁnite voltage
spike across L.
R2
R1
E
SW
Discharge
resistor
L
vL


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–14
Discharge resistor R2 helps
limit the size of the induced voltage.
(a) Circuit just before the switch
is opened
R2
600 E
iL = 4 A
R1 = 30 E
i2 = 0.2 A
vL = 0
120 V


SW
(b) Circuit just after SW is opened.
Since coil voltage polarity is opposite
to that shown, vL is negative.
R1
R2






4 A
SW
vL
vR1 = 120 V
vR2
vSW


2520 V
2400 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–15
Circuit of Figure 14–14 immediately before and after the switch is opened.
Coil voltage jumps from 0 V to 2520 V for this example.
CircuitSim 14-8 
Now open the switch. Just prior to opening the switch, iL  4 A; therefore,
just after opening the switch, it must still be 4 A. As indicated in (b), this 4 A
passes through resistances R1 and R2, creating voltages vR1  4 A 	 30  
120 V and vR2  4 A 	 600   2400 V with the polarity shown. From KVL,
vL  vR1  vR2  0. Therefore, at the instant the switch is opened,
vL  (vR1  vR2)  2520 volts
appears across the coil, yielding a negative voltage spike as in Figure 14–16.
Note that this spike is more than 20 times larger than the source voltage. As we
see in the next section, the size of this spike depends on the ratio of R2 to R1;
the larger the ratio, the larger the voltage.
Consider again Figure 14–15. Note that current i2 changes abruptly from
0.2 A just prior to switching to 4 A just after. This is permissible, however,
since i2 does not pass through the inductor, and only currents through induc-
tance cannot change abruptly.
vL
0
Voltage at the
instant the switch
is opened
t
2520 V
iL
vL


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–16
Voltage spike for the circuit
of Figure 14–14. This voltage is more than
20 times larger than the source voltage.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Inductor Equivalent at Switching
Figure 14–17 shows the current through L of Figure 14–15. Because the cur-
rent is the same immediately after switching as it is immediately before, it is
constant over the interval from t  0 s to t  0 s. Since this is true in gen-
eral, we see that an inductance with an initial current looks like a current
source at the instant of switching. Its value is the value of the current at
switching, Figure 14–18. As indicated in Figure 14–17, this is I0  iL(0). In
any given problem, you can use either representation, but depending on what
you are focusing on, you might choose one over the other.
Section 14.4 | De-Energizing Transients
467
Figure 14–16 shows the voltage across the coil of Figure 14–14. Make a simi-
lar sketch for the voltage across the switch and across resistor R2. Hint: Use
KVL to ﬁnd vSW and vR2.
Answer
vSW: With the switch closed, vSW  0 V; When the switch is opened, vSW jumps to 2520 V,
then decays to 120 V. vR2: Identical in shape to Figure 14–16 except that vR2 spikes at
2400 V instead of 2520 V.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
iL
iL(0+) = 4A
t
0
4 amps
Switch
opened here
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–17
Inductor current for the
circuit of Figure 14–15. Note that initial
current iL(0) is often represented by the
symbol I0. In this notation, I0  4 A.
(a) Current at switching
iL = I0
I0
(b) Current source equivalent
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–18
An inductor carrying current looks like a current source at the instant of
switching. You may see either representation (a) or representation (b) used in practice.
We now look at equations for the de-energizing transient voltages and cur-
rents described in the previous section.
Consider Figure 14–19(a). Let the current in the inductor before the switch
is opened (the initial current) be denoted as I0 amps. Now open the switch as
in (b). KVL yields vL  vR1  vR2  0. Substituting vL  Ldidt, vR1  R1i, and
14.4 De-Energizing
Transients
R2
R1
E
SW
L
i2
i = I0
(a) Immediately before the switch
is opened
(b) Decay circuit
R2
R1
vL


vR2


i
vR1


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–19
Circuit for studying decay transients. 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

vR2  R2i yields Ldidt  (R1  R2)i  0. Using calculus, it can be shown that
the solution is
i  I0ett
(A)
(14–10)
where
t  R
L
T
  
R1 
L
R2

(s)
(14–11)
is the time constant of the discharge circuit. If the circuit is in steady state
before the switch is opened, initial current I0  ER1 and Equation 14–10
becomes
i  R
E
1
ett
(A)
(14–12)
468
Chapter 14 | Inductive Transients
NOTES...
As an aid to help you understand
and solve the problems of this
chapter, note that the transient por-
tions of inductive transients (like
capacitive transients) are always
exponential in form, varying accord-
ing to either ett or 1  ett, and
have the general shape of either
Figure 14–9 or Figure 14–8. If you
remember this and understand
basic principles, you won’t have to
rely so much on the memorization
of formulas. This is what a lot of
experienced people do.
EXAMPLE 14–6       
For Figure 14–19(a), assume the current has reached steady state with the switch
closed. Suppose that E  120 V, R1  30 , R2  600 , and L  126 mH:
a. Determine I0.
b. Determine the decay time constant.
c. Determine the equation for the current decay.
d. Compute the current i at t  0.5 ms.
Solution
a. Consider Figure 14–19(a). Since the circuit is in a steady state, the inductor
looks like a short circuit to dc. Thus, I0  ER1  4 A.
b. Consider Figure 14–19(b). t  L(R1  R2)  126 mH630   0.2 ms.
c. i  I0ett  4et0.2 ms A.
d. At t  0.5 ms, i  4e0.5 ms0.2 ms  4e2.5  0.328 A.
CircuitSim 14-9 
Now consider voltage vL. Using calculus, it can be shown that
vL  V0ett
(14–13)
where V0 is the voltage across L just after the switch is opened. Letting i  I0
in Figure 14–19(b), you can see that V0  I0(R1  R2)  I0RT. Thus,
Equation 14–13 can also be written as
vL  I0RTett
(14–14)
Finally, if the current has reached steady state before the switch is opened,
I0  ER1, and Equation 14–14 becomes
vL  E1  R
R
2
1
ett
(14–15)
Note that vL starts at V0 volts (which is negative) and decays to zero as shown
in Figure 14–20.
vL
vL = V0e       
0
t
V0
t/'
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–20
Inductor voltage during
decay phase. V0 is negative.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now consider the resistor voltages. Each is the product of resistance times
current (Equation 14–10). Thus,
vR1  R1I0ett
(14–16)
and
vR2  R2I0ett
(14–17)
If current has reached steady state before switching, these become
vR1  Eett
(14–18)
and
vR2  R
R
2
1
Eett
(14–19)
Substituting the values of Example 14–6 into these equations, we get for the
circuit of Figure 14–19 vL  2520et0.2 ms V, vR1  120et0.2 ms V and 
vR2  2400et0.2 ms V. These can also be written as vL  2520e5000t V and
so on, if desired.
Decay problems can also be solved using the decay portion of the univer-
sal time constant curves shown in Figure 14–10.
Section 14.5 | More Complex Circuits
469
CircuitSim 14-10 
EXAMPLE 14–7        
The circuit of Figure 14–21 is in steady state with the switch closed. Use
Figure 14–10 to ﬁnd iL and vL at t  2 t after the switch is opened.
Solution
Before the switch is opened, the inductor looks like a short circuit
and its current is thus ER1  120 V40   3 A. Current just after the switch
is opened will be the same. Therefore, I0  3 A. At t  2 t, current will have
decayed to 13.5% of this initial value. Therefore, iL  0.135I0  0.405 A and
vL (R1  R1)i  (60 )(0.405 A)  24.3 V. [Alternately, V0  (3 A)
(60 )  180 V. At t  2 t, this has decayed to 13.5%. Therefore, vL 
0.135(180 V)  24.3 V as above.]
40 
R1
R2
iL
vL
+
–
20 
SW
E 120 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–21
The equations developed so far apply only to circuits of the forms of
Figures 14–7 or 14–19. Fortunately, many circuits can be reduced to these
forms using circuit reduction techniques such as series and parallel combina-
tions, source conversions, Thévenin’s theorem, and so on.
14.5 More Complex
Circuits
EXAMPLE 14–8        
Determine the expression for iL for the circuit of Figure 14–22(a) if L  5 H.
Compute current at t 10 ms and 30 ms.
Solution
The circuit can be reduced to its Thévenin equivalent (b) as you saw
in Chapter 11 (Section 11.5). For this circuit, t  LRTh  5 H200   25 ms.
Now apply Equation 14–7. Thus,
CircuitSim 14-11 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

470
Chapter 14 | Inductive Transients
iL  
E
R
T
T
h
h
 (1  ett)  2
4
0
0
0
 (1  et25 ms)  0.2 (1  e40t)
(A)
At t  10 ms, iL  0.2(1  e(40)(0.010))  0.2(1  e0.4)  65.9 mA.
Similarly, at t  30 ms, iL  139.8 mA.
CircuitSim 14-12 
EXAMPLE 14–9       
For the circuit of Example 14–8, at what time does current reach 0.12 amps?
Solution
iL  0.2(1  e40t)
(A)
Thus,
0.12  0.2(1  e40t)
(Figure 14–23)
0.6  1  e40t
e40t  0.4
Taking the natural log of both sides,
ln e40t  ln 0.4
40t  0.916
t  22.9 ms
240 
800 
R1
a
b
R2
200 
R3
104 
R4
E
L
iL
100 V
(a) Circuit
(b) Thévenin equivalent
200 
RTh
ETh
L
iL
40 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–22
iL (A)
Time
t
0.12
0
0.2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–23
1. For the circuit of Figure 14–22, compute iL and vR4 at t  50 ms.
2. For the circuit of Figure 14–22, let E  120 V, R1  600 , R2  3 k,
R3  2 k, R4  100 , and L  0.25 H:
a. Determine iL and sketch it.
b. Determine vL and sketch it.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A Note about Time Scales
Until now, we have considered energization and de-energization phases sepa-
rately. When both occur in the same problem, we must clearly deﬁne what we
mean by time. One way to handle this problem (as we did with RC circuits) is to
deﬁne t  0 s as the beginning of the ﬁrst phase and solve for voltages and cur-
rents in the usual manner, then shift the time axis to the beginning of the second
phase, redeﬁne t  0 s, solve the second part, and then use continuity consider-
ations to link the two solutions together. This is illustrated in Example 14–10.
Note that only the ﬁrst time scale is shown explicitly on the ﬁnal waveform plot.
Section 14.5 | More Complex Circuits
471
3. Let everything be as in Problem 1 except L. If iL  0.12 A at t  20 ms,
what is L?
Answers
1. 0.173 A,
17.99 V  18.0 V
2. a. 160(1  e2000t) mA; b. 80e2000t V. iL climbs from 0 to 160 mA with the
waveshape of Figure 14–1(b), reaching steady state in 2.5 ms. vL looks like 
Figure 14–2(c). It starts at 80 V and decays to 0 V in 2.5 ms.
3. 7.21 H
CircuitSim 14-13 
EXAMPLE 14–10        
Refer to the circuit of Figure 14–24:
a. Close the switch at t  0 and determine equations for iL and vL.
b. At t  300 ms, open the switch and determine equations for iL and vL
during the decay phase.
c. Determine voltage and current at t  100 ms and at t  350 ms.
d. Sketch iL and vL. Mark the points from (c) on the sketch.
80 
R3
R2
60 
L = 5 H
R1
30 
10 A
iL


vL
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–24
Solution
a. Convert the circuit to the left of L to its Thévenin equivalent. As indicated
in Figure 14–25(a), RTh  6030  80  100 . From (b), ETh  V2,
where
V2  (10 A)(20 )  200 V
The Thévenin equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 14–26(a). t  LRTh 
5 H100   50 ms. Thus, during current buildup,
iL  
E
R
T
T
h
h
(1  ett)  2
1
0
0
0
0
 (1  et50 ms)  2 (1  e20t)
A
vL  EThett  200 e20t
V
CircuitSim 14-14 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

472
Chapter 14 | Inductive Transients
80 
R3
R2
60 
R1
30 
RTh = 100 
20 
(a)
(b)
10 A




ETh = V2 = 200 V
80 
V2
20 
R1 || R2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–25
b. Current buildup is sketched in Figure 14–26(b). Since 5t  250 ms, current
is in steady state when the switch is opened at 300 ms. Thus, I0  2 A. When
the switch is opened, current decays to zero through a resistance of 60 
80  140  as shown in Figure 14–27. Thus, t  5 H140   35.7 ms. If
t  0 s is redeﬁned as the instant the switch is opened, the equation for the
decay is
iL  I0ett  2et35.7 ms  2e28t
A
RTh = 100 
vL


L = 5 H
ETh
200 V
(a) Thévenin equivalent
of Figure 14–24
iL
(b)
iL
t (ms)
2 A
Open switch here
(see Figure 14–24)
0
300
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–26
Circuit and current during the buildup phase.
(a) Decay circuit
R2
R3 = 80 
60 
iL
L = 5 H
vL


(b) As it looks immediately after the switch is
opened. KVL yields vL = 280 V


R2
R1
I0 = 2 A
L


160 V
120 V


vL = 280 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–27
The circuit of Figure 14–24 as it looks during the decay phase.
Now consider voltage. As indicated in Figure 14–27(b), the voltage
across L just after the switch is open is V0  280 V. Thus,
vL  V0ett  280e28t
V
c. You can use the universal time constant curves at t  100 ms since 
100 ms represents 2t. At 2t, current has reached 86.5% of its ﬁnal value.
Thus, iL  0.865(2 A)  1.73 A. Voltage has fallen to 13.5%. Thus, vL 
0.135(200 V)  27.0 V. Now consider t  350 ms: Note that this is 50 ms
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The basic principles that we have developed in this chapter permit us to solve
problems that do not correspond exactly to the circuits of Figure 14–7 and
14–19. This is illustrated in the following example.
Section 14.5 | More Complex Circuits
473
into the decay portion of the curve. However, since 50 ms is not a multiple
of t, it is difﬁcult to use the curves. Therefore, use the equations.
Thus,
iL  2 A e28(50 ms)  2 A e1.4  0.493 A
vL  (280 V)e28(50 ms)  (280 V)e1.4  69.0 V
d. The preceding points are plotted on the waveforms of Figure 14–28.
2.0
1.0
0
0
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
t (ms)
iL (A)
200
100
0
−100
−200
−300
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
t (ms)
vL (V)
Switch
opened
here
−280 V
1.73 A
0.493 A
27.0 V
−69.0 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–28
EXAMPLE 14–11        
The circuit of Figure 14–29(a) is in steady state with the switch open. At t  0 s,
the switch is closed.
40 
10 
E
L = 100 mH
iL
t = 0
100 V
R2
R1
(a) Steady state current with the 
switch open is            = 2 A
100 V
50 
R2 = 40 
L = 100 mH
vL


iL
vR2


(b) Decay circuit
' =      = 2.5 ms
L
R2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–29
CircuitSim 14-15 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Multisim
As a ﬁrst example, let us use Multisim to compute and plot inductor current and
voltage waveforms for the circuit of Figure 14–22(a)—see Notes 1 and 2. Now
build the circuit of Figure 14–31 on your screen. (To make the connections to
474
Chapter 14 | Inductive Transients
a. Sketch the circuit as it looks after the switch is closed and determine t.
b. Determine current iL at t  0 s.
c. Determine the expression for iL.
d. Determine vL at t  0 s.
e. Determine the expression for vL.
f. How long does the transient last?
g. Sketch iL and vL.
Solution
a. When you close the switch, you short out the E-R1 branch, leaving the decay
circuit of Figure 14–29(b). Thus, t  LR2  100 mH40   2.5 ms.
b. In steady state with the switch open, iL  I0  100 V50   2 A. This is
the current just before the switch is closed. Therefore, just after the switch
is closed, iL will still be 2 A (Figure 14–30).
c. iL decays from 2 A to 0. From Equation 14–10, iL  I0ett  2et2.5 ms 
2e400t A.
d. At t  0, KVL yields vL  vR2  R2I0  (40 ) (2A)  80 V.
Thus, V0  80 V.
e. vL decays from 80 V to 0. Thus, vL  V0ett  80e400t V.
f. Transients last 5t  5(2.5 ms)  12.5 ms.
vL (V)
iL
t
t
2 A
12.5 ms
80 V
vL = −80Ve−400t
iL = 2Ae−400t
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–30
NOTES...
For Further Investigation
Additional examples 
may be found on 
our Web site. Go to 
cengagebrain.com and follow the
links to For Further Investigation and
select Advanced Studies in Transients.
14.6 RL Transients
Using Computers
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–31
This is the circuit of Figure 14–22(a). Note that you do not need a switch
since you initiate the transient by software.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the R2R3 branch, you require junction dots. Click PlaceJunction and place the
dots where you need them.) Click SimulateAnalysesTransient Analyses, and
in the dialog box, enter 0.125 for TSTOP and set the initial conditions to zero.
Click the Output tab, highlight I(L1), then click Add. Now you need to create
an expression for the voltage across the inductor. Click Add Expression,
double-click V(2), press the minus key on your keyboard, double-click V(3),
then click OK. This creates the expression V(2)-V(3). (You should recognize
this as the voltage across inductor L1.) Click Simulate. Voltage and current
waveforms appear. Following the procedure that you learned in Chapter 11,
add a new scale for the current waveform. Your waveforms should now look
like those of Figure 14–31. Click the current curve (to select it), activate the
cursors (click the cursor icon), then drag the red cursor into the display area
and right-click it. Select Set Y Value, type in 0.12, then click OK. From the
cursor display, you should see that the corresponding time is 22.9 ms (which
agrees with our analytic solution to Example 14–9). Click the voltage curve,
then use the cursor to measure voltage at t  20 ms. Compare with the answer
of Practice Problems 5.
Section 14.6 | RL Transients Using Computers
475
NOTES...
Multisim
1. Because you use software to initiate the transient, you do not need the switch
shown in Figure 14–22(a)—thus, it has been omitted from Figure 14–31.
2. If you are a Multisim 9 or 10 user, go to our Web site at cengagebrain.com
and follow the links to Special Instructions for Multisim 9 and 10 Users.
3. Only basic steps are given for the following computer examples, as proce-
dures here are similar to those of Chapter 11. If you need help, refer back
to Chapter 11 or to Appendix A.
4. Multisim plots usually appear as colored traces on a black background. You
can reverse the color as you did in Chapter 11.
5. Multisim scopes are grounded automatically, so an external ground is not
necessary.
6. For Figure 14–32(a), to ﬁnd the switch, click PlaceComponents, and from
the Basic group, select SwitchSPST, then click OK.
7. To ﬁnd the oscilloscope, right-click View and make sure Instruments is
selected. Use your mouse to ﬁnd the scope icon in the resulting tool bin 
on your screen.
8. If switch S1 freezes, click an empty spot on your workspace screen to
unfreeze it.
9. If the ON/OFF switch is not shown, right-click View, then select Simulation
Switch (or Simulation if you are a legacy software user).
Using the circuit of Figure 14–22(b), analytically determine the equation for vL.
Compute voltage at t  20 ms.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
Using the Multisim Oscilloscope
Create the circuit of Figure 14–32. (Use a switch—see Note 6.) Add the
oscilloscope (see Notes 5 and 7). After you have wired it in, double-click the
oscilloscope, and using your mouse, activate the scrolling arrows (as indicated
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

in Figure 14–32), then set the time base to 20 ms/Div. Similarly, set Channel
A to 10 V/Div and Level to 1 mV. Select Trigger Edge buttons as indicated.
Select Single, then on your workspace screen, click the ON/OFF simulate
switch to ON—see Note 9. Press the spacebar to close switch S1—see Note 8.
Before the trace reaches the edge of the screen, click the simulate switch to
OFF. Position the cursor at t  50 ms and read voltage. You should get 17.99 V
as we did in Practice Problems 4, Question 1.
PSpice
As a ﬁrst example, use PSpice to solve for inductor voltage and current for the
circuit of Figure 14–45, end-of-chapter Problem 21.
• Build the circuit on the screen as in Figure 14–33 (see Notes 1 and 2). Click
the New Proﬁle icon and name the ﬁle. In the Simulations Settings box, select
transient analysis, set TSTOP to 90ms, then click OK.
476
Chapter 14 | Inductive Transients
A
B
+
–
+
–
+
Ext Trig
–
R2
800Ω
V1
100 V
Key = Space
S1
R1
XSC1
240Ω
R4
104Ω
L1
5H
R3
200Ω
(a) Test circuit
© Cengage Learning 2013
© Cengage Learning 2013
(b) Multisim oscilloscope screen
FIGURE 14–32
This is again the circuit of Figure 14–22(a). Here we have used a switch to initiate the transient.
NOTES...
PSpice
1. Since the process here is similar
to that of Chapter 11, only
abbreviated instructions are given.
2. Because you use software to
initiate the transient, you don't
need the switch that is shown in
Figure 14–45 of Problem 21.
3.9
R3
4.7
5.6
R4
V1
+
–
67 V
0
L1
150 mH
R1
1.7
R2
© Cengage Learning 2013
+
FIGURE 14–33
The voltage marker probe automatically creates the voltage trace 
of Figure 14–34. As is detailed in the text, you add the current trace later.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

• Click the Run icon. When simulation is complete, you should have the volt-
age curve of Figure 14–34 on your screen.
• To add the current curve, click Plot, Add Y Axis, Trace, Add Trace, then
double-click I(L1).
• Using a cursor, measure current at t  18.4 ms. (You should get an answer
of 5.19 A.)
• Measure voltage at t  18.4 ms. Conﬁrm your result using Equation 14–13.
Section 14.6 | RL Transients Using Computers
477
Voltage
Current
0 s
1
0 A
>>
5 A
10 A
0 V
40 V
80 V
20 ms
V(L1:1)
40 ms
60 ms
80 ms
100 ms
2
I(L1)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–34
Inductor voltage and current for the circuit of Figure 14–33.
EXAMPLE 14–12        
Consider the circuit of Figure 14–24, Example 14–10. The switch is closed at 
t  0 and opened 300 ms later. Prepare a PSpice analysis of this problem and
determine vL and iL at t  100 ms and at t  350 ms.
Solution
PSpice doesn’t have a switch that both opens and closes. However,
you can simulate such a switch by using two switches as in Figure 14–35 (see
Note 1). Create the circuit on your screen using IDC for the current source.
Double-click TOPEN of switch U2 and set it to 300ms. Click the New Proﬁle
icon and name the ﬁle. In the Simulation Settings box, select transient analysis
then type in a value of 0.6 for TSTOP. Run the simulation—see Note 2 and
Figure 14–36—then compare to the current curve of Figure 14–28. Next, create
a second Y-axis, then add the voltage trace V(L1:1). Using the cursor, read
values at t  100 ms, and 350 ms. You should get approximately 27 V and 1.73
A at t  100 ms, and 69 V and 493 mA at t  350 ms, as in Example 14–10.
R1
30
1
U1
U2
2
1
2
R2
60
L1
5H
80
R3
TOPEN = 300 ms
TCLOSE = 0
I1
10 A
–
+
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
+
NOTES...
1. For the circuit of Figure 14–35,
you need to use switches in
your simulation circuit in order
to simulate switching at two dis-
tinct times.
2. If you get an error message,
“Sw_tClose used by X_U1 is
undeﬁned” (or similar), go to
Appendix A for instructions on
how to deal with it.
FIGURE 14–35
Simulating the circuit of Example 14–10. Two switches are used to
model the closing and opening of the switch of Figure 14–24.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

478
Chapter 14 | Inductive Transients
Current
0 s
–400 V
>>
0 V
200 V
–200 V
0 A
1.0 A
2.0 A
100 ms
200 ms
300 ms
400 ms
600 ms
500 ms
© Cengage Learning 2013
Voltage
FIGURE 14–36
Inductor voltage and current for the circuit of Figure 14–35.
T
he first sample of a new product that your company has designed has an
indicator light that fails. (Symptom: When you turn a new unit on, the
indicator light comes on as it should. However, when you turn the power off
and back on, the lamp does not come on again.) You have been asked to
investigate the problem and design a fix. You acquire a copy of the
schematic and study the portion of the circuit where the indicator lamp is
located. As shown in the accompanying figure, the lamp is used to indicate
the status of the coil; the light is to be on when the coil is energized and off
when it is not. Immediately, you see the problem, solder in one component
and the problem is fixed. Write a short note to your supervisor outlining the
nature of the problem, explaining why the lamp burned out and why your
design modification fixed the problem. Note also that your modification did
not result in any substantial increase in power consumption (i.e., you did not
use a resistor). Note: This problem requires a diode. If you have not had an
introduction to electronics, you may not be able to do this problem.
Putting It into Practice
Problems
14.1
Introduction
1. a. What does an inductor carrying no current look like at the instant of
switching?
b. For each circuit of Figure 14–37, determine iS and vL immediately after
the switch is closed.
2. Determine all voltages and currents in Figure 14–38 immediately after the
switch is closed.
3. Repeat Problem 2 if L1 is replaced with an uncharged capacitor.
30 
4 H
18 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.2
Current Buildup Transients
4. a. If iL  8(1  e500t) A, what is the current at t  6 ms?
b. If vL  125e500t V, what is the voltage vL at t  5 ms?
5. The switch of Figure 14–39 is closed at t  0 s.
a. What is the time constant of the circuit?
b. How long is it until current reaches its steady value?
c. Determine the equations for iL and vL.
d. Compute values for iL and vL at intervals of one time constant from t  0
to 5 t.
e. Sketch iL and vL. Label the axis in t and in seconds.
6. Close the switch at t  0 s and determine equations for iL and vL for the cir-
cuit of Figure 14–40. Compute iL and vL at t  1.8 ms.
7. Repeat Problem 5 for the circuit of Figure 14–41 with L  4 H.
8. For the circuit of Figure 14–39, determine inductor voltage and current at 
t  50 ms using the universal time constant curve of Figure 14–10.
Problems
479
(a) Purely resistive circuit
25 E
R
40 V
iS
(b)
(c)
(d)
10 E
L
60 V
iS


vL
L
E
iS


vL
R
L


vL
90 V
iS
30 E
15 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–37
No value is needed for L here as it does not affect the solution.
14 
60 
40 
16 
vR3
10 
18 
E
180 V
L1
L2
+
−
vR5
+
−
vR6
+
−
vL2
+
−
vR1
vR2
vR4
+
+
−
−
+
−
vL1
+
−
iT
i1
i2
i4
i3
i5
i6
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–38
R = 60 
iL
E
180 V
L = 3 H
vL


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–39
FIGURE 14–40
600 mH


vL
t = 0 s
18 V
iL
390 
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9. Close the switch at t  0 s and determine equations for iL and vL for the 
circuit of Figure 14–42. Compute iL and vL at t  3.4 ms.
10. Using Figure 14–10, ﬁnd vL at one time constant for the circuit of Figure 14–42.
11. For the circuit of Figure 14–1(b), the voltage across the inductance at the
instant the switch is closed is 80 V, the ﬁnal steady state current is 4 A, and
the transient lasts 0.5 s. Determine E, R, and L.
12. For an RL circuit, iL  20(1  ett) mA and vL  40ett V. If the transient
lasts 0.625 ms, what are E, R, and L?
13. For Figure 14–1(b), if vL  40e2000t V and the steady state current is 10 mA,
what are E, R, and L?
14.4
De-Energizing Transients
14. For Figure 14–43, E  80 V, R1  200 , R2  300 , and L  0.5 H.
a. When the switch is closed, how long does it take for iL to reach steady
state? What is its steady state value?
b. When the switch is opened, how long does it take for iL to reach steady
state? What is its steady state value?
c. After the circuit has reached steady state with the switch closed, it is
opened. Determine equations for iL and vL.
15. For Figure 14–43, R1  20 , R2  230 , and L  0.5 H, and the inductor
current has reached a steady value of 5 A with the switch closed. At t  0 s,
the switch is opened.
a. What is the decay time constant?
b. Determine equations for iL and vL.
c. Compute values for iL and vL at intervals of one time constant from 
t  0 to 5 t.
d. Sketch iL and vL. Label the axis in t and in seconds.
16. Using the values from Problem 15, determine inductor voltage and current at 
t  3t using the universal time constant curves shown in Figure 14–10.
17. Given vL  2700 Ve100t. Using the universal time constant curve, ﬁnd vL
at t  20 ms.
18. For Figure 14–43, the inductor voltage at the instant the switch is closed is
150 V and iL  0 A. After the circuit has reached steady state, the switch is
opened. At the instant the switch is opened, iL  3 A and vL jumps to 750 V.
The decay transient lasts 5 ms. Determine E, R1, R2, and L.
19. For Figure 14–43, L  20 H. The current during buildup and decay is shown
in Figure 14–44. Determine R1 and R2.
20. For Figure 14–43, when the switch is moved to energization, iL  2 A 
(1  e10t). Now open the switch after the circuit has reached steady state 
and redeﬁne t  0 s as the instant the switch is opened. For this case, vL 
400 Ve25t. Determine E, R1, R2, and L.
480
Chapter 14 | Inductive Transients
20 V
4 
R2
L
16 
E
vL


iL
R1
t = 0 s
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–42
FIGURE 14–43
FIGURE 14–44
FIGURE 14–41
560 mH

 vL
t = 0 s
40 V
iL
220 
© Cengage Learning 2013
R2
R1
E
iL
L
vL


© Cengage Learning 2013
iL (A)
t (s)
5 s
2 s
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14.5
More Complex Circuits
21. For the coil of Figure 14–45, R  1.7  and L  150 mH. Determine coil
current at t  18.4 ms.
Problems
481
FIGURE 14–48
FIGURE 14–47
FIGURE 14–46
FIGURE 14–45


vL
t = 0 s
67 V
iL
3.9 
5.6 
4.7 
Coil
Rl
L
© Cengage Learning 2013
10.5 k
30 k
10 k
iL
vL
120 V
L = 0.36 H


© Cengage Learning 2013
22. Refer to Figure 14–46:
a. What is the energizing circuit time constant?
b. Close the switch and determine the equation for iL and vL during current
buildup.
c. What is the voltage across the inductor and the current through it at t  20 s?
23. For Figure 14–46, the circuit has reached steady state with the switch closed.
Now open the switch.
a. Determine the de-energizing circuit time constant.
b. Determine the equations for iL and vL.
c. Find the voltage across the inductor and current through it at t  17.8 s
using the equations determined previously.
24. Repeat part (c) of Problem 23 using the universal time constant curves shown
in Figure 14–10.
25. a. Repeat Problem 22, parts (a) and (b) for the circuit of Figure 14–47.
b. What are iL and vL at t  25 ms?
0.5 A
40 V
200 
300 
4 H
280 
vL


iL
© Cengage Learning 2013
26. Repeat Problem 23 for the circuit of Figure 14–47, except ﬁnd vL and iL at 
t  13.8 ms.
27. An unknown circuit containing dc sources and resistors has an open-circuit
voltage of 45 volts. When its output terminals are shorted, the short-circuit cur-
rent is 0.15 A. A switch, resistor, and inductance are connected (Figure 14–48).
Determine the inductor current and voltage 2.5 ms after the switch is closed.
28. The circuit of Figure 14–49 is in steady state with the switch in position 1.
At t  0, it is moved to position 2, where it remains for 1.0 s. It is then
moved to position 3, where it remains. Sketch curves for iL and vL from 
100 
L = 0.4 H
iL
Unknown
circuit
vL


© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

t  0 until the circuit reaches steady state in position 3. Compute the 
inductor voltage and current at t  0.1 s and at t  1.1 s.
482
Chapter 14 | Inductive Transients
15 
3
50 
30 
1
2
25 V
5 H


vL
iL
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 14–49
20 V
t
vss = 0 V
5t = 50 μs
i
iss = 2 mA
vL
© Cengage Learning 2013
14.6
RL Transients Using Computers
29. The circuit of Figure 14–46 is in steady state with the switch open. At t  0,
it is closed and remains closed. Graph the voltage across L and ﬁnd vL at 20 s
using the cursor.
30. For the circuit of Figure 14–47, close the switch at t  0 and ﬁnd vL at 
t  10 ms. (For PSpice, use current source IDC.)
31. For Figure 14–6, let L1  30 mH and L2  90 mH. Close the switch at t  0
and ﬁnd the current in the 30  resistor at t  2 ms. 
32. For Figure 14–41, let L  4 H. Solve for vL and iL. Using the cursor, measure
values at t  200 ms and 500 ms. (Multisim users: You may have to create a
separate vertical axis for the current waveform.)
33. We solved the circuit of Figure 14–22(a) by reducing it to its Thévenin equiva-
lent. Using PSpice, analyze the circuit in its original form and plot the inductor
current. Check a few points on the curve by computing values according to the
solution of Example 14–8 and compare to values obtained from screen.
34. The circuit of Figure 14–46 is in steady state with the switch open. At t  0,
the switch is closed. It remains closed for 150 s and is then opened and left
open. Compute and plot iL and vL. With the cursor, determine values at 
t  60 s and at t  165 s.
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. a. 20e100 000t V; 2(1  e100 000t) mA
b.
t(s)
vL(V)
iL(mA)
0
20
0
10
7.36
1.26
20
2.71
1.73
30
0.996
1.90
40
0.366
1.96
50
0.135
1.99
c.
PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
PSPICE
2. 11.5 V; 1.47 A
3. 4 V
4. 3.88 A
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

483
15 ac Fundamentals
16 R, L, and C Elements and
the Impedance Concept
17 Power in ac Circuits
I
FOUNDATION ac CONCEPTS IV
I
n previous chapters, we concentrated mostly on dc. We now turn our attention to
ac (alternating current).
AC is important to us for a number of reasons. First, it is the basis of the electri-
cal power system that supplies our homes and businesses with electrical energy. AC
is used instead of dc because it has several important advantages, the chief one
being that ac power can be transmitted easily and efﬁciently over long distances.
However, the importance of ac extends far beyond its use in the electrical power
industry. You will ﬁnd, for example, that an understanding of ac concepts is necessary
in virtually every branch of electronics that you will encounter, be it in the ﬁeld of
audio systems, communications systems, control systems, or any number of other
areas. In fact, nearly every electrical and electronic device that we use in our daily
lives operates from or involves the use of ac in some way.
We begin Part IV of this book with a look at fundamental ac concepts. We
examine ways to generate ac voltages, methods used to represent ac voltages and
currents, relationships between ac quantities in resistive, inductive, and capacitive
circuits, and, ﬁnally, the meaning and representation of power in ac systems. This
sets the stage for succeeding chapters that deal with ac circuit analysis tech-
niques, including ac versions of the various methods that you have used for dc
circuits throughout previous chapters of this book. I
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
ac Current
ac Voltage
Alternating Current (ac)
Amplitude
Average Value
Cycle
Effective Value
Frequency
Hertz (Hz)
Instantaneous Value
Lag
Lead
Oscilloscope
Peak-to-Peak
Peak Value
Period (T )
Periodic Waveform
Phase Difference
Phase Shifts
Phasor
Radian Frequency
RMS (Root Mean Square)
Values
Sine Wave
Waveform
I OUTLINE
Introduction
Generating ac Voltages
Voltage and Current
Conventions for ac
Frequency, Period,
Amplitude, and 
Peak Value
Angular and Graphic
Relationships for Sine
Waves
Voltages and Currents as
Functions of Time
Introduction to Phasors
ac Waveforms and
Average Value
Effective (RMS) Values
Rate of Change of a Sine
Wave (Derivative)
ac Voltage and Current
Measurement
Circuit Analysis Using
Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• explain how ac voltages and currents differ
from dc,
• draw waveforms for ac voltage and currents
and explain what they mean,
• explain the voltage polarity and current
direction conventions used for ac,
• describe the basic ac generator and explain
how ac voltage is generated,
• deﬁne and compute frequency, period,
amplitude, and peak-to-peak values,
• compute instantaneous sinusoidal voltage 
or current at any instant in time,
• deﬁne the relationships between q, T, and
f for a sine wave,
• deﬁne and compute phase differences
between waveforms,
• use phasors to represent sinusoidal voltages
and currents,
• determine phase relationships between
waveforms using phasors,
• deﬁne and compute average values for 
time-varying waveforms,
• deﬁne and compute effective (rms) values 
for time-varying waveforms,
• use Multisim and PSpice to study ac
waveforms.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15
ac FUNDAMENTALS
A
lternating currents (ac) are currents that alternate in direction (usually many times per
second), passing ﬁrst in one direction, then in the other through a circuit. Such currents are
produced by voltage sources whose polarities alternate between positive and negative (rather
than being ﬁxed as with dc sources). By convention, alternating currents are called ac currents
and alternating voltages are called ac voltages.
The variation of an ac voltage or current versus time is called its waveform. Since wave-
forms vary with time, they are designated by lowercase letters v(t), i(t), e(t), and so on, rather
than by uppercase letters V, I, and E as for dc. Often we drop the functional notation [e.g., v(t)]
and just use the simpler notations v, i, and e instead.
While many waveforms are important to us, the most fundamental is the sine wave (also
called sinusoidal ac). In fact, the sine wave is of such importance that many people associate
the term ac with sinusoidal, even though ac refers to any quantity that alternates with time.
In this chapter, we look at basic ac principles, including the generation of ac voltages and
ways to represent and manipulate ac quantities. These ideas are then used throughout the
remainder of the book to develop methods of analysis for ac circuits. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Previously you learned that dc sources have ﬁxed polarities and constant mag-
nitudes and thus produce currents with constant value and unchanging direc-
tion, as illustrated in Figure 15–1. In contrast, the voltages of ac sources
alternate in polarity and vary in magnitude and thus produce currents that vary
in magnitude and alternate in direction.
486
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
15.1 Introduction
Putting It in Perspective
Thomas Alva Edison
NOWADAYS WE TAKE IT FOR GRANTED that our electrical power 
systems are ac. (This is reinforced every time you see a piece
of equipment rated “60 hertz ac.”) However, this was not
always the case. In the late 1800s, a ﬁerce battle—the so-
called “war of the currents”—raged in the emerging electrical
power industry. The forces favoring the use of dc were led by
Thomas Alva Edison, and those favoring the use of ac were
led by George Westinghouse (Chapter 23) and Nikola Tesla
(Chapter 24).
Edison, a prolific inventor who gave us the electric light,
the phonograph, and many other great inventions as well,
fought vigorously for dc. He had spent a considerable
amount of time and money on the development of dc
power and had a lot at stake, in terms of both money and
prestige. So determined was Edison in this battle that he
first persuaded the state of New York to adopt ac for its
newly devised execution device, the electric chair, and then
pointed at it with horror as an example of how deadly ac was. Ultimately, however, the
combination of ac’s advantages over dc and the stout opposition of Tesla and Westinghouse
won the day for ac.
Edison was born in 1847 in Milan, Ohio. Most of his work was done at two sites in New
Jersey—ﬁrst at a laboratory in Menlo Park, and later at a much larger laboratory in West
Orange, where his staff at one time numbered around 5000. He received patents as inventor
or co-inventor on nearly 1300 inventions—an astonishing feat that made him probably the
greatest inventor of all time.
Thomas Edison died at the age of 84 on October 18, 1931. I
Library of Congress /digital version by Science Faction /Science
Faction /Getty Images
(a)
I = 2 A
E
12 V
12 V




6 
t
0
12 V
Voltage or
Current
2 A
(b) Voltage and current versus
time for dc
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–1
In a dc circuit, voltage polarities and current directions do not change.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Sinusoidal ac Voltage
To illustrate, consider the voltage at the wall outlet in your home. Called a sine
wave or sinusoidal ac waveform (for reasons discussed in Section 15.5), this
voltage has the shape shown in Figure 15–2. Starting at zero, the voltage
increases to a positive peak amplitude, decreases to zero, changes polarity,
increases to a negative peak amplitude, then returns again to zero. One com-
plete variation is referred to as a cycle. Since the waveform repeats itself at reg-
ular intervals as in (b), it is called a periodic waveform.
Symbol for an ac Voltage Source
The symbol for a sinusoidal voltage source is shown in Figure 15–3. Note that
a lowercase e is used to represent voltage rather than E, since it is a function of
time. Polarity marks are also shown although, since the polarity of the source
varies, their meaning has yet to be established.
Sinusoidal ac Current
Figure 15–4 shows a resistor connected to an ac source. During the ﬁrst half-
cycle, the source voltage is positive; therefore, the current is in the clockwise
direction. During the second half-cycle, the voltage polarity reverses; therefore,
the current is in the counterclockwise direction. Since current is proportional
to voltage, its shape is also sinusoidal (Figure 15–5).
Voltage
t
0
Voltage is positive
Voltage is
negative
Polarity
change


1 cycle
(a) Variation of voltage
versus time
Voltage
t


(b) A continuous stream
of cycles
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–2
Sinusoidal ac waveforms. Values above the axis are positive while values
below are negative.


e(t)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–3
Symbol for a sinusoidal
voltage source. Lowercase letter e is used
to indicate that the voltage varies with time.


R
Actual current direction
during first half-cycle
Actual
source
polarity
during
first
half-cycle
(a)


R
Actual current direction
during second half-cycle
Actual
source
polarity
during
second
half-cycle
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–4
Current direction reverses when the source polarity reverses.
CircuitSim 15-2 
CircuitSim 15-1 
t
0
Voltage
Current


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–5
Current has the same wave-
shape as voltage.
One way to generate an ac voltage is to rotate a coil of wire at constant
angular velocity in a ﬁxed magnetic ﬁeld—see Note. As indicated in Figure
15–6, slip rings and brushes connect the coil to the load. The magnitude of
15.2 Generating 
ac Voltages
Section 15.2 | Generating ac Voltages
487
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the resulting voltage is proportional to the rate at which ﬂux lines are cut
(Faraday’s law, Chapter 13), and its polarity is dependent on the direction the
coil sides move through the ﬁeld. Since the rate of cutting ﬂux varies with time,
the resulting voltage will also vary with time. For example in Figure 15–6(a),
since the coil sides are moving parallel to the ﬁeld, no ﬂux lines are being cut
and the induced voltage at this instant (and hence the current) is zero. (This is
deﬁned as the 0 position of the coil.) As the coil rotates from the 0 position,
coil sides AA and BB cut across ﬂux lines; hence, voltage builds, reaching a
peak when ﬂux is cut at the maximum rate in the 90 position as in (b). Note
the polarity of the voltage and the direction of current. As the coil rotates fur-
ther, voltage decreases, reaching zero at the 180 position when the coil sides
again move parallel to the ﬁeld as in (c). At this point, the coil has gone
through a half-revolution.
During the second half-revolution, coil sides cut ﬂux in directions oppo-
site to that which they did in the ﬁrst half-revolution; hence, the polarity of
the induced voltage reverses. As indicated in Figure 15–6(d), voltage reaches
a peak at the 270 point, and, since the polarity of the voltage has changed,
so has the direction of current. When the coil reaches the 360 position, volt-
age is again zero and the cycle starts over. Figure 15–7 shows one cycle of
488
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
B'
B
B
A
A
A'
Load
Brushes
Rotation
0 V
N
S
(a) 0° Position: Coil sides move
parallel to flux lines. Since no flux is
being cut, induced voltage is zero.
A
A
A'
N
(b) 90° Position: Coil end A is positive
with respect to B. Current direction
is out of slip ring A.


B
B
S
A
B
B'
A'
0 V
N
S
(c) 180° Position: Coil again cutting
no flux. Induced voltage is zero.
A
B
B
B'
N
(d) 270° Position: Voltage polarity
has reversed, therefore, current
direction has also reversed.


A
S
A
B
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–6
Generating an ac voltage. The 0 position of the coil is deﬁned as in (a) where
the coil sides move parallel to the ﬂux lines. In practice, the rotations are so fast that the
light does not have time to go out and so appears to be continuously on.
NOTES...
There are some good animations 
on the Internet that show the
process of ac generation. Search 
for Generator Animation. (Some 
animations are better than others—
look until you ﬁnd a good one.)
PRACTICAL NOTES...
In practice, the coil of Figure 15–6
consists of many turns wound on an
iron core. The coil, core, and slip
rings rotate as a unit.
In Figure 15–6, the magnetic
ﬁeld is ﬁxed and the coil rotates.
While small generators are built this
way, large ac generators usually have
the opposite construction, that is,
their coils are ﬁxed and the magnetic
ﬁeld is rotated instead. In addition,
large ac generators are usually made
as three-phase machines with three
sets of coils instead of one. This is
covered in Chapter 24. However,
although its details are oversimpli-
ﬁed, the generator of Figure 15–6
gives a true picture of the voltage
produced by a real ac generator.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the resulting waveform. Since the coil rotates continuously, the voltage
produced will be a repetitive, periodic waveform as you saw in Figure 15–2(b).
Current will be periodic also.
Time Scales
The horizontal axis of Figure 15–7 is scaled in degrees. Often we need it scaled
in time. The length of time required to generate one cycle depends on the veloc-
ity of rotation. To illustrate, assume that the coil rotates at 600 rpm (revolutions
per minute). Six hundred revolutions in 1 minute equals 600 rev60 s  10 revo-
lutions in 1 second. At 10 revolutions per second, the time for 1 revolution is
one-tenth of a second, that is, 100 ms. Since one cycle is 100 ms, a half-cycle is
50 ms, a quarter-cycle is 25 ms, and so on. Figure 15–8 shows the waveform
rescaled in time.
Instantaneous Value
As Figure 15–8 shows, the coil voltage changes from instant to instant. The value
of voltage at any point on the waveform is referred to as its instantaneous value.
This is illustrated in Figure 15–9. Figure 15–9(a) shows a photograph of an actual
waveform, and (b) shows it redrawn, with values scaled from the photo. For this
example, the voltage has a peak value of 40 volts and a cycle time of 6 ms. From
the graph, we see that at t  0 ms, the voltage is zero. At t  0.5 ms, it is 20 V.
At t  2 ms, it is 35 V. At t  3.5 ms, it is 20 V, and so on.
Section 15.2 | Generating ac Voltages
489
0
Generator voltage
90°
180°
270°
360°
2
+
Coil position
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–7
Coil voltage versus angular position.
t (ms)
0
25
50
75
100
e(t)
Cycle
Half-cycle point
Generator voltage
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–8
Cycle scaled in time. At
600 rpm, the cycle length is 100 ms.
(a) Sinusoidal voltage
© Cengage Learning 2013
e (V)
1
10
0
30
10
20
30
20
2
4
5
6
t (ms)
40
40
3
28 V
35 V
20 V
20 V
(b) Values scaled from the photograph
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–9
Instantaneous values.
CircuitSim 15-3 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Electronic Function Generators
AC waveforms may also be created electronically using function (also called
signal) generators. In fact, with function generators, you are not limited to
sinusoidal ac. The unit of Figure 15–10, for example, can produce a variety of
variable-frequency waveforms, including sinusoidal, square wave, triangular,
and so on. Waveforms such as these are commonly used to test electronic gear.
In Section 15.1, we looked brieﬂy at voltage polarities and current directions.
At that time, we used separate diagrams for each half-cycle (Figure 15–4).
However, this is unnecessary; one diagram and one set of references is all that
is required. This is illustrated in Figure 15–11. First, we assign reference
polarities for the source and a reference direction for the current. We then use
the convention that, when e has a positive value, its actual polarity is the same
as the reference polarity, and when e has a negative value, its actual polarity
is opposite to that of the reference. For current, we use the convention that
when i has a positive value, its actual direction is the same as the reference
arrow, and when i has a negative value, its actual direction is opposite to that
of the reference.
To illustrate, consider Figure 15–12. [Parts (b) and (c) show snapshots
at two instants of time.] At time t1, e has a value of 10 volts. This means that
at this instant, the voltage of the source is 10 V and its top end is positive
with respect to its bottom end as indicated in (b). With a voltage of 10 V 
and a resistance of 5 , the instantaneous value of current is i  eR 
10 V5   2 A. Since i is positive, the current is in the direction of the 
reference arrow.
Now consider time t2. Here, e  10 V. This means that source voltage is
again 10 V, but now its top end is negative with respect to its bottom end. Again
applying Ohm’s law, you get i  eR  10 V5   2 A. Since i is nega-
tive, current is actually opposite in direction to the reference arrow. This is indi-
cated in (c). (Recall our discussion of Section 4.2, Chapter 4 about the meaning
of negative currents.)
The preceding concept is valid for any ac signal, regardless of waveshape.
Let us illustrate.
490
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
Photo courtesy B&K Precision
(a) Model 4045 Function Generator
Square wave
t
Triangle wave
t
Sine wave
t
(b) Sample waveforms
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–10
Electronic function generators provide a variety of variable-frequency, variable-amplitude waveforms.
15.3 Voltage and Current
Conventions
for ac


R
(a) References for voltage
and current
e
i
t


i
e
© Cengage Learning 2013
During the first half-cycle, voltage
polarity and current direction are
as shown in (a). Therefore, e and i
are positive. During the second
half-cycle, voltage polarity and current
direction are opposite to that shown in
(a). Therefore, e and i are negative.
(b)
FIGURE 15–11
ac Voltage and current ref-
erence conventions.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 15.3 | Voltage and Current Conventions for ac
491
t
t1
t2
()
()
i
e
10 V
10 V
2 A
2 A
(a)


5 
(b) Time t1: e = 10 V and
i = 2 A. Thus, voltage and
current have the polarity
and direction indicated.
e
i = 2 A


5 
(c) Time t2: e = 10 V and i = 2 A.
Thus, voltage polarity is opposite to
that indicated and current direction
is opposite to the arrow direction.
e
i = 2 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–12
Illustrating the ac voltage and current convention.
CircuitSim 15-4 
EXAMPLE 15–1        
Figure 15–13(b) shows one cycle of a triangular voltage wave. Determine the
current and its direction at t  0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 s and
sketch.
Solution
Apply Ohm’s law at each point in time. At t  0 s, e  0 V, so i 
eR  0 V20 k  0 mA. At t  1 s, e  30 V. Thus, i  eR  30 V20 k 
1.5 mA. At t  2 s, e  60 V. Thus, i  eR  60 V20 k  3 mA.
Continuing in this manner, you get the values shown in Table 15–1. The wave-
form is plotted as Figure 15–13(c).


20 k
(a)
e
i
(b) Voltage
e (V)
1 2
0
90
90
3 4
t (s)
60
30
60
30
5
7 8 9 101112
6
11
4.5
4.5
7
8
9
10
12
Direction
i (mA)
t (μs)
(c) Current
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–13
CircuitSim 15-5 
t (s)
e (V)
i (mA)
0
0
0
1
30
1.5
2
60
3.0
3
90
4.5
4
60
3.0
5
30
1.5
6
0
0
7
30
1.5
8
60
3.0
9
90
4.5
10
60
3.0
11
30
1.5
12
0
0
TABLE 15–1
Values for Example 15–1
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Periodic waveforms (i.e., waveforms that repeat at regular intervals), regardless
of their waveshape, may be described by a group of attributes such as frequency,
period, amplitude, peak value, and so on.
Frequency
The number of cycles per second of a waveform is deﬁned as its frequency. In
Figure 15–14(a), one cycle occurs in one second; thus its frequency is one
cycle per second. Similarly, the frequency of (b) is two cycles per second and
that of (c) is 60 cycles per second. Frequency is denoted by the lowercase letter
f. In the SI system, its unit is the hertz (Hz, named in honor of pioneer
researcher Heinrich Hertz, 1857–1894). By deﬁnition,
1 Hz  1 cycle per second
(15–1)
Thus, the examples depicted in Figure 15–14 represent 1 Hz, 2 Hz, and 60 Hz,
respectively.
492
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
1. Let the source voltage of Figure 15–11 be the waveform of Figure 15–9. If
R  2.5 k, determine the current at t  0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 3, 4.5, and 5.25 ms.
2. For Figure 15–13, if R  180 , determine the current at t  1.5, 3, 7.5,
and 9 s.
Answers
1. 0, 8, 14, 16, 0, 16, 11.2 (all mA)
2. 0.25, 0.5, 0.25, 0.5 (all A)
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
15.4 Frequency,
Period,
Amplitude, and
Peak Value
1 second
Cycle
Cycle
1 second
Cycle
60 Cycles
t
1 second
Cycle
• • •
• • •
(a) 1 cycle per second = 1 Hz
(b) 2 cycles per second = 2 Hz
(c) 60 cycles per second = 60 Hz
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–14
Frequency is measured in hertz (Hz).
The range of frequencies is immense. Power line frequencies, for example,
are 60 Hz in many parts of the world (the USA and Canada for example) and
50 Hz in others. Audible sound frequencies range from about 20 Hz to about
20 kHz. The standard AM radio band occupies from 550 kHz to 1.6 MHz,
while the FM band extends from 88 MHz to 108 MHz. TV transmissions
occupy several bands in the 54-MHz to 890-MHz range. Above 300 GHz are
optical and X-ray frequencies.
Period
The period, T, of a waveform (Figure 15–15) is the duration of one cycle. It is
the inverse of frequency. To illustrate, consider again Figure 15–14. In (a), the
frequency is 1 cycle per second; thus, the duration of each cycle is T  1 s. In (b),
t
Period, T
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–15
Period, T is the duration of
one cycle, measured in seconds.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the frequency is two cycles per second; thus, the duration of each cycle is 
T  12 s, and so on. In general,
T  	1
f
	
(s)
(15–2)
and
f  	T
1
	
(Hz)
(15–3)
Note that these deﬁnitions are independent of waveshape.
Section 15.4 | Frequency, Period, Amplitude, and Peak Value
493
EXAMPLE 15–2        
a. What is the period of a 50-Hz voltage?
b. What is the period of a 1-MHz current?
Solution
a. T  	1
f
	  	
50
1
Hz
	  20 ms
b. T  	1
f
	  	
1 
 1
1
06 Hz
	  1 s
EXAMPLE 15–3        
Figure 15–16 shows an oscilloscope trace of a square wave. Controls have been
set such that each horizontal division represents 50 s. Determine the wave-
form’s frequency.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–16
The concepts of frequency and period apply also to nonsinusoidal
waveforms. Here, T  4 div 
 50 sdiv  200 s.
Solution
Since the wave repeats itself every 200 s, its period is 200 s and
f  		
200 
1
106 s
	  5 kHz
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The period of a waveform can be measured between any two correspond-
ing points (Figure 15–17). Often it is measured between zero points or peak
points because they are easy to establish on an oscilloscope trace.
494
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
EXAMPLE 15–4       
Determine the period and frequency of the waveform of Figure 15–18.
Solution
Time interval T1 does not represent a period as it is not measured
between corresponding points. Interval T2, however, is. Thus, T  10 ms and
f  	T
1
	  		
10 
1
103 s
	  100 Hz
t
T
(Between
peaks)
T
(Between zero
points)
T
(Any two
identical points)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–17
Period may be measured between any two corresponding points.
t
T2 = 10 ms
T1 = 8 ms
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–18
CircuitSim 15-6 
Amplitude and Peak-to-Peak Value
The amplitude of a sine wave is the distance from its average to its peak. Thus,
the amplitude of the voltage in Figures 15–19(a) and (b) is Em.
Peak-to-peak voltage is also indicated in Figure 15–19(a). It is mea-
sured between peak and trough values. Peak-to-peak voltages are denoted 
Ep-p or Vp-p in this book. (Some authors use Vpk-pk or the like.) Similarly, peak-
to-peak currents are denoted as Ip-p. To illustrate, consider again Figure 15–9.
The amplitude of this voltage is Em  40 V, and its peak-to-peak voltage is 
Ep-p  80 V.
Peak Value
The peak value of a voltage or current is its maximum value with respect to
zero. Consider Figure 15–19(b). Here, a sine wave rides on top of a dc value,
yielding a peak that is the sum of the dc voltage and the ac waveform ampli-
tude. For the case indicated, the peak voltage is E  Em.
t
0
v
Em
Ep–p
Em
(a)
FIGURE 15–19
Deﬁnitions.
t
v
E
Em
(b)
E  Em
E  Em
Em
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6. For the waveform in Figure 15–21, determine the frequency.
7. Two waveforms have periods of T1  10 ms and T2  30 ms. 
Which has the higher frequency? Compute the frequencies of both 
waveforms.
8. Two sources have frequencies f1 and f2, respectively. If f2  20f1, and T2
is 1 s, what is f1? What is f2?
9. Consider Figure 15–22. What is the frequency of the waveform?
10. For Figure 15–11, if f  20 Hz, what is the current direction at t  12 ms,
37 ms, and 60 ms? Hint: Sketch the waveform and scale the horizontal axis
in ms. The answers should be apparent.
11. A 10-Hz sinusoidal current has a value of 5 amps at t  25 ms. What is its
value at t  75 ms? See Hint in Problem 10.
Section 15.4 | Frequency, Period, Amplitude, and Peak Value
495
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
1. What is the period of an ac power system whose frequency is 60 Hz?
2. If you double the rotational speed of an ac generator, what happens to the
frequency and period of the waveform?
3. If the generator of Figure 15–6 rotates at 3000 rpm, what is the period and
frequency of the resulting voltage? Sketch four cycles and scale the horizon-
tal axis in units of time.
4. For the waveform of Figure 15–9, list all values of time at which e  20 V
and e  35 V. Hint: Sine waves are symmetrical.
5. Which of the waveform pairs of Figure 15–20 are valid combinations? Why?
i


e
(a) Circuit
i
(b)
e
i
(c)
e
i
(d)
e
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–20
Which waveform pairs are valid?
v
1 2
0
3
2
13
t (ms)
3 4
7 8 9 101112
5 6
© Cengage Learning 2013
t
100 ms


i
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–22
FIGURE 15–21
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

496
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
(a) End view showing coil position
N
S
α
Rotation
0°
0
(b) Voltage waveform
90° 180°
270°
360°
α
Em
Em
e
Rotation
e = Emsin α
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–23
Coil voltage versus angular position.
EXAMPLE 15–5       
If the amplitude of the waveform of Figure 15–23(b) is Em  100 V, determine
the coil voltage at 30 and 330.
Solution
At   30°, e  Em sin   100 sin 30°  50 V. At 330°, e  100
sin 330°  50 V. These are shown on the graph of Figure 15–24.
© Cengage Learning 2013
e (V)
0
α
100
100
50 V
30°
330°
50 V
FIGURE 15–24
CircuitSim 15-7 
NOTES...
The derivation of Equation 15–4 
may be found in many advanced
physics books.
The Basic Sine Wave Equation
Consider again the generator of Figure 15–6, reoriented and redrawn in end
view as Figure 15–23. As the coil rotates, the voltage produced is
e  Em sin a
(V)
(15–4)
where Em is the maximum coil voltage and a is the instantaneous angular posi-
tion of the coil—see Note. (For a given generator and rotational velocity, Em is
constant.) Note that a  0 represents the horizontal position of the coil and
that one complete cycle corresponds to 360. Equation 15–4 states that the volt-
age at any point on the sine wave may be found by multiplying Em times the
sine of the angle at that point.
15.5 Angular 
and Graphic
Relationships 
for Sine Waves
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Angular Velocity, 
The rate at which the generator coil rotates is called its angular velocity. If the
coil rotates through an angle of 30 in 1 second, for example, its angular
velocity is 30 per second. Angular velocity is denoted by the Greek letter q
(omega). For the case cited, q  30s. (Normally angular velocity is
expressed in radians per second instead of degrees per second. We will make
this change shortly—see Note.) When you know the angular velocity of a coil
and the length of time that it has rotated, you can compute the angle through
which it has turned. For example, a coil rotating at 30s rotates through an
angle of 30 in 1 second, 60 in 2 seconds, 90 in 3 seconds, and so on. In
general,
a  t
(15–5)
Expressions for t and q can now be found. They are
t  	a
q	
(s)
(15–6)
q  	a
t	
(15–7)
Section 15.5 | Angular and Graphic Relationships for Sine Waves
497
NOTES...
Note as well that Equation 15–5 
to Equation 15–7 also hold when α
is expressed in radians and q in 
radians/second. In fact, it is mostly
with radian measure that we 
use these equations as you will
soon see.
Table 15–2 is a tabulation of voltage versus angle computed from e  100 sin a.
Use your calculator to verify each value, then plot the result on graph paper.
The resulting waveshape should look like Figure 15–24.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
Angle 
Voltage e
0
0
30
50
60
86.6
90
100
120
86.6
150
50
180
0
210
50
240
86.6
270
100
300
86.6
330
50
360
0
TABLE 15–2
Data for Plotting 
e  100 sin 
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To convert from degrees to radians, multiply by p180, while to convert
from radians to degrees, multiply by 180p.
aradians  	
18
p
0°
	 
 adegrees
(15–9)
adegrees  	
18
p
0°
	 
 aradians
(15–10)
Table 15–3 shows selected angles in both measures.
Scientiﬁc calculators can perform these conversions directly; use yours to
conﬁrm the answers of Example 15–7.
498
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
(a)  360° = 2 radians
3
6
0
°
 
o
r
 
2

 
r
a
d
i
a
n
s
 
0
(b) Cycle length scaled in degrees 
and radians
90°
0
180° 270° 360°
/2

2
3/2
(radians)
(degrees)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–26
Radian measure.
Degrees
Radians
30
p6
45
p4
60
p3
90
p2
180
p
270
3p2
360
2p
TABLE 15–3
Selected Angles 
in Degrees and Radians
© Cengage Learning 2013
Radian Measure
In practice, q is usually expressed in radians per second, where radians and
degrees are related by the identity
2p radians  360
(15–8)
One radian therefore equals 3602p  57.296. A full circle, as shown in
Figure 15–26(a), can be designated as either 360 or 2p radians. Likewise, the
cycle length of a sinusoid, shown in Figure 15–26(b), can be stated as either
360 or 2p radians; a half-cycle as 180 or p radians, and so on.
If the coil of Figure 15–23 rotates at 3600 rpm, determine its angular velocity, q,
in degrees per second.
Answer
21 600 degs
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
EXAMPLE 15–6       
If the coil of Figure 15–23 rotates at q  300s, how long does it take to com-
plete one revolution?
Solution
One revolution is 360°. Thus,
t  	a
q
	 
 1.2 s
Since this is one period, we should use the symbol T. Thus, T  1.2 s, as in
Figure 15–25.
360 degrees
		
300	
deg
s
rees
	
t
0
e
T = 1.2 s
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–25
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 15.5 | Angular and Graphic Relationships for Sine Waves
499
Graphing Sine Waves
A sinusoidal waveform can be graphed with its horizontal axis scaled in
degrees, radians, or time. When scaled in degrees or radians, one cycle is
always 360 or 2p radians (Figure 15–27); when scaled in time, it is frequency
dependent, since the length of a cycle depends on the coil’s velocity of rotation
as we saw in Figure 15–8. However, if scaled in terms of period T instead of in
seconds, the waveform is also frequency independent, since one cycle is always
T, as shown in Figure 15–27(c).
When graphing a sine wave, you don’t need many points to get a good sketch:
Values every 45 (one-eighth of a cycle) are generally adequate, Table 15–4. Often,
you can simply “eyeball” the curve as illustrated next in Example 15–8.
(b) Radians
α(°)
360°
0
90
180
270
360
(a) Degrees
α(rad)
2 rad
0
2


2
2
3
(c) Period
t
T (s)
0
4
T
2
T
T
4
3T
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–27
Comparison of various
horizontal scales. Cycle length may be
scaled in degrees, radians, or period. Each
of these is independent of frequency.
 (deg)
 (rad)
t (T)
Value of sin 
0
0
0
0.0
45
p4
T8
0.707
90
p2
T4
1.0
135
3p4
3T8
0.707
180
p
T2
0.0
225
5p4
5T8
0.707
270
3p2
3T4
1.0
315
7p4
7T8
0.707
360
2p
T
0.0
TABLE 15–4
Values for Rapid Sketching
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 15–7        
a. Convert 315 to radians.
b. Convert 5p4 radians to degrees.
Solution
a. aradians  (p180)(315)  5.5 rad
b. adegrees  (180p)(5p4)  225
EXAMPLE 15–8        
Sketch the waveform for a 25-kHz sinusoidal current that has an amplitude of 
4 mA. Scale the axis in seconds.
Solution
For this waveform, T  125 kHz  40 s. Thus,
1. Lay out the time axis with the end of the cycle marked as 40 s, the half-cycle
point as 20 s, the quarter-cycle point as 10 s, and so on (Figure 15–28).
2. The peak value (i.e., 4 mA) occurs at the quarter-cycle point, which is
10 s on the waveform. Likewise, 4 mA occurs at 30 s. Now sketch.
3. Values at other time points can be determined easily if needed. For
example, the value at 5 s can be calculated by noting that 5 s is one-
eighth of a cycle, or 45. Thus, i  4 sin 45 mA  2.83 mA. Alternately,
from Table 15–4, at T8, i  (4 mA)(0.707)  2.83 mA. As many points
as you need can be computed and plotted in this manner.
i (mA)
10
5
0
t (s)
4
2.83
2.83
4
15
3.33 s
30 35
25
40
20
i = 2 mA at
t = 3.33 s
— see text
T = 40 s
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–28
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Sinusoidal Voltages and Currents as Functions of Time
Recall from Equation 15–4, e  Em sin a, and from Equation 15–5, a  qt.
Combining these equations yields
e  Em sin qt
(15–14a)
Similarly,
v  Vm sin qt
(15–14b)
i  Im sin qt
(15–14c)
500
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
4. Values at particular angles can also be located easily. For instance, if you
want a value at 30, the required value is i  4 sin 30 mA  2.0 mA.
To locate this point on the graph, note that 30 is one-twelfth of a cycle or
T12  (40 s)12  3.33 s. The point is shown on Figure 15–28.
Note that what we have done here is probably overkill, as you seldom need
this much detail—it is often adequate to “eyeball” the curve as in Steps 1 and 2.
Relationship between , T, and f
Earlier you learned that one cycle of a sine wave may be represented as either
a  2 rads or t  T s, Figure 15–27. Substituting these into a  qt
(Equation 15–5), you get 2p  qT. Transposing yields
qT  2p (rad)
(15–11)
Thus,
q  	2
T
p	 (rads)
(15–12)
Recall that, f  1T Hz. Substituting this into Equation 15–12 you get
q  2pf (rads)
(15–13)
Note that q is referred to as radian frequency.
15.6 Voltages and
Currents as
Functions of Time
EXAMPLE 15–9       
In some parts of the world, the power system frequency is 60 Hz; in other parts,
it is 50 Hz. Determine q for each.
Solution
For 60 Hz, q  2pf  2p(60)  377 rads. For 50 Hz, q  2pf 
2p(50)  314.2 rads.
1. If q  240 rads, what are T and f ? How many cycles occur in 27 s?
2. If 56 000 cycles occur in 3.5 s, what is q?
Answers
1. 26.18 ms, 38.2 Hz, 1031 cycles
2. 100.5 
 103 rads
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Equations 15–14 may be used to compute voltages or currents at any
instant in time. Usually, q is in radians per second, and thus qt is in radians.
You can work directly in radians or you can convert to degrees. For example,
suppose you want to know the voltage at t  1.25 ms for e  150 sin 628t V.
Working in Rads.
With your calculator in the RAD mode, e  150 sin(628)
(1.25 
 103)  150 sin 0.785 rad  106 V.
Working in Degrees.
0.785 rad  45. Thus, e  150 sin 45  106 V as before.
Section 15.6 | Voltages and Currents as Functions of Time
501
EXAMPLE 15–10        
A 100-Hz sinusoidal voltage source has an amplitude of 150 volts. Write the
equation for e as a function of time.
Solution
q  2pf  2p(100)  628 rads and Em  150 V. Thus, e  Em sin
qt  150 sin 628t V.
EXAMPLE 15–11        
For v  170 sin 2450t, determine v at t  3.65 ms and show the point on the v
waveform.
Solution
q  2450 rads. Therefore, qt  (2450)(3.65 
 10–3)  8.943 rad 
512.4°. Thus, v  170 sin 512.4°  78.8 V. Alternatively, v  170 sin 8.943 
rad  78.8 V. The point is plotted on the waveform in Figure 15–29.
CircuitSim 15-8 
A sinusoidal current has a peak amplitude of 10 amps and a period of 120 ms.
a. Determine its equation as a function of time using Equation 15–14c.
b. Using this equation, compute a table of values at 10-ms intervals and
plot one cycle of the waveform scaled in seconds.
c. Sketch one cycle of the waveform using the procedure of Example 15–8.
(Note how much less work this is.)
Answers
a. i  10 sin 52.36t A
c. Mark the end of the cycle as 120 ms, 1⁄2 cycle as 60 ms, 1⁄4 cycle as 30 ms, and so on.
Draw the sine wave so that it is zero at t  0, 10 A at 30 ms, 0 A at 60 ms, 10 A at
90 ms, and ends at t  120 ms. (See Figure 15–30.)
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
v (V)
170
3.65
t (ms)
78.8 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–29
Determining When a Particular Value Occurs
Sometimes you need to know when a particular value of voltage or current
occurs. Given v  Vm sin a, rewrite this as sin a  vVm. Then,
a  sin1	V
v
m
	
(15–15)
Compute the angle a at which the desired value occurs using the inverse sine
function of your calculator, then determine the time from
t  aq
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Voltages and Currents with Phase Shifts
If a sine wave does not pass through zero at t  0 s as in Figure 15–30, it has a
phase shift.Waveforms may be shifted to the left or to the right (see Figure 15–31).
For a waveform shifted left as in (a),
v  Vm sin(qt  v)
(15–16a)
while, for a waveform shifted right as in (b),
v  Vm sin(qt  v)
(15–16b)
502
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
EXAMPLE 15–12       
A sinusoidal current has an amplitude of 10 A and a period of 0.120 s.
Determine the times at which
a. i  5.0 A,
b. i  5 A.
Solution
a. Consider Figure 15–30. As you can see, there are two points on the
waveform where i  5 A. Let these be denoted t1 and t2, respectively. First,
determine q:
q  	2
T
p	  	
0.1
2
2
p
0 s
	  52.36 rads
Let i  10 sin a A. Now, ﬁnd the angle a1 at which i  5 A:
a1  sin1	I
i
m
	  sin1	
1
5
0
A
A
	  sin10.5  30°  0.5236 rad
Thus, t1  a1q  (0.5236 rad)(52.36 rads)  0.01 s  10 ms. This is
indicated in Figure 15–30. Now consider t2. Because of symmetry, t2 is the
same distance back from the half-cycle point as t1 is in from the beginning
of the cycle. Thus, t2  60 ms  10 ms  50 ms.
b. Similarly, t3 (the ﬁrst point at which i  5 A occurs) is 10 ms past mid-
point, while t4 is 10 ms back from the end of the cycle. Thus, t3  70 ms
and t4  110 ms.
i (A)
10
2
0
6
2
4
6
4
50 70 90 110
t (ms)
8
10
8
10
30
i = 5 A
t1
t3
t2
t4
i = 5 A
i = 5 A
i = 5 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–30
Given v  10 sin 52.36t, determine both occurrences of v  8.66 V.
Answer
80 ms, 100 ms
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
NOTES...
With equations such as 15–16(a) and
(b), it is customary to express qt in
radians and v in degrees, yielding
mixed angular units (as indicated in
the following examples). Although this
is acceptable when the equations are
written in symbolic form, you must
convert both angles to the same unit
(either degrees or radians) before you
make numerical computations. This is
illustrated in Example 15–14.
CircuitSim 15-9 
(a) v = Vm sin(t  q)
q
t (rad)
Vm
(b) v = Vm sin(t  q)
Vm
q
t (rad)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–31
Waveforms with phase shifts. Angle v is normally measured in degrees, yield-
ing mixed angular units. (See Notes.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 15.6 | Voltages and Currents as Functions of Time
503
EXAMPLE 15–13        
Demonstrate that v  20 sin(qt  60), where q  p6 rads (i.e,  30s),
yields the shifted waveform shown in Figure 15–32.
Solution
1. Since qt and 60 are both angles, (qt  60) is also an angle. Let us deﬁne it
as x. Then v  20 sin x, which means that the shifted wave is also sinusoidal.
2. Consider v  sin(qt  60). At t  0 s, v  20 sin(0  60) 
20 sin(60)  17.3 V as indicated in Figure 15–32.
3. Since q  30s, it takes 2 s for qt to reach 60. Thus, at t  2 s, v 
20 sin(60  60)  20 sin 0  0 V, and the waveform passes through
zero at t  2 s as indicated. 
60°
α  ωt
v  20 sin (ωt  60°)
t  2 s
20 sin ( 60°)  17.3V
v
0
20
20
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–32
CircuitSim 15-10
EXAMPLE 15–14        
a. Determine the equation for the waveform of Figure 15–33(a), given 
f  60 Hz. Compute current at t  4 ms.
b. Repeat (a) for Figure 15–33(b).
(a)
i (A)
0
t
2
1
2
1
120°
(b)
i (A)
0
t
2
1
2
1
50°
(c) v = 40°
90°
50°
v
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–33
Solution
a. Im  2 A and q  2p(60)  377 rads. This waveform corresponds to
Figure 15–31(b) with v  120. Therefore,
i  Im sin(qt  v)  2 sin(377t  120) A
At t  4 ms, current is
i  2 sin(377 
 4 ms  120)  2 sin(1.508 rad  120)
 2 sin(86.4  120)  2 sin(33.64)  1.11 A.
As you can see, this example conﬁrms that sin (qt  v) describes the wave-shape
of Figure 15–31(b).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

504
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
b. This waveform matches Figure 15–31(a) as you can see if you extend the
waveform back 90 from its peak as in (c). Note that v  40. Thus,
i  2 sin(377t  40) A
At t  4 ms, current is
i  2 sin(377 
 4 ms  40)  2 sin(126.4)
 1.61 A.
1. Given i  2 sin(377t  60), compute the current at t  3 ms.
2. Sketch each of the following:
a. v  10 sin(qt  20) V.
b. i  80 sin(qt  50) A.
c. i  50 sin(qt  90) A.
d. v  5 sin(qt  180) V.
3. Given i  2 sin(377t  60), determine at what time i  1.8 A.
Answers
1. 1.64 A
2. a. Same as Figure 15–31(a) with Vm  10 V, v  20.
b. Same as Figure 15–31(b) with Im  80 A, v  50.
c. Same as Figure 15–39(b) except use Im  50 A instead of Vm.
d. A negative sine wave with magnitude of 5 V.
3. 0.193 ms
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 7
A phasor is a rotating vector whose projection on a vertical axis can be used to
represent sinusoidally varying quantities. To get at the idea, consider the red line
of length Vm shown in Figure 15–34(a). (It is the phasor.) The vertical projection
of this line (indicated in dotted red) is Vm sin . Now, assume that the phasor
rotates at angular velocity of q rads in the counterclockwise direction. Then, a 
qt, and its vertical projection is Vm sin qt. If we designate this projection (height)
as v, we get v  Vm sin qt, which is the familiar sinusoidal voltage equation.
If you plot a graph of this projection versus a, you get the sine wave of
Figure 15–34(b). Figure 15–35 illustrates the graphing process—see Note.
15.7 Introduction 
to Phasors
Probably the easiest way to deal with shifted waveforms is to use phasors. We
introduce the idea next.
CircuitSim 15-11
(b) Resulting sine wave
(a) Phasor
Vm
2V
Vm
a
j = t
v
v
Amplitude is the
same as the length
of the phasor
j
Vm sin j

Vm
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–34
As the phasor rotates about the origin, its vertical projection creates a sine
wave. (Figure 15–35 illustrates the process.)
NOTES...
There are some good animations on
the Internet that show the process
described here. Search for Phasor
Animation. (Some animations are
better than others. In addition, look
for an animation that shows the
generation of a sine wave, not a
cosine wave.) 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

It shows snapshots of the phasor and the evolving waveform at various instants
of time for a phasor of magnitude Vm  100 V rotating at q  30s. For exam-
ple, compute and plot voltage values at times t  0, 1, 2, and 3 s:
1. At t  0 s, a  0, the phasor is at its 0 position, and its vertical 
projection is v  Vm sin qt  100 sin 0  0 V. The point is thus, at 
the origin.
2. At t  1 s, the phasor has rotated 30 and its vertical projection is v 
100 sin 30  50 V. This point is plotted at a  30 on the horizontal
axis.
3. At t  2 s, a  60, and v  100 sin 60  87 V, which is plotted at a 
60 on the horizontal axis. Similarly, at t  3 s, a  90, and v  100 V.
Continuing in this manner, the complete waveform is evolved.
From the foregoing, we conclude that a sinusoidal waveform can be
created by plotting the vertical projection of a phasor that rotates in the coun-
terclockwise direction at constant angular velocity . If the phasor has a
length of Vm, the waveform represents voltage; if the phasor has a length of
Im, it represents current. Note carefully: Phasors apply only to sinusoidal
waveforms.
Section 15.7 | Introduction to Phasors
505
0
270 300 330 360
0
180
210 240 270
0
120 150 180
90
30
60
0
90
t = 0 s
t = 1 s
t = 2 s
t = 3 s
100 V
100 V
ω
100 V
87 V
50 V
0 V
0 V
50 V
87 V
t = 6 s
t = 5 s
t = 4 s
100 V
ω
100 V
50 V
100 V
t = 7 s
t = 8 s
t = 9 s
100 V
ω
100 V
50 V
87 V
87 V
0 V
t = 10 s
t = 11 s
t = 12 s
ω
100 V
100 V
α (°)
α (°)
α (°)
α (°)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–35
Evolution of the sine wave of Figure 15–34.
NOTES...
1. Although we have indicated
phasor rotation in Figure 15–35 
by a series of “snapshots,” this is
too cumbersome; in practice, we
show only the phasor at its t  0 s
(reference) position and imply rota-
tion rather than show it explicitly.
2. Although we are using maximum
values (Em and Im) here, phasors
are normally drawn in terms of
effective (rms) values (considered
in Section 15.9). For the moment,
we will continue to use maxi-
mum values. We make the
change to rms in Chapter 16.
3. Phasors apply only to sinusoidal
waveforms.
4. In this discussion (for the sake 
of familiarity), we specify q in
degrees per second. Generally,
however, you will use radians per
second. We will make this
change shortly.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Shifted Sine Waves
Phasors may be used to represent shifted waveforms, v  Vm sin(qt  v) or 
i  Im sin(qt  v) as indicated in Figure 15–37. Angle v is the position of the
phasor at t  0 s.
506
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
EXAMPLE 15–15       
Draw the phasor and waveform for current i  25 sin qt mA for f  100 Hz.
Solution
The phasor has a length of 25 mA and is drawn at its t  0 position,
which is zero degrees as indicated in Figure 15–36. Since f  100 Hz, the period
is T  1f  10 ms.
Im = 25 mA

ω
25
0
10
5
25
t (ms)
i (mA)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–36
The reference position of the phasor is its t  0 position.
Im
Im
ωt
ω
(a) i = Im sin(ωt  θ)
2  θ
θ
θ
Im sin θ
Im sin θ
Im
Im
t

(b) i = Im sin(t  q)
2V  q
q
q
Im sin(q)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–37
Phasors for shifted waveforms. Angle v is the position of the phasor at t  0 s.
EXAMPLE 15–16       
Consider v  20 sin(qt  60), where   p6 rads (i.e., 30s). Show that the
phasor of Figure 15–38(a) represents this waveform.
Solution
The phasor has length 20 V and at time t  0 is at –60° as indicated in
(a). Now, as the phasor rotates, it generates a sinusoidal waveform, oscillating
(a) Phasor

60°

20 V
20 sin (60°)
t
60°
20 V
20 V
0
t = 2 s
v (V)
(b) v = 20 sin (ωt  60°), with ω = 30°/s
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–38
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Phase Difference
Phase difference refers to the angular displacement between different waveforms
of the same frequency. Consider Figure 15–40. If the angular displacement is 0
as in (a), the waveforms are said to be in phase; otherwise, they are out of phase.
When describing a phase difference, select one waveform as reference. Other
waveforms then lead, lag, or are in phase with this reference. For example, in (b),
for reasons to be discussed in the next paragraph, the current waveform is said to
lead the voltage waveform, while in (c) the current waveform is said to lag.
Section 15.7 | Introduction to Phasors
507
between 20 V as indicated in (b). Note that the zero crossover point occurs at
t  2 s, since it takes 2 seconds for the phasor to rotate from –60° to 0° at 
30 degrees per second. Now compare the waveform of (b) to the waveform of
Figure 15–32, Example 15–13. They are identical. Thus, the phasor of (a) rep-
resents the shifted waveform v  20 sin(qt  60°).
EXAMPLE 15–17        
With the aid of a phasor, sketch the waveform for v  Vm sin(qt  90).
Solution
Place the phasor at 90° as in Figure 15–39(a). Note that the resultant
waveform (b) is a cosine waveform, that is, v  Vm cos qt. From this, we conclude
that
sin(qt  90)  cos qt
(a) Phasor at 90° position
Vm

ω
ωt
v
v = Vm sin (ωt  90°)
90°
(b) Waveform can also be
described as a cosine wave.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–39
Demonstrating that sin(qt  90)  cos qt.
With the aid of phasors, show that
a. sin(qt  90)  cos qt,
b. sin(qt  180)  sin qt
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 8
v
(a) In phase
i
v
i
(b) Current leads
θ
v
i
(c) Current lags
© Cengage Learning 2013
q
FIGURE 15–40
Illustrating phase differ-
ence. In these examples, voltage is taken 
as reference.
CircuitSim 15-12
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The terms lead and lag can be understood in terms of phasors. If you observe
phasors rotating as in Figure 15–41(a), the one that you see passing ﬁrst is leading
and the other is lagging. By deﬁnition, the waveform generated by the leading
phasor leads the waveform generated by the lagging phasor and vice versa. In
Figure 15–41, phasor Im leads phasor Vm; thus current i(t) leads voltage v(t).
508
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
(a) Im leads Vm
Vm
Im
1

q
(b) Therefore, i(t) leads v(t)
Time
v(t)
i(t)
q
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–41
Deﬁning lead and lag.
NOTES...
1. To determine which waveform
leads and which lags, make a
quick sketch of their phasors, and
the answer will be apparent.
Note also that the terms lead and
lag are relative. In Figure 15–41,
we said that current leads volt-
age; you can just as correctly say
that voltage lags current.
2. When you plot two phasors as
in Figure 15–43(a), the angle
between them is their phase 
difference.
EXAMPLE 15–18       
Voltage and current are out of phase by 40, and voltage lags. Using current as
the reference, sketch the phasor diagram and the corresponding waveforms.
Solution
Since current is the reference, place its phasor in the 0° position and
the voltage phasor at –40°. Figure 15–42 shows the phasors and corresponding
waveforms.
ωt
i(t) = Im sin ωt
v(t) = Vm sin (ωt 2 40°)
Vm
Im
1
40°
40°
Vm sin(240°)
ω
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–42
EXAMPLE 15–19       
Given v  20 sin(qt  30) and i  18 sin(qt  40), draw the phasor diagram,
determine phase relationships, and sketch the waveforms—see Note.
Solution
The phasors are shown in Figure 15–43(a). From these, you can see
that v leads i by 70°. The waveforms are shown in (b).
Vm = 20 V
Im = 18 A

(a)
30°
40° 70°
t
i = 18 sin (ωt  40°)
v = 20 sin (ωt  30°)
(b)
40°
30°
70°
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–43
NOTES...
In all phasor diagrams to this point,
we have used a stylized arrow to
imply phasor rotation. In practice,
however, this is not usually done—
thus, from this point onward, we
will omit it. 
CircuitSim 15-13
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Sometimes voltages and currents are expressed in terms of cos qt rather
than sin qt. As Example 15–17 shows, a cosine wave is a sine wave shifted by
90, or alternatively, a sine wave is a cosine wave shifted by 90. For sines
or cosines with an angle, the following formulas apply.
cos(qt  v)  sin(qt  v  90)
(15–17a)
sin(qt  v)  cos(qt  v  90)
(15–17b)
To illustrate, consider cos(qt  30). From Equation 15–17a, cos(qt  30) 
sin(qt  30  90)  sin(qt  120). Figure 15–45 illustrates this relationship
graphically. The red phasor in (a) generates cos qt as was shown in
Example 15–17. Therefore, the green phasor generates a waveform that leads
it by 30, namely cos(qt  30). For (b), the red phasor generates sin qt, and the
green phasor generates a waveform that leads it by 120, that is, sin(qt  120).
Since the green phasor is the same in both cases, you can see that cos(qt  30) 
sin(qt  120). You may ﬁnd this process easier to apply than trying to remem-
ber Equations 15–17(a) and (b).
Section 15.7 | Introduction to Phasors
509
EXAMPLE 15–20        
Figure 15–44 shows a pair of waveforms v1 and v2 on an oscilloscope. Each
major vertical division represents 20 V and each major division on the horizon-
tal (time) scale represents 20 s. Voltage v1 leads. Prepare a phasor diagram
using v1 as reference. Determine equations for both voltages.
(a) 
© Cengage Learning 2013
Vm1 = 60 V
Vm2 = 40 V

60°
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–44
Solution
From the photograph, the magnitude of v1 is Vm1  3 div 
 20 Vdiv 
60 V. Similarly, Vm2  40 V. Cycle length is T  6 
 20 s  120 s, and the dis-
placement between waveforms is 20 s, which is 1⁄6 of a cycle (i.e., 60°). Selecting
v1 as reference and noting that v2 lags yields the phasors shown in (b). Angular
frequency q  2T  2(120 
 10–6 s)  52.36 
 103 rads. Thus, v1  Vm1
sin qt  60 sin(52.36 
 103t) V and v2  40 sin(52.36 
 103t – 60°) V.
30°
(a)
Generates
cos (ωt  30°)
ωt
60°
0
cos (ωt  30°) = sin (ωt  120°)
(c)
120°
(b)
Generates
sin (ωt  120°)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–45
Using phasors to show that
cos(t  30)  sin(t  120).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

510
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
EXAMPLE 15–21       
Determine the phase angle between v  30 cos(qt  20) and i  25 sin(qt  70).
Solution
i  25 sin(qt  70°) may be represented by a phasor at 70°, and 
v  30 cos(qt  20°) by a phasor at (90°  20°)  110°, Figure 15–46(a).
Thus, v leads i by 40°. Waveforms are shown in (b).
Vm = 30 V
Im = 25 A

70°
20°
110°
40°
(a)
(b)
Phase
displacement
70°
110°
20°
40°
ωt
i = 25 sin (ωt + 70°)
v = 30 cos (ωt + 20°) = 30 sin (ωt + 110°)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–46
Sometimes you encounter negative waveforms such as i  Im sin qt. To
see how to handle these, refer back to Figure 15–36, which shows the wave-
form and phasor for i  Im sin qt. If you multiply this waveform by 1, you
get the inverted waveform Im sin qt of Figure 15–47(a) with corresponding
phasor (b). Note that the phasor is the same as the original phasor except that
it is rotated by 180. This is always true—thus, if you multiply a waveform
by 1, the phasor for the new waveform is 180 rotated from the original
phasor, regardless of the angle of the original phasor.
Im
Im
i
t
(a) i  −Im sin ωt
Im

(b) Phasor
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–47
For a negative sine wave, the phasor is at 180.
EXAMPLE 15–22       
Find the phase relationship between i  4 sin(qt  50) and v  120 sin
(qt  60).
Solution
i  –4 sin(qt  50°) is represented by a phasor at (50° – 180°) 
–130° and v  120 sin(qt – 60°) by a phasor at –60°, Figure 15–48. The phase
difference is 70° and voltage leads. From this, you can see that i can also be
written as i  4 sin(qt – 130°).
Alternatively, you can add the 180 instead of subtracting it. This yields 50 
180  230, which is the same as the 130 that we obtained above.
Im  4 A
Vm  120 V
50°
60°
70°
130°

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–48
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The importance of phasors to ac circuit analysis cannot be overstated—you
will ﬁnd that they are one of your main tools for representing ideas and for
solving problems in later chapters and in practice. (By the time you reach
Section 18.2 of Chapter 18, analysis is done exclusively with phasors.) We will
leave them for the moment, but pick them up again in Chapter 16.
Section 15.7 | Introduction to Phasors
511
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
1. If i  15 sin a mA, compute the current at a  0, 45, 90, 135, 180,
225, 270, 315, and 360.
2. Convert the following angles to radians:
a. 20
c. 120
b. 50
d. 250
3. If a coil rotates at q  p60 radians per millisecond, how many degrees
does it rotate through in 10 ms? In 40 ms? In 150 ms?
4. A current has an amplitude of 50 mA and q  0.2p rads. Sketch the wave-
form with the horizontal axis scaled in
a. degrees
b. radians
c. seconds
5. If 2400 cycles of a waveform occur in 10 ms, what is q in radians per second?
6. A sinusoidal current has a period of 40 ms and an amplitude of 8 A. Write its
equation in the form of i  Im sin qt, with numerical values for Im and q.
7. A current i  Im sin qt has a period of 90 ms. If i  3 A at t  7.5 ms,
what is its equation?
8. Write equations for each of the waveforms in Figure 15–49 with the phase
angle v expressed in degrees and q in rads.
9. Given i  10 sin qt, where f  50 Hz, ﬁnd all occurrences of
a. i  8 A between t  0 and t  40 ms
b. i  5 A between t  0 and t  40 ms
10. Sketch the following waveforms with the horizontal axis scaled in degrees:
a. v1  80 sin(qt  45) V
c. i1  10 cos qt mA
b. v2  40 sin(qt  80) V
d. i2  5 cos(qt  20) mA
11. Given q  p3 rads, determine when voltage ﬁrst crosses through 0 for
a. v1  80 sin(qt  45) V
b. v2  40 sin(qt  80) V
12. Consider the voltages of Question 10:
a. Sketch phasors for v1 and v2.
b. What is the phase difference between v1 and v2?
c. Determine which voltage leads and which lags.
13. Repeat Question 12 for the currents of Question 10.
v (V)
2 μs
t
47 V
(c) f = 100 Hz
v (V)
40
ωt
6

(a) f = 40 Hz
(b) T = 100 ms
i (A)
20
ωt
4

(d) f = 50 kHz
i (A)
i = Im sin (ωt  30°)
ωt
125 A
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–49
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

While we can describe ac quantities in terms of frequency, period, instanta-
neous value, and other attributes, we do not yet have any way to give a mean-
ingful value to an ac current or voltage in the same sense that we can say of a
car battery that it has a voltage of 12 volts. This is because ac quantities con-
stantly change, and thus there is no single numerical value that truly repre-
sents a waveform over its complete cycle. For this reason, ac quantities are
generally described by a group of characteristics, including instantaneous,
peak, average, and effective values. The first two of these we have already
seen. In this section, we look at average values; in Section 15.9, we consider
effective values.
Average Values
Many quantities are measured by their average, for instance, test and examina-
tion scores. To find the average of a set of marks for example, you add them,
then divide by the number of items summed. For waveforms, the process is
conceptually the same. For example, to find the average of a waveform, you
can sum the instantaneous values over a full cycle, then divide by the number
of points used. The trouble with this approach is that waveforms do not consist
of discrete values.
Average in Terms of the Area under a Curve
An approach more suitable for use with waveforms is to find the area under the
curve, then divide by the baseline of the curve. To get at the idea, we can use
an analogy. Consider again the technique of computing the average for a set of
numbers. Assume that you earn marks of 80, 60, 60, 95, and 75 on a group of
tests. Your average mark is therefore
average  (80  60  60  95  75)5  74
An alternate way to view these marks is graphically as in Figure 15–50.
The area under this curve can be computed as
area  (80 
 1)  (60 
 2)  (95 
 1)  (75 
 1)
Now divide this by the length of the base, namely 5. Thus,
 74
which is exactly the answer obtained above. That is,
average 	
ar
l
e
e
a
ng
u
t
n
h
d
o
e
f
r
b
c
a
u
s
r
e
ve
	
(15–18)
This result is true in general. Thus, to ﬁnd the average value of a waveform,
divide the area under the waveform by the length of its base. Areas above the
axis are counted as positive, while areas below the axis are counted as nega-
tive. This approach is valid regardless of waveshape.
Average values are also called dc values, because dc meters indicate aver-
age values rather than instantaneous values. Thus, if you measure a non-dc
quantity with a dc meter, the meter will read the average of the waveform, that
is, the value calculated according to Equation 15–18.
(80 
 1)  (60 
 2)  (95 
 1)  (75 
 1)
					
5
512
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
15.8 ac Waveforms
and Average
Value
Grades
1
20
0
60
40
2
4
5
100
80
3
Base = 5
95
75
60
60
80
Test
Marks
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–50
Determining average by
area.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 15.8 | ac Waveforms and Average Value
513
EXAMPLE 15–23        
a. Compute the average for the current waveform of Figure 15–51.
b. If the negative portion of Figure 15–51 is 3 A instead of 1.5 A, what is
the average?
c. If the current is measured by a dc ammeter, what will the ammeter indicate
for each case?
Solution
a. The waveform repeats itself after 7 ms. Thus, T  7 ms and the average is
Iavg 
 	
6 
7
6
	  0 A
b. Iavg 
 	
6
7
A
	  0.857 A
c. A dc ammeter measuring (a) will indicate zero, while for (b) it will indicate
0.857 A.
(2 A 
 3 ms)  (3 A 
 4 ms)
				
7 ms
(2 A 
 3 ms)  (1.5 A 
 4 ms)
				
7 ms
i (A)
1 2
0
1
2
1
t (ms)
2
5 6
1 cycle
8
7
3 4
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–51
EXAMPLE 15–24        
Compute the average value for the waveforms of Figures 15–52(a) and (c).
Sketch the averages for each.
v (V)
1 2
10
0
30
20
3 4
7 8
t (s)
5 6
1 cycle
(a)
Vavg = 16.7 V
10
0
20
(b)
i (mA)
1 2
0
40
20
9
t (s)
40
20
3 4
7 8
5 6
(c)
Iavg = 7.5 mA
10
0
(d)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–52
Solution
For the waveform of (a), T  6 s. Thus,
Vavg
	
100
6
V
s
-s
	 16.7V
The average is shown as (b). For the waveform of (c), T  8 s and
Iavg
	

8
60
	 mA7.5 mA
	1
2
	 (40mA
3s)(20mA
2s)(40mA
2s)
					
8s
(10V
2s)(20V
1s)(30V
2s)(0V
1s)
						
6s
CircuitSim 15-14
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Sine Wave Averages
Because a sine wave is symmetrical, its area below the horizontal axis is the
same as its area above the axis; thus, over a full cycle its net area is zero, inde-
pendent of frequency and phase angle. Thus, the average of sin qt, sin(qt  v),
sin 2qt, cos qt, cos(qt  v), cos 2qt, and so on are each zero. The average of
half a sine wave, however, is not zero. Consider Figure 15–54. The area under
the half-cycle may be found using calculus as
area 
p
0 Im sina da  Im cos a
p
0  2Im
(15–19)
Similarly, the area under a half-cycle of voltage is 2Vm. (If you haven’t studied
calculus, you can approximate this area using numerical methods as described
later in this section.)
Two cases are important in electronics; full-wave average and half-wave
average. The full-wave case is illustrated in Figure 15–55. The area from 0 to
2p is 2(2Im) and the base is 2p. Thus, the average is
Iavg  	
2(
2
2
p
Im)
	  	2
p
Im	  0.637Im
For the half-wave case (Figure 15–56),
Iavg  	
2
2I
p
m	  	I
p
m	  0.318Im
The corresponding expressions for voltage are
Vavg  0.637Vm (full-wave)
Vavg  0.318Vm (half-wave)
Numerical Methods
If the area under a curve cannot be computed exactly, it can be approximated.
One method is to approximate the curve by straight line segments as in
Figure 15–57. (If the straight lines closely ﬁt the curve, the accuracy is very
good.) Each element of area is a trapezoid (b) whose area is its average height
514
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
Determine the averages for Figures 15–53(a) and (b).
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 9
(a)
i (A)
1 2
0
20
8
t (s)
−20
4
7
5 6
3
(b)
v (V)
1 2
10
0
20
7 8 9
t (s)
3 4 5 6
Identical
half circles
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–53
Answers
a. 1.43 A; b. 6.67 V

0

i
Im
Area = 2Im
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–54
Area under a half-cycle.
a
0
p
2p
i
Im
Base
Iavg = 0.637Im
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–55
Full-wave average.
a
0
p
2p
i
Im
Base
Iavg = 0.318Im
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–56
Half-wave average.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

times its base. Thus, A1  1⁄2(y0  y1)x, A2  1⁄2(y1  y2)x, and so on. Total
area is A1  A2  …  Ak  [1⁄2(y0  y1)  1⁄2(y1  y2)  …]x and so on.
Combining terms yields
area 	y
2
0	  y1  y2  …  yk1  	y
2
k	 x
(15–20)
This result is known as the trapezoidal rule. Example 15–25 illustrates
its use.
Section 15.8 | ac Waveforms and Average Value
515
0
y
y0 y1 y2
yk
x
x
A1 A2
(a) Approximating the curve
y0
y1
x
A1
Actual curve
(b) Element of area
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–57
Determining area using the trapezoidal rule.
EXAMPLE 15–25        
Approximate the area under y  sin(qt  30), Figure 15–58. Use an increment
size of p6 rad, that is, 30.
0

y5 = 0.866
y3 = 0.866
y2 = 0.5
y4 = 1.0
y6 = 0.5
y0 = 0.5
y7 = 0
y1 = 0
y
6

6

2


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–58
Solution
Points on the curve sin(qt – 30°) have been computed by calculator
and plotted as Figure 15–58. Substituting these values into Equation 15–20 yields
area 	1
2
	(0.5)  0  0.5  0.866  1.0  0.866  0.5  	1
2
	(0)	p
6
	 1.823
1. Repeat Example 15–25 using an increment size of p12 rad. What is the
percent error?
2. Approximate the area under v  50 sin(qt  30) from qt  0 to qt  210.
Use an increment size of 12 rad.
Answers
1. 1.855; 0.59%
2. 67.9 (exact 68.3; error  0.6%)
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 10
The exact area (found using calculus) is 1.866; thus, the approximation of
Example 15–25 is in error by 2.3%.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Superimposed ac and dc
Sometimes ac and dc are used in the same circuit. For example, ampliﬁers are
powered by dc, but the signals they amplify are ac. Figure 15–59 shows a
simple circuit with combined ac and dc.
Figure 15–60(c) shows superimposed ac and dc. Since we know that the
average of a sine wave is zero, the average value of the combined waveform
will be its dc component, E. However, peak voltages depend on both compo-
nents as illustrated in (c). Note for the case illustrated that although the wave-
form varies sinusoidally, it does not alternate in polarity since it never changes
polarity to become negative.
516
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals




e
E
v = E + e
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–59
(a) AC alone. E = 0 V.
Vavg = 0 V
T
0
v
Em
Time
2
T
v = e
Em
(b) DC alone. e = 0 V.
Vavg = E
Time
0
v
E
v = E
(c) Superimposed ac and dc.
Vavg = E
Time
0
v
E
E  Em
v = E  e
E  Em
Vavg
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–60
Superimposed dc and ac.
EXAMPLE 15–26       
Draw the waveform for voltage v for the circuit of Figure 15–61(a). Determine
its average, peak, and trough voltages.
Solution
The waveform consists of a 10-V dc value with 15-V ac riding 
on top of it. The average is the dc value, Vavg  10 V. The peak voltage is 
10  15  25 V, while the trough voltage is 10  15  5 V. This waveform
alternates in polarity, although not symmetrically (as is the case when there is
no dc component).




e = 15 sin ωt
E
10 V
v = E + e
(a)
(b)
5 V
Vavg = 10 V
25 V
v (V)
10
0
30
10
20
ωt
15 V
15 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–61
v  10  15 sin t.
Repeat Example 15–26 if the dc source of Figure 15–61 is E  5 V.
Answers
Vavg  5 V; positive peak  10 V; negative trough  20 V
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 11
CircuitSim 15-15
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

While instantaneous, peak, and average values provide useful information
about a waveform, none of them truly represents the ability of the waveform
to do useful work. In this section, we look at a representation that does. It is
called the waveform’s effective value. The concept of effective value is an
important one; in practice, most ac voltages and currents are expressed as
effective values. Effective values are also called rms values for reasons dis-
cussed shortly.
What Is an Effective Value?
An effective value is an equivalent dc value: it tells you how many volts or
amps of dc that a time-varying waveform is equal to in terms of its ability to
produce average power. Effective values depend on the waveform. A familiar
example of such a value is the value of the voltage at the wall outlet in your
home. In North America its value is 120 Vac. This means that the sinusoidal
voltage at the wall outlets of your home is capable of producing the same aver-
age power as 120 volts of steady dc.
Effective Values for Sine Waves
The effective value of a waveform can be determined using the circuits of
Figure 15–62. Consider a sinusoidally varying current, i(t). By deﬁnition, the
effective value of i is that value of dc current that produces the same average
power. Consider (b). Let the dc source be adjusted until its average power is
the same as the average power in (a). The resulting dc current is then the effec-
tive value of the current of (a). To determine this value, determine the average
power for both cases, then equate them.
First, consider the dc case. Since current is constant, power is constant, and
average power is
Pavg  P  I2R
(15–21)
Now consider the ac case. Power to the resistor at any value of time is p(t) 
i2R, where i is the instantaneous value of current. A sketch of p(t) is shown in
Figure 15–62(a), obtained by squaring values of current at various points
along the axis, then multiplying by R. Average power is the average of p(t).
Since i  Im sin qt,
p(t)  i2R
 (Im sin qt)2R  Im2R sin2qt
(15–22)
 Im2R	1
2
	(1  cos 2qt)
Section 15.9 | Effective (RMS) Values
517
15.9 Effective (RMS)
Values


R
(a) ac Circuit
e
i
t
p(t)
p(t)
i(t)
Im2R
Pavg = Im2R
2
p(t) = i2R. Therefore, p(t) varies cyclically.
R
(b) dc Circuit
E
I
t
P
P
P = I2R. Therefore, P is constant.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–62
Determining the effective value of sinusoidal ac.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where we have used the trigonometric identity sin2 qt  1⁄2(1  cos 2qt), from
the mathematics tables inside the front cover of this book. Thus,
p(t)  	
Im
2
2R
	  	
Im
2
2R
	 cos 2qt
(15–23)
To get the average of p(t), note that the average of cos 2qt is zero and thus the
last term of Equation 15–23 drops off, leaving
Pavg  average of p(t)  	
Im
2
2R
	
(15–24)
Now equate Equations 15–21 and 15–24, then cancel R.
I2  	I
2
m2
	
Now take the square root of both sides. Thus,
I 
		
	I
2
m2
	   	
Im
2	
	  0.707Im
Current I is the value that we are looking for; it is the effective value of cur-
rent i. To emphasize that it is an effective value, we will initially use sub-
scripted notation Ieff. Thus,
Ieff  	

Im
2	
	  0.707Im
(15–25)
Effective values for voltage are found in the same way:
Eeff  	

Em
2	
	  0.707Em
(15–26a)
Veff  	

Vm
2	
	  0.707Vm
(15–26b)
As you can see, effective values for sinusoidal waveforms depend only on
magnitude.
518
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
NOTES...
Because ac currents alternate in
direction, you might expect average
power to be zero, with power during
the negative half-cycle being equal
and opposite to power during the
positive half-cycle and hence can-
celling. However this is not true
since, as Equation 15–22 shows,
current is squared, and hence
power is never negative. This is con-
sistent with the idea that insofar as
power dissipation is concerned, the
direction of current through a resis-
tor does not matter (Figure 15–63).
80 
I = 4 A
80 
I = 4 A
(b) P = (4)2(80) = 1280 W
(a) P = (4)2(80) = 1280 W
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–63
Since power depends
only on current magnitude, it is the
same for both current directions.
CircuitSim 15-16
EXAMPLE 15–27       
Determine the effective values of
a. i  10 sin qt A
b. i  50 sin(qt  20) mA
c. v  100 cos 2qt V
Solution
Since effective values depend only on magnitude,
a. Ieff  (0.707)(10 A)  7.07 A
b. Ieff  (0.707)(50 mA)  35.35 mA
c. Veff  (0.707)(100 V)  70.7 V
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To obtain peak values from effective values, rewrite Equations 15–25 and
15–26. Thus,
Im  2	Ieff  1.414Ieff
(15–27)
Em  2	Eeff  1.414Veff
(15–28a)
Vm  2	Veff  1.414Veff
(15–28b)
It is important to note that these relationships hold only for sinusoidal wave-
forms. However, the concept of effective value applies to all waveforms, as we
shall soon see.
Consider again the ac voltage at the wall outlet in your home. Since Eeff 
120 V, Em  (2	)(120 V)  170 V. This means that a sinusoidal voltage alter-
nating between 170 V produces the same average power in a resistive circuit
as 120 V of steady dc (Figure 15–64).
Section 15.9 | Effective (RMS) Values
519
e (V)
0
Time
170
170
(a)
(b)
Time
120 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–64
120 V of steady dc is capable of producing the same average power as
sinusoidal ac with Em  170 V.
General Equation for Effective Values
The 2	 relationship holds only for sinusoidal waveforms. For other wave-
forms, you need a more general formula. Using calculus, it can be shown that
for any waveform
Ieff 	T
1
	

T
0i
2d
t
(15–29)
with a similar equation for voltage. This equation can be used to compute
effective values for any waveform, including sinusoidal. In addition, it leads to
a graphic approach to ﬁnding effective values. In Equation 15–29, the integral
of i2 represents the area under the i2 waveform. Thus,
Ieff 

(15–30)
To compute effective values using this equation, do the following:
Step 1: Square the current (or voltage) curve.
Step 2: Find the area under the squared curve.
Step 3: Divide the area by the length of the curve.
Step 4: Find the square root of the value from Step 3.
This process is easily carried out for rectangular-shaped waveforms since the
area under their squared curves is easy to compute. For other waveforms, you
have to use calculus or approximate the area using numerical methods as in
area under the i2 curve
			
base
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

end-of-chapter Problem 62. For the special case of superimposed ac and dc
(Figure 15–60), Equation 15–29 leads to the following formula:
Ieff  
					
(15–31)
where Idc is the dc current value, Iac is the effective value of the ac component,
and Ieff is the effective value of the combined ac and dc currents. Equations 15–30
and 15–31 also hold for voltage when V is substituted for I.
RMS Values
Consider again Equation 15–30. To use this equation, we compute the root
of the mean square to obtain the effective value. For this reason, effective
values are called root mean square or rms values, and the terms effective
and rms are synonymous. Since, in practice, sinusoidal ac quantities are
almost always expressed and measured as rms values, we shall assume from
here on that, unless otherwise noted, all sinusoidal ac voltages and currents
are rms values.
Idc2  Iac2
520
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
EXAMPLE 15–28       
One cycle of a voltage waveform is shown in Figure 15–65(a). Determine its
effective (rms) value.
v (V)
1 2
10
0
30
20
3 4
10
9
t
10
5
T
(a) Voltage waveform
7 8
6
v2 
2
0
900
400
4
10
t
(b) Squared waveform
8
6
100
0
T = 10
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–65
Solution
Square the voltage waveform point by point, and plot it as in (b).
Apply Equation 15–30:
Veff 


	
3

6
1
0
0
0
	
  19.0 V
Thus, the waveform of Figure 15–65(a) has the same effective value as 19.0 V
of steady dc.
(400 
 4)  (900 
 2)  (100 
 2)  (0 
 2)
					
10
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Dropping the eff and rms Notation
The subscripts eff and rms are not used in practice. Once the concept is famil-
iar, we drop them. From now on, they are implied rather than stated; thus, we
use I instead of Ieff and V instead of Veff.
Section 15.9 | Effective (RMS) Values
521
EXAMPLE 15–29        
Determine the effective (rms) value of the waveform of Figure 15–66(a).
(a)
i (A)
1 2
1
0
3
1
2
2
3 4
t (s)
5 6
1 cycle
8
7
(b)
i2
1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0
t (s)
4
9
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–66
Solution
Square the curve, then apply Equation 15–30. Thus,
Ieff 

	4
8
1	
  2.26 A
(9 
 3)  (1 
 2)  (4 
 3)
			
8
EXAMPLE 15–30        
Compute the rms value of the waveform of Figure 15–61(b).
Solution
Use Equation 15–31 (with I replaced by V ). First, compute the rms
value of the ac component. Vac  0.707 
 15  10.61 V. Now substitute this
into Equation 15–31. Thus,
V
V
V
rms
dc
ac
V





2
2
2
2
10
10 61
14 6
(
)
(
.
)
.
1. Determine the rms value of the current of Figure 15–51.
2. Repeat for the voltage graphed in Figure 15–52(a).
Answers
1. 1.73 A; 2. 20 V
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 12
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

As you will see in Chapter 16, several important circuit effects depend on the 
rate of change of sinusoidal quantities. The rate of change of a quantity is the
slope (i.e., derivative) of its waveform versus time. Consider the waveform of
Figure 15–67. As indicated, the slope is maximum positive at the beginning of
the cycle, zero at both its peaks, maximum negative at the half-cycle crossover
point, and maximum positive at the end of the cycle. This slope is plotted in
Figure 15–68. Note that it is also sinusoidal, but it leads the original waveform
by 90. Thus, if A is a sine wave, its slope B is a cosine wave—see Note. 
522
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
15.10 Rate of Change
of a Sine Wave
(Derivative)
Zero slope
Zero
slope
Maximum
positive slope
Maximum
positive
slope
Maximum
negative
slope
t
© Cengage Learning 2013
Waveform A
Slope
(Waveform B)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–67
Slope at various places
for a sine wave.
FIGURE 15–68
Showing the 90 phase
shift.
NOTES...
The Derivative of a Sine Wave
The result developed intuitively here
can be proven easily using calculus.
To illustrate, consider the waveform
sin qt shown in Figure 15–67. 
The slope of this function is its
derivative. Thus,
Slope  	d
d
	t
	 sin qt  qcos qt
Therefore, the slope of a sine wave
is a cosine wave as depicted in
Figure 15–68.
CircuitSim 15-17
15.11 ac Voltage 
and Current
Measurement
Two of the most important instruments for measuring ac quantities are the mul-
timeter and the oscilloscope. Multimeters read the magnitude of ac voltage and
current, and sometimes frequency. Oscilloscopes show waveshape and period
and permit determination of frequency, phase difference, and so on.
Meters for Voltage and Current Measurement
There are two basic classes of ac meters: one measures rms correctly for sinu-
soidal waveforms only (called “average responding” instruments); the other
measures rms correctly regardless of waveform (called “true rms” meters).
Most common meters are average responding meters.
Average Responding Meters
Average responding meters use a rectiﬁer circuit to convert incoming ac to dc.
They then respond to the average value of the rectiﬁed input. Internal circuitry
then rescales the measured value and displays it as an rms value. However,
since these meters are calibrated for sinusoidal ac only, their readings are
meaningless for all other waveforms. Most low-cost multimeters are average
responding meters.
True RMS Measurement
If you need to measure the rms value of a nonsinusoidal waveform, you need a true
rms meter. A true rms meter indicates true rms voltages and currents regardless of
waveform. For example, for the waveform of Figure 15–64(a), any ac meter will
correctly read 120 V (since it is a sine wave). For the waveform considered in
Example 15–30, a true rms meter (such as that of Figure 15–69) will correctly read
14.6 V, but an average responding meter will yield only a meaningless value. 
Courtesy of Fluke Corporation
FIGURE 15–69
A true rms digital 
multimeter (DMM).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Connecting ac Meters to Measure Voltage and Current
Unlike dc meters, ac meters are not polarity sensitive—that is, you do not need
to be concerned about polarity when connecting an ac meter. For example,
suppose you connect an ac voltmeter to read voltage, then disconnect it,
reverse its leads, reconnect, then read voltage again. Both connections will
yield a positive reading.
Oscilloscopes
Oscilloscopes (frequently referred to as scopes) are used for time domain mea-
surement, that is, waveshape, frequency, period, phase difference, and so on, as
illustrated earlier in Figures 15–16 and 15–44. As indicated, scope screens are
scaled in volts vertically and in time horizontally to permit visual study of wave-
forms and (with the aid of cursors), measurement of waveform values—see Note.
Most modern oscilloscopes use digital technology (rather than the bulky
CRT designs of a few years ago) and have many more features. The scope of
Figure 15–70 for example, is a multichannel digital instrument with multicolored
traces that permits the observation and analysis of many signals simultaneously. 
Section 15.11 | ac Voltage and Current Measurement
523
NOTES...
A series of hands-on, computer-
based  oscilloscope tutorials using
circuit simulation techniques may be
found on our Web site. Go to the
Student Premium Website at 
cengagebrain.com and follow the
links to Lab Pre-Study Simulations—
The Oscilloscope. The simulations
use Multisim.
© Tektronix. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
FIGURE 15–70
An oscilloscope displaying multiple waveforms simultaneously. 
CircuitSim 15-18
Oscilloscopes measure voltage. To measure current, you need to convert
it to an equivalent voltage. The most inexpensive way to do this is to place a
resistor in the circuit (small enough so as to not appreciably disturb the cir-
cuit), measure the voltage across this resistor with the oscilloscope, then use
Ohm’s law to convert the waveform to current. Alternatively, you can use a
current probe that clips over the wire and monitors its magnetic ﬁeld. One type
of current probe uses a Hall effect sensor and can measure a wide range of cur-
rents over a considerable frequency range, including dc. However, these are
quite expensive.
Meter Frequency Considerations
AC meters measure voltage and current only over a limited frequency range,
typically up to a few hundred kilohertz. Note, however, that accuracy may
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

become poorer as frequency gets higher—check your manual. Oscilloscopes,
on the other hand, measure very high frequencies; even moderately priced
oscilloscopes work at frequencies up to hundreds of MHz.
524
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
15.12 Circuit Analysis
Using
Computers
Multisim and PSpice both provide a convenient way to study phase relation-
ships and other aspects of ac waveforms as they both incorporate easy-to-use
graphing facilities. To illustrate, let us graph e1  100 sin qt V and e2  80
sin(qt  60) V and confirm the phase difference by measurement. (Since the
measurement of phase difference is independent of frequency, we can choose
any convenient frequency we want for this simulation. Let us use 500 Hz.) 
Multisim
Select an ac signal voltage source and place it on your screen as in Figure 15–71
(see Note 1). Click Place, select Junction, and add a junction dot above the
source. Repeat for the second source, add grounds, then wire the circuits as
shown. Read Note 2, double-click source 1, then set voltage to 100 and fre-
quency to 500. For source 2, set voltage to 80, frequency to 500, and phase to
60. Click Options, Sheet Properties then Show All to display your circuit’s
node numbers. Click Simulate and select Transient Analysis; in the dialog
box, set TSTOP to 0.002 (to run the solution to 2 ms so that you see a full
cycle) and Minimum number of time points to 200 (see Note 3). Click the
Output tab and select  voltage variables V(1) and V(2) (or nodes $1 and $2 for
legacy users), and click Add—see Notes 4 and 5. When you click Simulate,
you should get the waveforms of Figure 15–71(b) on your screen. (They may
appear on a black background, but you can change that if you like.)
PSPICE
MultiSim
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–71
Studying phase relationships using Multisim.
You can verify the angle between the waveforms using cursors. First, note
that the period T  2 ms  2000 s. (This corresponds to 360.) Click the Show
Grid icon, then the Show Cursors icon. Using the cursors, measure the time
between crossover points as indicated in Figure 15–72. You should get 333 s.
This yields an angular displacement of
v 

 360°  60°
as expected.
333 s
2000 s
NOTES...
1. For this example, use the ac
signal source from the Signal
Sources component bin. To
access it, right-click View and
ensure that Signal Source
Components is selected. Use
your mouse to locate its icon,
then click and position it on 
your screen.
2. To ensure that your source phase
angles are set up correctly, click
Options/Global Preferences then
select the Simulation tab (or the
Parts tab if you are using legacy
software). Look for the small
sinusoidal waveform. Ensure that
the Shift Right button is selected. 
3. Multisim generates time steps
automatically when it plots
waveforms. Sometimes,
however, it does not generate
enough points, and you get a
jagged curve. If this happens,
click Minimum number of time
points and type in a larger
number (say 200).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PSpice
Click the Place Part icon, ensure that the SOURCE library is selected, type
VSIN in the Place Part box, then click the Place Part button. Build the circuit as
shown in Figure 15–73 on your screen. Note the empty parameter boxes beside
each source. Double-click each in turn and enter 0V for the offset, 100V for the
amplitude, and 500Hz for the frequency for Source 1. Similarly enter values for
Source 2. Now double-click the V2 source symbol and in its Property editor
window, ensure that the Parts tab is selected, scroll until you ﬁnd a cell labelled
PHASE, type in 60, click Apply, then close. (You don’t need to do this for Source
1 because PSpice will automatically use the default value of zero degrees.) Click
the New Simulations icon and enter the ﬁle name. When the dialog box opens,
select Time Domain, set TSTOP to 2 ms (to display a full cycle), then OK. Place
voltage markers as shown to automatically plot the traces, then click Run. When
the simulation is complete, the waveforms shown appear. (They may be on a
black background, but you can change that if you like.)
Section 15.12 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
525
4. Node numbers in Figure 15–71
depend on the order in which
you connect wire—thus, your
node numbers may be different
from those shown. However, for
purposes of discussion, we will
use the node numbers as
illustrated.
5. Node numbers help you identify
variables—for example, V(1) is the
voltage (with respect to ground)
at Node 1, V(2) is the voltage at
Node 2, and so on. [For legacy
software users, you need to 
use $1 instead of V(1), etc.]
v
t
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–72
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–73
Studying phase relationships using PSpice.
You can verify the angle between the waveforms using cursors. First, note
that the period T  2 ms  2000 s. (This corresponds to 360.) Now using the
cursors, measure the time between crossover points as indicated in Figure
15–72. You should get 333 s. This yields an angular displacement of
v 

 360°  60°
which agrees with the given sources.
333 s
2000 s
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

526
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
e (V)
1 2
10
0
10
20
20
3 4
7 8
t (ms)
5 6
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–74
FIGURE 15–77
FIGURE 15–78
FIGURE 15–76
FIGURE 15–75
25 
I
40 V
70 V
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
i(t)


e(t)
R
4 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
9 V
6 V
5
0
v
t (ms)
10
© Cengage Learning 2013
3 mA
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14
3 mA
i
t (μs)
© Cengage Learning 2013
Problems
15.1
Introduction
1. What do we mean by “ac voltage?” By “ac current?”
15.2
Generating ac Voltages
2. The waveform of Figure 15–8 is created by a 600-rpm generator. If the speed
of the generator changes so that its cycle time is 50 ms, what is its new speed?
3. a. What do we mean by instantaneous value?
b. For Figure 15–74, determine instantaneous voltages at t  0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, and 8 ms.
15.3
Voltage and Current Conventions for ac
4. Consider the circuit of Figure 15–75. By moving the switch back and forth
between positions 1 and 2, you can create a rectangular ac waveform.
Suppose you let the switch remain in each position for 1 second,
a. Sketch the voltage waveform across the load, complete with numeric
values. Don't forget to scale the time axis.
b. Sketch the load current, complete with numerical values.
5. The source of Figure 15–76 has the waveform of Figure 15–74. Determine
the current at t  0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 ms. Include signs.
15.4
Frequency, Period, Amplitude, and Peak Value
6. For each of the following, determine the period:
a. f  100 Hz
b. f  40 kHz
c. f  200 MHz
7. For each of the following, determine the frequency:
a. T  0.5 s
b. T  100 ms
c. 5T  80 s
8. For a triangular wave, f  1.25 MHz. What is its period? How long does it
take to go through 8 
 107 cycles?
9. Determine the period and frequency for the waveform of Figure 15–77.
10. Determine the period and frequency for the waveform of Figure 15–78. How
many cycles are shown?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11. What is the peak-to-peak voltage for Figure 15–77? What is the peak-to-peak
current of Figure 15–78?
12. For a certain waveform, 625T  12.5 ms. What is the waveform’s period and
frequency?
13. A square wave with a frequency of 847 Hz goes through how many cycles in
2 minutes and 57 seconds?
14. For the waveform of Figure 15–79, determine
a. period
b. frequency
c. peak-to-peak value
15. Two waveforms have periods of T1 and T2. If T1  0.25 T2 and f1  10 kHz,
what are T1, T2, and f2?
16. Two waveforms have frequencies f1 and f2. If T1  4 T2 and waveform 1 is as
shown in Figure 15–77, what is f2?
15.5
Angular and Graphic Relationships for Sine Waves
17. Given voltage v  Vm sin a. If Vm  240 V, what is v at a  37?
18. For the sinusoidal waveform of Figure 15–80,
a. Determine the equation for i.
b. Determine current at all points marked.
19. A sinusoidal voltage has a value of 50 V at a  150. What is Vm?
20. Convert the following angles from radians to degrees:
a. p12
d. 1.43
b. p1.5
e. 17
c. 3p2
f. 32p
21. Convert the following angles from degrees to radians:
a. 10
d. 150
b. 25
e. 350
c. 80
f. 620
22. A 50-kHz sine wave has an amplitude of 150 V. Sketch the waveform with
its axis scaled in microseconds.
23. If the period of the waveform in Figure 15–80 is 180 ms, compute current at
t  30, 75, 140, and 315 ms.
24. A sinusoidal waveform has a period of 60 s and Vm  80 V. Sketch the
waveform. What is its voltage at 4 s?
25. A 20-kHz sine wave has a value of 50 volts at t  5 s. Determine Vm and
sketch the waveform.
26. For the waveform of Figure 15–81, determine v2.
15.6
Voltages and Currents as Functions of Time
27. Calculate q in radians per second for each of the following:
a. T  100 ns
d. period  20 ms
b. f  30 Hz
e. 5 periods in 20 ms
c. 100 cycles in 4 s
28. For each of the following values of q, compute f and T:
a. 100 rads
b. 40 rad in 20 ms
c. 34 
 103 rads
29. Determine equations for sine waves with the following:
a. Vm  170 V, f  60 Hz
c. T  120 s, v  10 V at t  12 s
b. Im  40 A, T  10 ms
Problems 
527
FIGURE 15–81
FIGURE 15–80
FIGURE 15–79
t
75 V
525 s
© Cengage Learning 2013
α
0
40°
50
250
120°
200°
310°
i (A)
© Cengage Learning 2013
α
0 60°
57
330°
v (V)
v2
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

30. Determine f, T, and amplitude for each of the following:
a. v  75 sin 200pt
b. i  8 sin 300t
31. A sine wave has a peak-to-peak voltage of 40 V and T  50 ms. Determine
its equation.
32. Sketch the following waveforms with the horizontal axis scaled in degrees,
radians, and seconds:
a. v  100 sin 200pt V
b. i  90 sin qt mA, T  80 s
33. Given i  47 sin 8260t mA, determine current at t  0 s, 80 s, 410 s, and
1200 s.
34. Given v  100 sin a. Sketch one cycle.
a. Determine at which two angles v  86.6 V.
b. If q  100p60 rads, at which times do these occur?
35. Write equations for the waveforms of Figure 15–82. Express the phase angle
in degrees.
528
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
ωt
i
 5 (mA)
(a) ω  1000 rad/s
π rad
5
ωt
i
 10 A
(b)  T  50 ms
60°
ωt
v
40 V
(c)  f  900 Hz
π rad
4
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–83
FIGURE 15–82
36. Sketch the following waveforms with the horizontal axis scaled in degrees
and seconds:
a. v  100 sin(232.7t  40) V
b. i  20 sin(qt  60) mA, f  200 Hz
37. Given v  5 sin(qt  45). If q  20p rads, what is v at t  20, 75, and
90 ms?
38. Repeat Problem 35 for the waveforms of Figure 15–83.
ωt
v
80 V
(a)  Period  10 μs
320°
ωt
v
100 V
160
μs
(b)  f  833.3 Hz
© Cengage Learning 2013
39. Determine the equation for the waveform shown in Figure 15–84.
40. For the waveform of Figure 15–85, determine i2.
41. Given v  30 sin(qt  45) where q  40p rads. Sketch the waveform. At
what time does v reach 0 V? At what time does it reach 23 V and 23 V?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15.7
Introduction to Phasors
42. For each of the phasors of Figure 15–86, determine the equation for v(t) or
i(t) as applicable, and sketch the waveform.
Problems 
529
FIGURE 15–87
FIGURE 15–86
FIGURE 15–85
FIGURE 15–84
ωt
v
100 V
54°
1620 μs
© Cengage Learning 2013
i1 = 15.6 A
Im sin (260°)
i
0
ωt
Im
i2
180°
350°
© Cengage Learning 2013
Vm = 100 V

70°
(a)
Im = 20 A

40°
(b)
Im = 10 mA

35°
(c)
© Cengage Learning 2013
43. With the aid of phasors, sketch the waveforms for each of the following pairs
and determine the phase difference and which waveform leads:
a. v  100 sin qt
c. i1  40 sin(qt  30)
i  80 sin(qt  20)
i2  50 sin(qt  20)
b. v1  200 sin(qt  30)
d. v  100 sin(qt  140) 
v2  150 sin(qt  30)
i  80 sin(qt  160)
44. Repeat Problem 43 for the following:
a. i  40 sin(qt  80)
c. v  20 cos(qt  10)
v  30 sin(qt  70)
i  15 sin(qt  120)
b. v  20 cos(qt  10)
d. v  80 cos(qt  30)
i  15 sin(qt  10)
i  10 cos(qt  15)
45. For the waveforms in Figure 15–87, determine the phase differences. Which
waveform leads?
46. Draw phasors for the waveforms of Figure 15–87.
15.8
ac Waveforms and Average Value
47. What is the average value of each of the following over an integral number
of cycles?
a. i  5 sin qt
c. v  400 sin(qt  30)
b. i  40 cos qt
d. v  20 cos 2qt
48. Using Equation 15–20, compute the area under the half-cycle of Figure 15–54
using increments of p12 rad.
49. Compute Iavg or Vavg for the waveforms of Figure 15–88.
(a)
ωt
30°
300°
B
A
(b)
ωt
B
A
60°
180°
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

50. For the waveform of Figure 15–89, compute Im.
51. For the circuit of Figure 15–90, e  25 sin qt V and period T  120 ms.
a. Sketch voltage v(t) with the axis scaled in milliseconds.
b. Determine the peak and minimum voltages.
c. Compute v at t  10, 20, 70, and 100 ms.
d. Determine Vavg.
52. Using numerical methods for the curved part of the waveform (with incre-
ment size t  0.25 s), determine the area and the average value for the
waveform of Figure 15–91.
53.
Using calculus, ﬁnd the average value for Figure 15–91.
530
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
i (A)
1 2
1
0
3
1
2
3
2
3 4
7 8 9 10
t (s)
5 6
(a)
v (V)
0
20
20
t (ms)
100
200
(b)
i (A)
0
2
1
ωt
2

2
3
2

Sine
wave
1 cycle
(c)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 15–91
FIGURE 15–90
FIGURE 15–89
FIGURE 15–88
i (A)
Im
Iavg = 10 A
Im
0
t (s)
5 6
1 cycle
4
1 2 3
© Cengage Learning 2013




e
e = 25 sin 	t
15 V
v(t)
© Cengage Learning 2013
6 V
12 V
0
1
2
5
6 V
3 t2
v
t (s)
3
4
© Cengage Learning 2013
15.9
Effective (RMS) Values
54. Determine the effective values of each of the following:
a. v  100 sin qt V
c. v  40 sin(qt  40) V
b. i  8 sin 377t A
d. i  120 cos qt mA
55. Determine the rms values of each for the following:
a. A 12-V battery
c. 10  24 sin qt V
b. 24 sin(qt  73) mA
d. 45  27 cos 2 qt V
56. For a sine wave, Veff  9 V. What is its amplitude?
57. Determine the root mean square values for
a. i  3  2	(4) sin(qt  44) mA
b. Voltage v of Figure 15–92 with e  25 sin qt V
58. Compute the rms values for Figure 15–88(a) and Figure 15–89. For 
Figure 15–89, use Im  30 A.
59. Compute the rms values for the waveforms of Figure 15–92.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60. Compute the effective value for Figure 15–93.
61. Determine the rms value of the waveform of Figure 15–94. Why is it the
same as that of a 24-V battery?
Problems 
531
FIGURE 15–94
FIGURE 15–93
FIGURE 15–92
−12 A
(a)
4 A
0
i
t (μs)
2
6
4
(b)
0
 5 V
30 V
 10 V
1 cycle
v
t (ms)
1
3
2
4
© Cengage Learning 2013
t
v
2 V
0
−10 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
t (ms)
v
24 V
0
1
2
 24 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
62. Compute the rms value of the waveform of Figure 15–52(c). To handle the
triangular portion, use Equation 15–20. Use a time interval t  1 s.
63.
Repeat Problem 62, using calculus to handle the triangular portion.
15.11
ac Voltage and Current Measurement
64. Determine the reading of an average responding ac meter for each of the
following cases. (Note: Meaningless is a valid answer if applicable.) Assume
the frequency is within the range of the instrument.
a. v  153 sin qt V
b. v  2	(120) sin(qt  30) V
c. The waveform of Figure 15–61
d. v  597 cos qt V
65. Repeat Problem 64 using a true rms meter.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15.12
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
Use Multisim or PSpice for the following:
66. Plot the waveform of Problem 37 and, using the cursor, determine voltage at
the times indicated. Compare to answers in Appendix D. Don’t forget to con-
vert the frequency to Hz.
67. Plot the waveform of Problem 41. Using the cursor, determine the times at
which v reaches 0 V, 23 V, and 23 V. Compare to answers in Appendix D.
68. Assume the equations of Problem 43 all represent voltages. For each case,
plot the waveforms, then use the cursor to determine the phase difference
between waveforms. Use f  100 Hz. Compare to answers in Appendix D.
532
Chapter 15 | ac Fundamentals
PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
MultiSim
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. 16.7 ms
2. Frequency doubles, period halves
3. 20 ms; 50 Hz
4. 20 V; 0.5 ms and 2.5 ms; 35 V: 4 ms and 5 ms
5. (c) and (d); Since current is directly proportional to the voltage, it will have
the same waveshape.
6. 250 Hz
7. f1  100 Hz; f2  33.3 Hz
8. 50 kHz and 1 MHz
9. 22.5 Hz
10. At 12 ms, direction →; at 37 ms, direction ←; at 60 ms, →
11. At 75 ms, i  5 A
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
1.
2. a. 0.349
c. 2.09
b. 0.873
d. 4.36
3. 30; 120; 450
4. Same as Figure 15–27 with T  10 s and amplitude  50 mA.
5. 1.508 
 106 rads
6. i  8 sin 157t A
7. i  6 sin 69.81t A
8. a. i  250 sin(251t  30) A
b. i  20 sin(62.8t  45) A
c. v  40 sin(628t  30) V
d. v  80 sin(314 
 103t  36) V
9. a. 2.95 ms; 7.05 ms; 22.95 ms; 27.05 ms
b. 11.67 ms; 18.33 ms; 31.67 ms; 38.33 ms
a (deg)
0
45
90
135
180
225
270
315
360
i (mA)
0
10.6
15
10.6
0
10.6
15
10.6
0
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10.
Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
533
(a)
ωt
v1
80 V
45°
135°
315°
(b)
ωt
v2
40 V
440°
80°
260°
(c)
i1
360°
90°
ωt
10 mA
70°
(d)
t
i2
5 mA
290°
110°
11. a. 2.25 s
b. 1.33 s
12. a.
b. 125
c. v1 leads
13. a.
b. 20
c. i1 leads
1
80°
45°
j
Vm1 5 80 V 
Vm2 5 40 V 
1
70°
j
Im1 5 10 mA 
Im2 5 5 mA 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Capacitive Reactance
Complex Number
Impedance
Inductive Reactance
Phasor Domain
Polar Form
Rectangular Form
Time Domain
I OUTLINE
Complex Number Review
Complex Numbers in 
ac Analysis
R, L, and C Circuits with
Sinusoidal Excitation
Resistance and 
Sinusoidal ac
Inductance and 
Sinusoidal ac
Capacitance and
Sinusoidal ac
The Impedance Concept
Computer Analysis of 
ac Circuits
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• express complex numbers in rectangular and
polar forms,
• represent ac voltage and current phasors as
complex numbers,
• represent ac sources in transformed form,
• add and subtract currents and voltages using
phasors,
• compute inductive and capacitive reactance,
• determine voltages and currents in simple ac
circuits,
• explain the impedance concept,
• determine impedance for R, L, and C circuit
elements,
• determine voltages and currents in simple ac
circuits using the impedance concept,
• use Multisim and PSpice to solve simple ac
circuit problems.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16
R, L, AND C ELEMENTS AND THE 
IMPEDANCE CONCEPT
I
n Chapter 15, you learned how to analyze a few simple ac circuits in the time domain using
voltages and currents expressed as functions of time. However, this is not a very practical
approach. A more practical approach is to represent ac voltages and currents as phasors and
circuit elements as impedances, and to analyze circuits in the phasor domain using complex
algebra. With this approach, ac circuit analysis is handled much like dc circuit analysis, and all
basic relationships and theorems—Ohm’s law, Kirchhoff’s laws, mesh and nodal analysis,
superposition, and so on—apply. The major difference is that ac quantities are complex numbers,
rather than real numbers, as with dc. While this complicates computational details, it does not
alter basic circuit principles. This is the approach used in practice. The basic ideas are devel-
oped in this chapter.
Since phasor analysis and the impedance concept require a familiarity with complex num-
bers, we begin with a short review. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A complex number is a number of the form C  a  jb, where a and b are
real numbers and j  
1. The number a is called the real part of C and b is
called its imaginary part. (In circuit theory, j is used to denote the imaginary
component rather than i to avoid confusion with current i.)
Geometrical Representation
Complex numbers may be represented geometrically, either in rectangular
form or in polar form as points on a two-dimensional plane called the com-
plex plane (Figure 16–1). The complex number C  6  j8, for example, rep-
resents a point whose coordinate on the real axis is 6 and whose coordinate on
the imaginary axis is 8. This form of representation is called the rectangular
form.
Complex numbers may also be represented in polar form by magnitude
and angle. Thus, C  10 ∠53.13 (Figure 16–2) is a complex number with
magnitude 10 and angle 53.13. This magnitude and angle representation is
just an alternate way of specifying the location of the point represented by
C  a  jb.
536
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
Putting It in Perspective
Charles Proteus Steinmetz
CHARLES STEINMETZ WAS BORN IN BRESLAU, Germany, in 1865
and emigrated to the United States in 1889. In 1892, he
began working for the General Electric Company in
Schenectady, New York, where he stayed until his death 
in 1923, and it was there that his work revolutionized ac cir-
cuit analysis. Prior to his time, this analysis had to be carried
out using calculus, a difﬁcult and time-consuming process.
By 1893, however, Steinmetz had reduced the very complex
alternating-current theory to, in his words, “a simple prob-
lem in algebra.” The key concept in this simpliﬁcation 
was the phasor—a representation based on complex num-
bers. By representing voltages and currents as phasors,
Steinmetz was able to deﬁne a quantity called impedance
and then use it to determine voltage and current magnitude
and phase relationships in one algebraic operation.
Steinmetz wrote the seminal textbook on ac analysis
based on his method, but at the time he introduced it, it
was said that he was practically the only person who understood it. Now, however, it is
common knowledge, and the methods devised by Steinmetz form the basis for nearly all ac 
circuit analysis techniques in use today. In this chapter, we learn the method and illustrate its
application to the solution of basic ac circuit problems.
In addition to his work for GE, Charles Steinmetz was a professor of electrical engineering
(1902–1913) and electrophysics (1913–1923) at Union College in Schenectady. I
Library of Congress/digital version by Science Faction/Science
Faction/Getty Images
16.1 Complex
Number Review
FIGURE 16–1
A complex number in 
rectangular form.
j
j

2
0
2
4
6
8
4
8 10
 Real
Axis
6
Imaginary Axis
C = 6  j8
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Conversion between Rectangular and Polar Forms
To convert between forms, note from Figure 16–3 that
C  a  jb
(rectangular form)
(16–1)
C  C ∠v
(polar form)
(16–2)
where C is the magnitude of C. From the geometry of the triangle,
a  C cos v
(16–3a)
b  C sin v
(16–3b)
where
C  
⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
(16–4a)
and
v  tan1b
a

(16–4b)
While Equations 16–3 and 16–4 permit conversion between forms, they
are not used much in computations anymore because modern calculators do the
job automatically. However, we will do one example using them to illustrate
the principles involved.
a2  b2
Section 16.1 | Complex Number Review
537
FIGURE 16–2
A complex number in polar
form.
j
 Real 
Axis
C = 10∠53.13°
10
53.13°
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–3
Polar and rectangular 
equivalence.
j
 Real 
Axis
C = a  jb = C∠θ
θ
C
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 16–1        
Determine rectangular and polar forms for the complex numbers C, D, V, and
W of Figure 16–4(a).
j
1
1
2
3
4
1
1
2
3
4
2
4

4
3
2
3
W
C
D
V
(a) Complex numbers
j

C
(b) In polar form, C = 5∠36.87°
36.87°
5
j

D
(c) In polar form, D = 5.66∠45°
45°
5.66
j

W
(d) In polar form, W = 5.66∠135°
135°
5.66
45°
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

As discussed later in this section, inexpensive calculators are available that
perform such conversions directly—you simply enter the complex number
components and press the conversion key. With these, the problem of deter-
mining angles for numbers such as W in Example 16–1 does not occur; you
just enter 4  j4 and the calculator returns 5.66∠135°.
Powers of j
Powers of j are frequently required in calculations. Here are some useful powers:
j2  (
1)(
1)  1
j3  j2j  j
j4  j2j2  (1) (1)  1
(16–5)
(j)j   j2  1
1
j
  1
j
  j
j
  j
j
2  j
Addition and Subtraction of Complex Numbers
Addition and subtraction of complex numbers can be performed analytically or
graphically. Analytic addition and subtraction are most easily illustrated in rec-
tangular form, while graphical addition and subtraction are best illustrated in polar
form. For analytic addition, add real and imaginary parts separately. Similarly for
subtraction. For graphical addition, add vectorially as in Figure 16–5(a); for sub-
traction, change the sign of the subtrahend, then add, as in Figure 16–5(b).
538
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
Solution
Point C: Real part  4; imaginary part  3. Thus, C  4  j3. In
polar form, C  √⎯
4232
⎯⎯ 5 and vC  tan–1 (34)  36.87°. Thus, C 
5∠36.87° as indicated in (b).
Point D: In rectangular form, D  4  j4. Thus, D  √⎯
42 42
⎯⎯ 5.66 and 
vD  tan1 (44)  45. Therefore, D  5.66∠45, as shown in (c).
Point V: In rectangular form, V  j2. In polar form, V  2∠90.
Point W: In rectangular form, W  4  j4. Thus, W  √⎯
42 42
⎯⎯ 5.66 and
tan1 (44)  45. Inspection of Figure 16–4(d) shows, however, that this
45 angle is the supplementary angle. The actual angle (measured from the pos-
itive horizontal axis) is 135. Thus, W  5.66∠135.
EXAMPLE 16–2       
Given A  2  j1 and B  1  j3, determine their sum and difference analyt-
ically and graphically.
Solution
A  B  (2  j1)  (1  j3)  (2  1)  j(1  3)  3  j4.
A  B  (2  j1)  (1  j3)  (2  1)  j(1  3)  1  j2.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Multiplication and Division of Complex Numbers
These operations are best illustrated using polar representation. For multiplica-
tion, multiply magnitudes and add angles algebraically. For division, divide the
magnitude of the denominator into the magnitude of the numerator, then sub-
tract algebraically the angle of the denominator from that of the numerator.
Thus, given A  A∠vA and B  B∠vB,
A 	 B  ABvA  vB
(16–6)
A/B  ABvA  vB
(16–7)
Section 16.1 | Complex Number Review
539
Graphical addition and subtraction are shown in Figure 16–5.
j
1
1
2
3
4
2
4

3
B
A
(a)
A  B = 3  j4
j
1
1
2
3
2
4

3
B
B
A
(b)
A  (B) = A  B = 1  j2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–5
EXAMPLE 16–3        
Given A  3∠35 and B  2∠20, determine the product A 	 B and the quo-
tient A/B.
Solution
A 	 B  (3∠35°)(2∠20°)  (3)(2)35°  20°  6∠15°
A
B
  
(2
(3
∠
∠

3
2
5
0
°)
°)
  3
2
35°  (20°)  1.5∠55°
EXAMPLE 16–4        
For computations involving purely real, purely imaginary, or small integer num-
bers, it is sometimes more convenient to multiply directly in rectangular form
than it is to convert to polar. Compute the following directly:
a. (j3)(2  j4)
b. (2  j3)(1  j5)
Solution
a. (j3)(2  j4)  (j3)(2)  (j3)(j4)  j6  j212  12  j6
b. (2  j3)(1  j5)  (2)(1)  (2)( j5)  ( j3)(1)  ( j3)( j5)
 2  j10  j3  j215  2  j13  15  13  j13
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Reciprocals
In polar form, the reciprocal of a complex number C  C∠v is

C
1
∠v
  C
1
∠v
(16–8)
Thus,

20∠
1
30°
  0.05∠30°
When you work in rectangular form, you must be somewhat careful—see
the Note.
Complex Conjugates
The conjugate of a complex number (denoted by an asterisk *) is a complex
number with the same real part but the opposite imaginary part. Thus, the 
conjugate of C  C∠v  a  jb is C*  C∠v  a  jb. For example, if 
C  3  j4  5∠53.13, then C*  3  j4  5∠53.13.
Calculators for ac Analysis
The analysis of ac circuits involves a considerable amount of complex
number arithmetic, and you will need a calculator that works easily in both
rectangular and polar forms, and (preferably) displays results in standard
(or near-standard) notation as in Figure 16–6. (There are a number of cal-
culators on the market, so be sure to check with your professors or instruc-
tors before buying to determine what make and model is recommended for
your school. For purposes of illustration, we have selected the Sharp 
EL-506W—see Note. If you have a different calculator, consult its instruc-
tion manual, then follow through the examples. Although details differ, the
concepts will generally be the same.) Computations that you will need to
do in circuit analysis range from simple conversions between forms (as
illustrated in Example 16–5) to rather complex computations (as illustrated
in Example 16–6).
540
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
1. Polar numbers with the same angle can be added or subtracted directly
without conversion to rectangular form. For example, the sum of 
6 ∠36.87 and 4 ∠36.87 is 10 ∠36.87, while the difference is 6 ∠36.87
 4 ∠36.87  2 ∠36.87. By means of sketches, indicate why this 
procedure is valid.
2. To compare methods of multiplication with small integer values, convert
the numbers of Example 16–4 to polar form, multiply them, then convert
the answers back to rectangular form.
Answers
1. Since the numbers have the same angle, their sum also has the same angle and thus,
their magnitudes simply add (or subtract).
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
NOTES...
A common mistake when determin-
ing reciprocals in rectangular form is
to write the reciprocal of a  jb as
. This is not cor-
1
a  jb  1
a  1
jb
this is not equal to 
0.333 
j0.25.
1
3
1
4


j
NOTES...
While preparing this edition, we 
surveyed current users, but found
no consensus about the choice of
calculator. From among the various
choices, we arbitrarily selected 
the Sharp EL-506W for illustrative
purposes. 
rect. To illustrate, consider C  3 
j4. To ﬁnd its reciprocal, enter 3  j4
into your calculator (see section enti-
tled Calculators for ac Analysis), then
press the inverse key. The result is 
Clearly,
1
1
3
4
0.12
0.16.
C




j
j
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

While all calculators with complex number capabilities can easily perform
basic calculations such as those of Example 16–5, there is a great variation in
how easily they handle complex calculations. To illustrate, consider the
expression (9  j2)  10∠30°.  On some calculators, you need intermediate
steps, for example, you need to convert 10∠30° to rectangular in order to per-
form the addition. On other calculators, you can freely mix rectangular and
polar numbers on input. This is illustrated in Figure 16–7.  The answer will be
displayed in either rectangular or polar, depending on what mode you have set.
Section 16.1 | Complex Number Review
541
EXAMPLE 16–5        
Using your calculator,
a. determine the polar form of C  3  j 4,
b. determine the inverse of 3  j 4 with the answer expressed in rectangular
form.
Solution
Consult your manual, then set your calculator for complex number
operation with angles expressed in degrees. Using the following as general
guidelines, proceed as shown:
a. Key in 3, press the  key, key in 4, press the imaginary operator key “i.”
Typically, your display will show 3  4i. Now convert to polar form using
the 
rv procedure detailed in your manual. Depending on your
calculator, the complete answer 5 ∠53.13° may appear on your screen, or
you may have to extract the angle part as a second step—check your
manual for details. 
Sharp EL-506W Procedure:
To select the complex mode, press the following
keys: Mode 3 . Key in 3, press the , key in 4, press the “imaginary” key,
press key 2nd F, press 
rv (i.e., key 8), then the  key. The magnitude 5
appears, Figure 16–6(a). To display the angle, press 2nd F, then 
,
(i.e.,
DEG
5.
rθ
3+4  =
DEG
53.130 10235
rθ
(a)
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
3+4  =
FIGURE 16–6
Converting rectangular to polar form on the Sharp EL-506W. The 
magnitude and angle parts of the answer must be retrieved separately. (a) Showing the
magnitude part of answer (b) Showing the angle part of answer.
b. Key in a left bracket, key in 3, press the minus key (not the 
 key), key in 4,
press the “imaginary” key, then add a right bracket. You should see (3  4i)
on your display. Now invoke the inverse operation. Your calculator should
show (3  4i)1 (or something similar). Press the  key to get the answer
0.12  0.16i. 
Sharp EL-506W Procedure:
After you enter (3  4i), press 2nd F, then x1
(i.e., key 2). This yields (3  4i)1. Press the  key. If your calculator is set to
rectangular, the real part of the answer, 0.12, will appear on your display. Press
2nd F, then the 
,
key to view the imaginary part, 0.16i.  If your calcu-
lator is set to polar, you will get 0.2 ∠53.13°. To convert this to rectangular,
press 2nd F, then 
xy.
18.9969622
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–7
On this calculator, rectan-
gular and polar forms can be mixed freely
on input. (Only the magnitude part of the
answer is shown, as the angle part must be
retrieved separately—recall Figure 16–6.)
the Exp key). The angle part of the answer appears, Figure 16–6(b). Thus, 3 
j4  5 ∠53.13° (rounded to a sensible number of digits).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(In polar form, the answer is 18.997 ∠21.62°.  Note that only the magnitude of the
answer is shown in Figure 16–7. A second step is required to extract the angle.)
Now consider Example 16–6.
542
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
EXAMPLE 16–6       
Reduce the following to polar form.
(6  j5) 
(3
6


j
3
4
0
)
∠
(1
5
0
3
∠
.1
4
3
0
°
°)

Solution
a. Using a calculator with basic capabilities requires a number of intermediate
steps, some of which are shown below.
answer  (6  j5) 
 (6  j5) 
 (6  j5) 
 (6  j5)  1.473∠58.13  (6  j5)  (0.778  j1.251)
 6.778  j3.749  7.75∠28.95
b. While all calculators permit you to solve the problem in small steps as in
(a), others (such as the Sharp EL-506W and the TI-89) permit you to solve
the problem in one step. Using brackets to avoid ambiguity, you can, for
example, key the expression in as follows:
(6  5i)  ((3  4i)(10∠40))  (6  30∠53.13)
When you press the  key (or whatever key your calculator manual
speciﬁes), the expression is evaluated and the answer displayed. If your
calculator is set to polar mode, you will get an answer of 7.75∠28.95°; if
your calculator is set to rectangular mode, you will get 6.778  3.749i.
(5∠53.13)(10∠40)

33.94∠45
(5∠53.13)(10∠40)

24  j24
(5∠53.13)(10∠40)

6  (18  j24)
Representing ac Voltages and Currents by Complex Numbers
As you learned in Chapter 15, ac voltages and currents can be represented as
phasors (see Note 1). Since phasors have magnitude and angle, they can be
viewed as complex numbers. To get at the idea, consider the voltage source of
Figure 16–8(a). Its phasor equivalent (b) has magnitude Em and angle v. It
therefore can be viewed as the complex number
E  Em∠v
(16–9)
16.2 Complex
Numbers 
in ac Analysis


e(t)
(a) e(t) = Em sin (ωt  θ)
(b) E = Em∠θ
E
θ
Em
j

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–8
Representation of a sinusoidal source voltage as a complex number.
NOTES...
1. As you saw in Chapter 15, the
basic deﬁnition of a phasor is a
rotating radius vector with a
length equal to the amplitude
(Em or Im) of the voltage or cur-
rent that it represents. In prac-
tice, however, phasor voltages
and phasor currents are always
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

From this point of view, the sinusoidal voltage e(t)  200 sin(qt  40) 
of Figure 16–9(a) and (b) can be represented by its phasor equivalent, E 
200 V∠40, as in (c).
Section 16.2 | Complex Numbers in ac Analysis
543
(a) e = 200 sin (ωt  40°) V


e
(b) Waveform
ωt
200
e
40°
(c) Phasor equivalent
E = 200 V∠40°
40°
200 V
j

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–9
Transforming e  200 sin (qt  40) V to E  200 V ∠40.
We can take advantage of this equivalence. Rather than show a source as
a time-varying voltage e(t) that we subsequently convert to a phasor, we can
represent the source by its phasor equivalent right from the start. This view-
point is illustrated in Figure 16–10. Since E  200 V∠40, this representation
retains all the original information of Figure 16–9 since the sinusoidal time
variation and its associated angle as illustrated in Figure 16–9(b) are implicit
in the deﬁnition of the phasor.
The idea illustrated in Figure 16–10 is of fundamental importance to circuit
theory. By replacing the time function e(t) with its phasor equivalent E, we have
transformed the source from the time domain to the phasor domain—see Notes 2
and 3. (This is one of Steinmetz’s great contributions to electrical science.)
Circuit Relationships in the Phasor Domain
Before we move on, we should note that both Kirchhoff’s voltage law (KVL)
and Kirchhoff’s current law (KCL) apply in the time domain and in the phasor
domain—see Notes 2 and 3. For example, e  v1  v2 in the time domain can
be transformed to E  V1  V2 in the phasor domain and vice versa. Similarly
for currents. (Although we have stated the preceding result without proof, it
can be proven rigorously—as is done in some advanced circuit theory text-
books.) The value of this approach is illustrated next.
Summing ac Voltages and Currents
Sinusoidal quantities must sometimes be added or subtracted as in Figure 16–11.
Here, we want the sum of e1 and e2, where e1  10 sin qt and e2  15 sin
(qt  60). First, let us illustrate the process in the time domain. The sum of
expressed as rms values. We
will make this change shortly; in
the meantime, there are a few
ideas that we need to explore
using the phasor’s fundamental
deﬁnition.
2. Quantities expressed as time
functions are said to be in the
time domain, while quantities
expressed as phasors are said
to be in the phasor domain.
Thus, e  200 sin (qt  40) 
is in the time domain, while 
its phasor equivalent E 
200 V∠40 is in the phasor
domain.
3. The phasor domain is some-
times referred to as the 
frequency domain.
FIGURE 16–10
Direct transformation 
of the source.


E = 200 V∠40°
Transformed source
© Cengage Learning 2013
e2


e1


v (t)


(a) e1 = 10 sin ωt
e2 = 15 sin (ωt  60°)
17.5 V
13.0 V
(b) Waveforms
60°
90°
ωt
e1 = 10 sin ωt
v = e1  e2
0
e2 = 15 sin (ωt  60°)
360°
180°
270°
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–11
Summing waveforms point by point.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

e1 and e2 can be found by adding waveforms point by point as in Figure
16–11(b). For example, at qt  0, e1  10 sin 0  0, and e2 
15 sin(0  60)  13 V, and their sum is 13 V. Similarly, at qt  90, e1 
10 sin 90  10 V, and e2  15 sin(90  60)  15 sin 150  7.5 V, and
their sum is 17.5 V. Continuing in this manner, the sum of e1  e2 (the green
waveform) is obtained.
As you can see, the process is tedious and provides no analytic expression
for the resulting voltage; thus, it is seldom used. A better way is to transform
the sources and use complex numbers to perform the addition. This is shown
in Figure 16–12. Here, we have replaced voltages e1 and e2 with their phasor
equivalents, E1 and E2, and v with its phasor equivalent, V. Since v  e1  e2,
replacing v, e1, and e2 with their phasor equivalents yields V  E1  E2. Now
V can be found by adding E1 and E2 as complex numbers. Once V is known,
its corresponding time equation and companion waveform can be determined.
This is the procedure used in practice.
544
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
e2


e1


v


(a) Original network.
v(t) = e1(t)  e2(t)
E2


E1


V


(b) Transformed network.
V = E1  E2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–12
Transformed circuit. This is one of the key ideas of sinusoidal circuit analysis.
EXAMPLE 16–7       
Given e1  10 sin qt V and e2  15 sin(qt  60) V as before, determine v and
sketch it.
Solution
e1  10 sin qt V. Thus, E1  10 V∠0.
e2  15 sin(qt  60) V. Thus, E2  15 V∠60.
Transformed sources are shown in Figure 16–13(a) and phasors in (b).
(a) Phasor summation




V = 21.8 V ∠36.6°


10 V∠0°
15 V∠60°
(c) Waveforms: Compare v(t) here
to v(t) in Figure 16–11(b)
60°
ωt
36.6°
e2(t)
e1(t)
v(t)
21.8 V
(b) Phasors
V
E2
E1
36.6°
60°
j
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–13
Note that v(t), determined from phasor V gives the same result as adding e1 and e2 point by point.
CircuitSim 16-1 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.2 | Complex Numbers in ac Analysis
545
V  E1  E2  10∠0  15∠60  21.8 V∠36.6
Thus, v  21.8 sin(qt  36.6) V.
Waveforms are shown in (c). (To verify that this produces the same result
as adding the waveforms point by point, see Practice Problems 2 or the Multisim
simulation CircuitSim 16–1.)
Verify by direct substitution that v  21.8 sin(qt  36.6) V, as in Figure 16–13,
is the sum of e1 and e2. To do this, compute e1 and e2 at a point, add them, then
compare the sum to 21.8 sin(qt  36.6) V computed at the same point. Perform
this computation at qt  30 intervals over the complete cycle to satisfy yourself
that the result is true everywhere. [For example, at qt  0, v  21.8 sin(qt 
36.6)  21.8 sin(36.6)  13 V, as we saw in Figure 16–11.]
Answers
Here are the points on the graph at 30 intervals:
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
qt
0 30
60
90
120 150 180 210
240
270
300
330 360
v
13
20
21.7 17.5 8.66 2.5 13 20 21.7 17.5 8.66
2.5
13
NOTES...
1. Although we use phasors to represent sinusoidal waveforms, it should be
noted that sine waves and phasors are not the same thing. Sinusoidal volt-
ages and currents are real—they are the actual quantities that you measure
with meters and whose waveforms you see on oscilloscopes. Phasors, on
the other hand, are mathematical abstractions that we use to help visualize
relationships and solve problems.
2. To add or subtract sinusoidal voltages or currents, follow the three steps
outlined in Example 16–7. That is,
• convert sine waves to phasors and express them in complex number form,
• add or subtract the complex numbers,
• convert back to time functions if desired.
Representing Phasors as RMS Values
To this point, we have used peak values such as Em, Vm, and Im to represent the
magnitudes of phasor voltages and currents, as this has been most convenient
for our purposes. However, in practice, phasors are always expressed as rms
values. Accordingly, we will now make the change. Thus, from now on, a
phasor such as V  120 V∠0 will be taken to mean 120 V rms at an angle of
zero degrees. If you need to convert this to a time function, ﬁrst multiply the
rms value by √2–, then follow the usual procedure. Thus, the phasor V  120
V∠0, when converted to the time domain, yields v(t)  √2–(120 V) sin qt 
170 sin qt V. See Note 1.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

546
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
EXAMPLE 16–8       
Express the voltage and current of Figure 16–14 in both the time and the phasor
domains. (Remember to use rms values in the phasor domain.)
(a)
ωt
100
v (V)
80°
(b)
ωt
40 mA
i
25°
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–14
Solution
a. Time domain: v  100 sin(qt  80) volts.
Phasor domain: V  (0.707)(100 V ∠80)  70.7 V∠80 (rms).
b. Time domain: i  40 sin(qt  25) mA.
Phasor domain: I  (0.707)(40 mA∠25)  28.3 mA∠25 (rms).
EXAMPLE 16–9       
Consider two currents i1 and i2. If i1  14.14 sin(qt  55) A and i2 
4 sin(qt  15) A:
a. Determine  their sum, i. Work with rms values.
b. If the currents are measured with ammeters, what will be their readings?
Solution
a.
I1  (0.707)(14.14 A)∠55  10 A∠55
I2  (0.707)(4 A)∠15  2.828 A∠15
 I1  I2  10 A∠ 55  2.828 A∠15
 11.3 A∠41.4
i(t)  2(11.3) sin(qt  41.4)  16 sin(qt  41.4) A
b. 10 A, 2.828 A, and 11.3 A.
Example 16–9 illustrates a primary reason why we use rms—it ties in
with standard practice in the sense that all voltmeters and ammeters display
their measurements in rms. Additionally, in real life (after you have gotten
through the learning process), you seldom need to deal explicitly with time
functions; all you really need is magnitude and angle. Thus, very soon, we
will stop working in the time domain entirely and work only with phasors. At
that point, the solution will be complete when we have the answer in the form
I  11.3A∠41.4. (To help focus on rms, voltages and currents in the next
two examples are expressed as an rms value times √2–.)
CircuitSim 16-2 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.2 | Complex Numbers in ac Analysis
547
EXAMPLE 16–10        
For Figure 16–15, v1  2(16) sin qt V, v2  2(24) sin(qt  90) and v3 
2(15) sin(qt  90) V. Determine source voltage e. If measurements are made
with voltmeters, what will the meters indicate?
Solution
The answer can be obtained by KVL. First, convert to phasors. Thus,
V1  16 V ∠0°, V2  24 V ∠90°, and V3  15 V ∠–90°. KVL yields E 
V1  V2  V3  16 V ∠0°  24 V ∠90°  15 V ∠–90°  18.4 V ∠29.4°.
Converting back to a function of time yields e  √2–(18.4) sin(t  29.4°) V.
Voltmeter readings will be 16 V, 24 V, and 15 V for the voltage drops and 18.4 V
for the source.
EXAMPLE 16–11        
For Figure 16–16, i1  2(23) sin qt mA, i2  2(0.29) sin(qt  63) A, and
i3  2(127)  103 sin(qt  72) A. Determine current iT. If currents are
measured with ammeters, what will they indicate?
Solution
Convert to phasors. Thus, I1  23 mA∠0°, I2  0.29 A∠63°, and
I3  127  10–3 A∠72°. KCL yields IT  I1  I2  I3  23 mA∠0° 
290 mA∠63°  127 mA∠–72°  238 mA∠35.4°. Converting back to a function
of time yields iT  2(238) sin(qt  35.4°) mA.  Ammeters would read 23 mA,
290 mA, and 127 mA for the branch currents and 238 mA for the total current.
i1
i2
iT
i3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–16
1. Convert the following to time functions. Values are rms.
a. E  500 mV∠20 b. I  80 A∠40
2. For the circuit of Figure 16–17, using phasors, determine voltage e1. 
If voltages are measured with voltmeters, what will the meters indicate?
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
 v1  
 v3  
e


v2


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–15






e1
e2 = 141.4 sin (ωt  30°) V
v = 170 sin (ωt  60°) V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–17
Answers
1. a. e  707 sin(qt  20) mV b. i  113 sin(qt  40) A
2. e1  221 sin(qt  99.8) V, 156.3 V, 100 V for the sources and 120.2 for their sum.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

548
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
1. Convert the following to polar form:
a. j6
b. j4
c. 3  j3
d. 4  j6
e. 5  j8
f. 1  j2
g. 2  j3
2. Convert the following to rectangular form:
a. 4∠90
b. 3∠0
c. 2∠90
d. 5∠40
e. 6∠120
f. 2.5∠20 
g. 1.75∠160
3. If C  12∠140, what is C?
4. Given: C1  36  j4 and C2  52  j11. Determine C1  C2, C1  C2,
1(C1  C2), and 1(C1  C2). Express in rectangular form.
5. Given: C1  24∠25 and C2  12∠125. Determine C1 	 C2 and C1C2.
6. Compute the following and express answers in rectangular form:
a. 
1
6
0∠

2
j
0
4
°
  (14  j2)
b. (1  j6) 2 

7. For Figure 16–18, determine iT where i1  10 sin qt, i2  20 sin(qt  90),
and i3  5 sin(qt  90).
8. If meters are used to measure the currents of Figure 16–18, what will be their
readings?
(12∠0°)(14  j2)

6  (10∠20°)(2∠10°)
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
i1
iT = i1  i2  i3
i2
i3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–18
R, L, and C circuit elements each have quite different electrical properties.
Resistance, for example, opposes current, while inductance opposes changes in
current, and capacitance opposes changes in voltage. These differences result
in quite different voltage-current relationships as you saw earlier. We now
investigate these relationships for the case of sinusoidal ac. Sine waves have
several important characteristics that you will discover from this investigation:
1. When a circuit consisting of linear circuit elements R, L, and C is con-
nected to a sinusoidal source, all currents and voltages in the circuit will
be sinusoidal and of the same frequency as the source.
2. Since all voltages and currents are sinusoidal functions of the same fre-
quency as the source, it is necessary only to determine their magnitudes
and phase angles to complete the solution.
16.3 R, L, and C
Circuits with
Sinusoidal
Excitation
We begin with a purely resistive circuit. Here, Ohm’s law applies, and thus cur-
rent is directly proportional to voltage. Current variations therefore follow volt-
age variations, reaching their peak when voltage reaches its peak, changing
direction when voltage changes polarity, and so on (Figure 16–19). From this,
we conclude that for a purely resistive circuit, current and voltage are in phase.
Since voltage and current waveforms coincide, their phasors also coincide
(Figure 16–20).
16.4 Resistance and
Sinusoidal ac
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The relationship illustrated in Figure 16–19 may be stated mathematically as
iR  v
R
R  
Vm s
R
in qt
  V
R
m sin qt  Im sin qt
(16–10)
where
Im  VmR
(16–11)
Transposing,
Vm  ImR
(16–12)
The in-phase relationship is true regardless of reference. Thus, if vR 
Vm sin(qt  v), then iR  Im sin(qt  v).
Section 16.4 | Resistance and Sinusoidal ac
549
(a) Source voltage is a sine wave.
Therefore, vR is a sine wave.
e
iR


vR


(b) iR = vR/R. Therefore
iR is a sine wave also.
t
vR
iR
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–19
Ohm’s law applies. Note that current and voltage are in phase.
j

VR
VR
IR
IR
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–20
For a resistor, voltage and
current phasors are in phase.
EXAMPLE 16–12        
For the circuit of Figure 16–19(a), if R  5  and iR  12 sin(qt  18) A,
determine vR.
Solution
vR  RiR  5 × 12 sin(qt – 18°)  60 sin(qt – 18°) V. The waveforms
are shown in Figure 16–21.
ωt
60 V
12 A

2

2
3
2
vR
iR
18°
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–21
1. If vR  150 cos qt V and R  25 k, determine iR and sketch both wave-
forms.
2. If vR  100 sin(qt  30) V and R  0.2 M, determine iR and sketch
both waveforms.
Answers
1. iR  6 cos qt mA. vR and iR are in phase.
2. iR  0.5 sin(qt  30) mA. vR and iR are in phase.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

550
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
Phase Lag in an Inductive Circuit
As you saw in Chapter 13, for an ideal inductor, voltage vL is proportional to the
rate of change of current. Because of this, voltage and current are not in phase as
they are for a resistive circuit. This can be shown with a bit of calculus. From
Figure 16–22, vL  LdiLdt. For a sine wave of current, you get the following
when you differentiate
vL  Ld
d
i
t
L  Ld
d
t
(Im sin qt)  qLIm cos qt  Vm cos qt
Utilizing the trigonometric identity cos qt  sin(qt  90), you can write this as
vL Vm sin(qt  90)
(16–13)
where
Vm  qLIm
(16–14)
Voltage and current waveforms are shown in Figure 16–23, and phasors in
Figure 16–24. As you can see, for a purely inductive circuit, current lags volt-
age by 90 (i.e., 1⁄4 cycle). Alternatively you can say that voltage leads current
by 90.
16.5 Inductance and
Sinusoidal ac
iL
vL = L


L
diL
dt
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–22
Voltage vL is proportional
to the rate of change of current iL.
ωt
Vm
Im
iL
vL
π
2
π
2 π
3 π
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
j

VL
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–23
For inductance, current lags voltage
by 90. Here, iL is reference.
FIGURE 16–24
Phasors for the
waveforms of Figure 16–23 
showing the 90 lag of current.
(b) Waveforms
0
ωt
iL
vL
(a) Current IL always lags
voltage VL by 90°
j

IL
VL
Vm
Im

2

2
3
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–25
Phasors and waveforms when VL is used as reference.
Although we have shown that current lags voltage by 90 for the case
of Figure 16–23, this relationship is true in general, that is, current always
lags voltage by 90 regardless of the choice of reference. This is illustrated in
Figure 16–25. Here, VL is at 0 and IL at 90. Thus, voltage vL will be a sine
wave and current iL a negative cosine wave, that is, iL  Im cos qt. Since iL is
a negative cosine wave, it can also be expressed as iL  Im sin(qt  90).
The waveforms are shown in (b).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Since current always lags voltage by 90 for a pure inductance, you can, if
you know the phase of the voltage, determine the phase of the current, and vice
versa. Thus, if vL is known, iL must lag it by 90, while if iL is known, vL must
lead it by 90.
Inductive Reactance
From Equation 16–14, we see that the ratio Vm to Im is
V
Im
m  qL
(16–15)
The ratio of Vm to Im is deﬁned as inductive reactance and is given the symbol
XL. Since the ratio of volts to amps is ohms, reactance has units of ohms. Thus,
XL  V
Im
m
()
(16–16)
Combining Equations 16–15 and 16–16 yields
XL  qL ()
(16–17)
where q is in radians per second and L is in henries. Reactance XL represents
the opposition that inductance presents to current for the sinusoidal ac case.
We now have everything that we need to solve simple inductive circuits
with sinusoidal excitation; that is, we know that current lags voltage by 90 and
that their amplitudes are related by
Im  V
X
m
L

(16–18)
and
Vm  ImXL
(16–19)
Section 16.5 | Inductance and Sinusoidal ac
551
EXAMPLE 16–13        
The voltage across a 0.2-H inductance is vL  100 sin (400t  70) V.
Determine iL and sketch it.
Solution
q  400 rads. Therefore, XL  qL  (400)(0.2)  80 Ω.
Im  V
X
m
L
  
1
8
0
0
0

V
  1.25 A
The current lags the voltage by 90. Therefore iL  1.25 sin(400t  20) A as
indicated in Figure 16–26.
j

VL = 70.7 V∠70°
IL = 0.884 A∠20°
20°
70°
(a)
(b)
ωt
vL = 100 sin (400t  70°)V
iL = 1.25 sin (400t  20°)A
100 V
1.25 A

2

2
3
2
70°
90°
20°
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–26
With voltage VL at 70°, current IL will be 90° later at –20°.
NOTES...
Remember to show phasors as rms
values. However (by convention),
we draw waveforms using peak
amplitudes—Vm and Im, and so on.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

552
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
EXAMPLE 16–14       
The current through a 0.01-H inductance is iL  20 sin(qt  50) A and f 
60 Hz. Determine vL.
Solution
q  2pf  2p(60)  377 rads
XL  qL  (377)(0.01)  3.77 
Vm  ImXL  (20 A)(3.77 )  75.4 V
Voltage leads current by 90. Thus, vL  75.4 sin(377t  40) V as shown in
Figure 16–27.
(a)
j

VL = 53.3 V   40°
IL = 14.1 A   50°
50°
40°
(b)
ωt
vL = 75.4 sin (ωt  40°)
iL = 20 sin (ωt  50°)
75.4 V
20 A

2

2
3
2
40°
50°
90°
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–27
CircuitSim 16-3 
1. Two inductances are connected in series (Figure 16–28). If e  100 sin qt
and f  10 kHz, determine the current. Sketch voltage and current 
waveforms.
2. The current through a 0.5-H inductance is iL  100 sin(2400t  45) mA.
Determine vL and sketch voltage and current phasors and waveforms.
Answers
1. iL  1.99 sin(qt  90) mA. Waveforms same as Figure 16–25.
2. vL  120 sin(2400t  135 V). See the following ﬁgure for waveforms.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
e(t)
iL


0.2 H
0.6 H
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–28
ωt
π
2
45°
π
2 π
3 π
2
vL
135°
iL
45°
135°

j
VL
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
Variation of Inductive Reactance with Frequency
Since XL  qL  2pfL, inductive reactance is directly proportional to fre-
quency (Figure 16–29). Thus, if frequency is doubled, reactance doubles, while
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

if frequency is halved, reactance halves, and so on. In addition, XL is directly
proportional to inductance. Thus, if inductance is doubled, XL is doubled, and
so on. Note also that at f  0, XL  0 . This means that inductance looks like
a short circuit to dc. (We already concluded this earlier in Chapter 13.)
Section 16.6 | Capacitance and Sinusoidal ac
553
XL (V)
100
0
1500
3000
4500
6000
200
400 500
f (Hz)
7500
300
L2
L1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–29
Variation of XL with frequency. Note that L2  L1.
A coil has 50 ohms inductive reactance. If both the inductance and the fre-
quency are doubled, what is the new XL?
Answer
200 
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
Phase Lead in a Capacitive Circuit
For capacitance, current is proportional to the rate of change of voltage, that
is, iC  C dvCdt [Figure 16–30(a)]. Thus, if vC is a sine wave, you get upon
substitution
iC  Cd
d
v
t
C  Cd
d
t
(Vm sin qt)  qCVm cos qt  Im cos qt
Using the appropriate trigonometric identity, this can be written as
iC  Im sin(qt  90)
(16–20)
where
Im  qCVm
(16–21)
Waveforms are shown in Figure 16–30(b) and phasors in (c). As indicated, for a
purely capacitive circuit, current leads voltage by 90, or alternatively, voltage
16.6 Capacitance and
Sinusoidal ac
(a) iC = C
iC
vC


C
dvC
dt
ωt
Vm
Im
π
2
π
2 π
3 π
2
vC
iC
(b) Waveforms with vC as reference
(c) VC at 0º
j

IC
VC
(d) VC  at −30º
j

IC
VC
30º
60º
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–30
For capacitance, current always leads voltage by 90.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

lags current by 90. This relationship is true regardless of reference. Thus, if the
voltage is known, the current must lead by 90 while if the current is known, the
voltage must lag by 90. For example, if IC is at 60 as in (d), VC must be at 30.
554
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
1. The current source of Figure 16–31(a) is a sine wave. Sketch phasors and
capacitor voltage vC.
2. Refer to the circuit of Figure 16–32(a):
a. Sketch the phasors.
b. Sketch capacitor current iC.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 7
(a)
iC
vC
ig


(b)
ωt
Im

2

0
2
3
2
iC = ig
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–31
(a)
e
iC


(b)
ωt
Em
45°
e
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–32
Answers
1. IC is at 0; VC is at 90; vC is a negative cosine wave.
2. a. VC is at 45 and IC is at 135.
b. Waveforms are the same as for Problem 2, Practice Problems 5, except that 
voltage and current waveforms are interchanged.
Capacitive Reactance
Now consider the relationship between maximum capacitor voltage and current
magnitudes. As we saw in Equation 16–21, they are related by Im  qCVm.
Rearranging, we get VmIm  1qC. The ratio of Vm to Im is deﬁned as capac-
itive reactance and is given the symbol XC. That is,
XC  V
Im
m
()
Since VmIm  1qC, we also get
XC  q
1
C

()
(16–22)
where q is in radians per second and C is in farads. Reactance XC represents
the opposition that capacitance presents to current for the sinusoidal ac case.
It has units of ohms.
We now have everything that we need to solve simple capacitive circuits with
sinusoidal excitation, that is, we know that current leads voltage by 90 and that
Im  V
X
m
C

(16–23)
and
Vm  ImXC
(16–24)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.6 | Capacitance and Sinusoidal ac
555
EXAMPLE 16–15        
The voltage across a 10-F capacitance is vC  100 sin(qt  40) V and 
f  1000 Hz. Determine iC and sketch its waveform.
Solution
q  2pf  2p(1000 Hz)  6283 rads
XC  q
1
C
 
(6283)(1
1
0  106)
  15.92 
Im  V
X
m
C
  
1
1
5
0
.9
0
2
V

  6.28 A
Since current leads voltage by 90, iC  6.28 sin(6283t  50) A as indicated
in Figure 16–33.
(a)
j

IC
VC
40°
50°
(b)
ωt
vC
iC
100 V
6.28 A

3
2

2
50°
40°
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–33
Phasors are not to scale with waveform.
EXAMPLE 16–16        
The current through a 0.1-F capacitance is iC  5 sin(1000t  120) mA.
Determine vC.
Solution
XC  q
1
C
 
 10 k
Thus, Vm  ImXC  (5 mA)(10 k)  50 V. Since voltage lags current by 90,
vC  50 sin(1000t  30) V. Waveforms and phasors are shown in Figure 16–34.
1

(1000 rads)(0.1  106 F)
(a)
j

IC
VC
30°
120°
(b)
ωt
vC
iC
50 V
5 mA
120°
30°
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–34
Phasors are not to scale with waveform.
CircuitSim 16-4 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Variation of Capacitive Reactance with Frequency
Since XC  1qC  12pfC, the opposition that capacitance presents varies
inversely with frequency. This means that the higher the frequency, the lower
the reactance, and vice versa (Figure 16–36). At f  0 (i.e., dc), capacitive reac-
tance is inﬁnite. This means that a capacitance looks like an open circuit to dc.
(We already concluded this earlier in Chapter 10.) Note that XC is also inversely
proportional to capacitance. Thus, if capacitance is doubled, XC is halved, and
so on.
556
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
Two capacitances are connected in parallel (Figure 16–35). If e  100 sin qt V
and f  10 Hz, determine the source current. Sketch current and voltage phasors
and waveforms.
Answer: i  0.942 sin(62.8t  90)  0.942 cos 62.8t A
See Figure 16–30(b) and (c).
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 8
e(t)
i


100 F
50 F
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–35
XC (V)
1
0
1000
2000
3000
3183 V
637 V
797 V
1061 V
1591 V
2
4
5
f (kHz)
3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–36
XC varies inversely with fre-
quency. Values shown are for C  0.05 F.
1. For a pure resistance, vR  100 sin(qt  30) V. If R  2 , what is the
expression for iR?
2. For a pure inductance, vL  100 sin(qt  30) V. If XL  2 , what is the
expression for iL?
3. For a pure capacitance, vC  100 sin(qt  30) V. If XC  2, what is the
expression for iC?
4. If f  100 Hz and XL  400 , what is L?
5. If f  100 Hz and XC  400 , what is C?
6. For each of the phasor sets of Figure 16–37, identify whether the circuit is
resistive, inductive, or capacitive. Justify your answers.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
(a)
V
I
j

(b)
j

I
V
(c)
j

I
V
(d)
j
`
I
V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–37
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 16.7 | The Impedance Concept
557
During the learning process of Sections 16.5 and 16.6, we handled magnitude
and phase analysis separately. However, this is not the way it is done in prac-
tice. In practice, we represent circuit elements by their impedance, and we
determine magnitude and phase relationships in one step. Before we do this,
however, we need to learn how to represent circuit elements as impedances.
Impedance
The opposition that a circuit element presents to current in the phasor domain
is deﬁned as its impedance. The impedance of the element of Figure 16–38,
for example, is the ratio of its voltage phasor to its current phasor. Impedance
is denoted by the boldface, uppercase letter Z. Thus,
Z  V
I

(ohms)
(16–25)
(This equation is sometimes referred to as Ohm’s law for ac circuits.)
Since phasor voltages and currents are complex, Z is also complex. That is,
Z  V
I
  V
I
∠v
(16–26)
where V and I are the rms magnitudes of V and I, respectively, and v is the
angle between them. From Equation 16–26,
Z  Z∠v
(16–27)
where Z  VI. Since V  0.707Vm and I  0.707Im, Z can also be expressed
as VmIm. Once the impedance of a circuit is known, the current and voltage can
be determined using
I  V
Z

(16–28)
and
V  IZ
(16–29)
Let us now determine impedance for the basic circuit elements R, L, and C.
Resistance
For a pure resistance (Figure 16–39), voltage and current are in phase. Thus, if
voltage has an angle v, current will have the same angle. For example, if VR 
VR∠v, then I  I∠v. Substituting into Equation 16–25 yields:
ZR  V
I
R  
V
I
R
∠
∠
v
v
  V
I
R∠0°  R∠0°  R
Thus, the impedance of a resistor is just its resistance. That is,
ZR  R
(16–30)
This agrees with what we know about resistive circuits, that the ratio of volt-
age to current is R and that the angle between them is 0.
Inductance
For a pure inductance, current lags voltage by 90. Assuming a 0 angle for
voltage (we can assume any reference we want because we are interested only
16.7 The Impedance
Concept
NOTES...
Although Z is a complex number, 
it is not a phasor. (Phasors are
complex numbers that are used 
to represent sinusoidally varying
quantities such as voltage and 
current). However, Z does not 
represent anything that varies with
time—thus it is not a phasor.
Z =
ohms
V
I
Z
V
1
2
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–38
Impedance concept.
I
VR


(a) Voltage
and current
(b) Impedance
ZR = R 
FIGURE 16–39
Impedance of a pure 
resistance.
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

558
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
I
VL
(a) Voltage
and current
+
−
(b) Impedance
ZL = jωL
FIGURE 16–40
Impedance of a pure 
inductance.
in the angle between VL and I), we can write VL  VL∠0 and I  I∠90.
The impedance of a pure inductance (Figure 16–40) is therefore
ZL  V
I
L  
I∠
VL

∠
9
0
0
°
°
  V
I
L∠90°  qL∠90°  jqL
where we have used the fact that VLIL  qL. Thus,
ZL  jqL  jXL
(16–31)
since qL is equal to XL.
EXAMPLE 16–17       
Consider again Example 16–13. Given vL  100 sin(400t  70) V and L 
0.2 H, determine iL using the impedance concept.
Solution
See Figure 16–41. Use rms values. Thus,
VL  70.7 V∠70°
and
q  400 rads
ZL  jqL  j(400)(0.2)  j80 
IL  V
ZL
L  
70.7
j8
∠
0
70°
  
7
8
0
0
.7
∠
∠
9
7
0
0
°
°
  0.884 A∠20°
In the time domain, iL  2(0.884) sin(400t  20)  1.25 sin(400t  20) A,
which agrees with our previous solution, Example 16–13.
FIGURE 16–41
IL
VL = 70.7 V∠70°
ZL = j80 


© Cengage Learning 2013
Capacitance
For a pure capacitance, current leads voltage by 90. Its impedance (Figure 16–42)
is therefore
ZC  V
I
C  
V
I∠
C∠
90
0
°
°
  V
I
C∠90°  q
1
C
∠90°  jq
1
C

(ohms)
Thus,
ZC  jq
1
C
  jXC
(ohms)
(16–32)
since 1qC is equal to XC.
ZC = j 1
ωC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–42
Impedance of a pure 
capacitance.
EXAMPLE 16–18       
Given vC  100 sin(qt  40) V, f  1000 Hz, and C  10 F, determine iC in
Figure 16–43.
Solution
q  2pf  2p(1000 Hz)  6283 radss
VC  70.7 V∠40°
FIGURE 16–43
IC


VC = 70.7 V∠40°
ZC = j15.92 
© Cengage Learning 2013
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A Look Ahead
The real power of the impedance method becomes apparent when you consider
complex circuits with elements in series, parallel, and so on. This we do later,
beginning in Chapter 18. Before we do this, however, there are some ideas on
power that you need to know. These are considered in Chapter 17.
Section 16.8 | Computer Analysis of ac Circuits
559
ZC  jq
1
C
  j
6283  1
1
0  106
  j15.92 
IC  V
ZC
C  
70

.7
j
∠
15

.9
4
2
0°
  
1
7
5
0
.
.
9
7
2
∠
∠


4
9
0
0
°
°
  4.442 A∠50°
In the time domain, iC  2(4.442) sin(6283t  50)  6.28 sin(6283t  50)
A, which agrees with our previous solution, in Example 16–15.
1. If IL  5 mA∠60, L  2 mH, and f  10 kHz, what is VL?
2. A capacitor has a reactance of 50  at 1200 Hz. If vC  80 sin 800t V,
what is iC?
Answers
1. 628 mV∠30
2. 0.170 sin(800t  90) A
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 9
Let us now use Multisim and PSpice to verify the assertion of Practice
Problems 2 (Section 16.2) that v(t)  21.8 sin(qt  36.6°) is the sum of e1(t) 
10 sinqt and e2(t)  15 sin(qt  60°). To do this, we will build two circuits on
the screen, one to generate the sum e1(t)  e2(t), and the other to generate the
equivalent voltage v(t)  21.8 sin(qt  36.6°), then compare the waveforms.
Since the process is independent of frequency, we can choose any convenient
frequency, say 500 Hz.
Multisim
Review Multisim Notes 1, 2, and 4, and then create the circuits of Figure 16–44
on your screen. (If you want, you can change the source designations to E1, E2,
and E3 to match the original problem symbols. Double-click a source, select
the Label tab, then change the designation.) Next, place junction dots to create
nodes at the wire ends, then click Options/Sheet Properties/Show All/OK to
display node numbers. Set source values, click Simulate/Analyses/Transient
Analysis, set TSTOP to 0.002 and the Minimum number of time points to
200. Click the Output tab, add variables V(1), V(2), and V(2)  V(1) for dis-
play (see Notes 3 and 5), then click Simulate. Three waveforms appear. Add
grid lines, then (optionally) turn off the select marks and change the back-
ground color to white.
16.8 Computer
Analysis of 
ac Circuits
PSPICE
MultiSim
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Results: Compare the results here to those of Figure 16–11 from earlier in the
chapter. So far, the only waveforms plotted in Figure 16–44 are due to circuit (a).
Click the Show Legend icon and note the legend at the bottom of the screen.
Voltage V(1) represents the voltage at Node 1, which, as you can see, is source
voltage e2. Voltage V(2) represents the voltage at Node 2, which is the sum of e1
and e2. Thus, voltage V(2)  V(1), the difference between the two node voltages,
is source voltage e1. Waveforms are identical to those shown in Figure 16–11
(except that Multisim cannot plot the pre t  0 portion of the traces—however,
see Practice Problems 10). 
Now add the waveform from circuit (b) as follows: click Simulate/
Analyses, then Transient Analysis, select the Output tab, select V(3), click
Add, then Simulate. At ﬁrst glance, it appears that nothing has happened.
However, your legend now shows that V(3), the voltage at Node 3, has been
added. A closer look shows that the color of the “sum” trace has changed.
What has happened is that since V(3) is identical to V(2), Multisim has simply
graphed over the previously plotted trace. Since the two traces coincide per-
fectly, we conclude that the waveforms are identical, thus verifying our asser-
tion of Practice Problems 2.
560
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–44
Using Multisim to demonstrate that 10 sin qt  15 sin (qt  60°) 
21.8 sin (qt  36.6°). 
NOTES...
Multisim
1. As noted in Chapter 15, Multisim source phase angles must be set up cor-
rectly. If you are unsure, click Options/Global Preferences then select the
Simulation tab (or the Parts tab if you are a legacy user). Ensure that the
Shift Right button is selected.
2. Multisim assigns node numbers according to the order in which you wire
up a circuit; thus, the node numbers for your circuit may be different from
those shown in Figure 16–44. For purposes of discussion, however, we will
assume node numbers as in Figure 16–44.
3. Node numbers help you identify variables—for example, V(1) is the voltage
(with respect to ground) at Node 1, V(2) is the voltage at Node 2, and so
on. [Legacy users use $1 instead of V(1), etc.]
4. As described in Chapter 15, Multisim has two ac voltage source types. Be
sure to use Signal_Voltage_Source sources in this example.
5. To create V(2)-V(1), use the Add Expression procedure found in the Output
dialog box. If you have forgotten how, see Appendix A.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PSpice
Create the circuit of Figure 16–45 using source VSIN. Double-click each para-
meter box in turn and key in values for voltage and frequency as indicated.
Double-click the V2 source symbol, and in its Property Editor, scroll to PHASE
and type in 60, click Apply, then close the Property Editor. Similarly, set the
phase angle for source 3 to 36.6. Click the New Simulation Proﬁle icon, choose
Transient, and set TSTOP to 2ms, then click OK. Add differential voltage
markers (probes) across source V1 and ordinary voltage markers elsewhere as
indicated in Figure 16–45. (The differential markers are the ones with the , 
designations.) All markers will be gray, but they will turn color after simulation.
Click the Run icon. 
Section 16.8 | Computer Analysis of ac Circuits
561
In the waveforms that you get from the preceding example, you cannot see the
waveforms before t  0. What if you want to see them? Hint: You can cheat 
a bit here. Note that the waveforms start to repeat at t  2 ms on your plot.
Mentally redeﬁne this as t  0, then rerun the simulation with TSTART set to
0.0015 and TSTOP to 0.004. Redeﬁning the time scale in your mind as above,
you can now see the pre t  0 part of the solution.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 10
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–45
Using PSpice to demonstrate that 10 sin qt  15 sin (qt  60°) 
21.8 sin (qt  36.6°). 
Results: Your graph colors may be different from those shown, but the curves
should be the same. Compare waveforms to those of Figure 16–11 from earlier
in the chapter. (Use the legend at the bottom of the screen to identify wave-
forms on your screen.) Note that results are identical. However, only three
waveforms are visible in spite of the fact that we plotted four. The reason is that
voltages at TP1 and TP2 are identical, and PSpice simply graphed one trace
over the other. Since the two traces coincide perfectly, we conclude that the
waveforms are identical, thus verifying our assertion of Practice Problems 2.
(To conﬁrm this, click the voltage probe at TP2 and delete it. You will see that
voltage V3 has disappeared from your graph legend and the underlying trace,
V2, remains.)
Another Example
PSpice makes it easy to study the response of circuits over a range of frequen-
cies. This is illustrated in Example 16–19.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Phasor Analysis
As a last example, we will show how to use PSpice to perform phasor
analysis—that is, to solve problems with voltages and currents expressed in
phasor form. To illustrate, consider again Example 16–18. Recall that 
VC  70.7 V∠40, C  10 F, and f  1000 Hz. Procedure: Create the
circuit on the screen (Figure 16–47) using source VAC and component
IPRINT (Note 1). Double-click the VAC symbol and in the Property Editor,
set ACMAG to 70.7V and ACPHASE to 40, click Apply, then close the
editor—see Note 2. Double-click IPRINT and in the Property Editor, type
yes into cells AC, MAG, and PHASE. Click Apply and close the editor. Click
the New Simulation Proﬁle icon, enter a name, select AC Sweep/Noise, set
both Start Frequency and End Frequency to 1000Hz, select Linear, then set
Total Points to 1. Run the simulation. When the simulation window opens,
click View, Output File, then scroll to near the end of the file where you
find the answers (see Note 3). The first number is the frequency (1000 Hz),
the second number (IM) is the magnitude of the current (4.442 A), and the
third (IP) is its phase (50 degrees). Thus, IC  4.442 A∠50 as we deter-
mined earlier in Example 16–18.
562
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
EXAMPLE 16–19       
Compute and plot the reactance of a 12-F capacitor over the range 10 Hz to
1000 Hz.
Solution
PSpice has no command to compute reactance; however, you can
calculate voltage and current over the desired frequency range, then plot their
ratio. This gives reactance. Procedure: Create the circuit of Figure 16–46 
on  your screen. (Use source VAC here as it is the source to use for phasor
analyses.) Note its default of 0V. Double-click the default value (not the
symbol) and in the dialog box, enter 120V, then click OK. Click the New
Simulations Proﬁle icon, enter a name, and then in the dialog box that opens,
select AC SweepNoise. For the Start Frequency, key in 10Hz; for the End
Frequency, key 1kHz; set AC Sweep type to Logarithmic, select Decade, and
type 100 into the PtsDecade (points per decade) box. Run the simulation and
a set of empty axes appears. Click Trace, Add Trace and in the dialog box, click
V1(C1), press the  key on the keyboard, then click I(C1) to yield the ratio
V1(C1)I(C1) (which is the capacitor’s reactance). Click OK and PSpice will
compute and plot the capacitor’s reactance versus frequency. Compare its
shape to Figure 16–36. Use the cursor to scale some values off the screen and
verify each point using your calculator and XC  1qC.
FIGURE 16–46
Computing reactance versus frequency for a 12-F capacitor using PSpice.
100 Hz
10 Hz
Capacitor reactance
0
0.5 K
1.0 K
1.5 K
1.0 KHz
V1(C1)/ I(C1)
120 Vac
0 Vdc
V1
+
–
C1
12uF
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
563
FIGURE 16–47
Phasor analysis using PSpice. Component IPRINT is a software ammeter.
(a) Circuit
(b) Ammeter reading
© Cengage Learning 2013
NOTES...
1. Component IPRINT is a software ammeter, found in the SPECIAL parts
library. In this example, we conﬁgure it to display ac current in magnitude
and phase angle format. Make sure that it is connected as shown in 
Figure 16–47, since if it is reversed, the phase angle of the measured 
current will be in error by 180.
2. If you want to display the phase of the source voltage on the schematic as
in Figure 16–47, double-click the source symbol and in the Property Editor
click ACPHASE, Display, then select Value Only.
3. The results displayed by IPRINT are expressed in exponential format. Thus,
frequency is shown as 1.000E03, which is 1.000  103  1000 Hz, and
so on.
Modify Example 16–19 to plot both capacitor current and reactance on the
same graph. You will need to add a second Y-axis for the capacitor current.
(See Appendix A if you need help.)
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 11
16.1
Complex Number Review
1. Convert each of the following to polar form:
a. 5  j12
c. 8  j15
b. 9  j6
d. 10  j4
Problems
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2. Convert each of the following to rectangular form:
a. 6∠30
e. 20∠140
b. 14∠90
f. 12∠30
c. 16∠0
g. 15∠150
d. 6∠150
3. Plot each of the following on the complex plane:
a. 4  j6
c. 6∠90
b. j4
d. 10∠135
4. Simplify the following using powers of j:
a. j(1  j1)
d. ( j4)(j2  4)
b. (j)(2  j5)
e. (2  j3)(3  j4)
c. j[j(1  j6)]
5. Express your answer in rectangular form.
a. (4  j8)  (3  j2)
d. 2.9∠25  7.3∠5
b. (4  j8)  (3  j2)
e. 9.2∠120  (2.6  j4.1)
c. (4.1  j7.6)  12∠20
f.
6. Express your answer in polar form.
a. (37  j9.8)(3.6  j12.3)
c. 
1
4
9
2
.1


j1
j
8
4
.
.
6
8

b. (41.9∠80°)(16  j2)
d. 
42
1
.6
1.

2∠
j1
3
8
8
7
°
.5

7. Reduce each of the following to polar form:
a. 15  j6 

b.
c.

16.2
Complex Numbers in ac Analysis
8. In the manner of Figure 16–10, represent each of the following as transformed
sources—see Notes.
a. e  100 sin(qt  30) V
d. e  50 cos qt V
b. e  15 sin(qt  20) V
e. e  40 sin(qt  120) V
c. e  50 sin(qt  90) V
f. e  80 sin(qt  70) V
9. Determine the sinusoidal equivalent for each of the transformed sources of
Figure 16–48—see Notes.
16  j17  21∠60°

4
18∠40°  18∠40°

7  j12
21∠20°  j41

36∠0°  (1  j12)  11∠40°
18∠40°  (12  j8)

11  j11
1
3
4
1
8
6
j
j
564
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept


10 V∠30°
(a)


15 V∠10°
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–48
NOTES...
The answers given to Problems 8
through 11 assume that you are not
using rms values since we do not
start using rms until later in the
chapter.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10. Given: e1  10 sin(qt  30) V and e2  15 sin(qt  20) V. Determine
their sum v  e1  e2 in the manner of Example 16–7, that is,
a. Convert e1 and e2 to phasor form.
b. Determine V  E1  E2.
c. Convert V to the time domain.
d. Sketch e1, e2, and v as per Figure 16–13.
11. Repeat Problem 10 for v  e1  e2.
Note: For the remaining problems and throughout the remainder of the book,
express phasor quantities as rms values rather than as peak values.
12. Express the voltages and currents of Figure 16–49 as time domain and
phasor domain quantities.
Problems
565
(a)
ωt
70.7
v (V)
(b)
ωt
90
150°
v (V)
(c)
ωt
100
i (mA)
(d)
ωt
10
200°
v (V)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–49
13. For Figure 16–50, i1  25 sin(qt  36) mA and i2  40 cos(qt  10) mA.
a. Determine phasors I1, I2, and IT.
b. Determine the equation for iT in the time domain.
14. For Figure 16–50, iT  50 sin(qt  60) A and i2  20 sin(qt  30) A.
a. Determine phasors IT and I2.
b. Determine I1.
c. From (b), determine the equation for i1.
15. For Figure 16–18, i1  7 sin qt mA, i2  4 sin(qt  90) mA, and i3 
6 sin(qt  90) mA.
a. Determine phasors I1, I2, I3 and IT.
b. Determine the equation for iT in the time domain.
16. For Figure 16–51, iT  38.08 sin(qt  21.8) A, i1  35.36 sin qt A, and i3 
28.28 sin(qt  90) A. Determine the equation for i2.
i1
iT
i2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–50
i1
iT
i2
i3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–51
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16.4 to 16.6
17. For Figure 16–52, R  12 . For each of the following, determine the
unknown current or voltage and sketch.
a. If v  120 sin qt V, ﬁnd i.
b. If v  120 sin(qt  27) V, ﬁnd i.
c. If i  17 sin(qt  56) mA, ﬁnd v.
d. If i  17 cos(qt  67) A, ﬁnd v.
18. Given v  120 sin(qt  52) V and i  15 sin(qt  52) mA,
what is R?
19. Two resistors R1  10 k and R2  12.5 k are in series. If i  14.7 sin
(qt  39) mA,
a. What are vR1 and vR2?
b. Compute vT  vR1  vR2 and compare to vT calculated 
from vT  i RT.
20. The voltage across a certain component is v  120 sin(qt  55) V and its
current is 18 cos(qt  145) mA. Show that the component is a resistor,
and determine its value.
21. For Figure 16–53, Vm  10 V and Im  5 A.
a. If vL  10 sin(qt  60) V, what is iL?
b. If vL  10 sin(qt  15) V, what is iL?
c. If iL  5 cos(qt  60) A, what is vL?
d. If iL  5 sin(qt  10) A, what is vL?
22. What is the reactance of a 0.5-H inductor at
a. 60 Hz
b. 1000 Hz
c. 500 rads
23. For Figure 16–53, e  100 sin qt and L  0.5 H. Determine iL at
a. 60 Hz
b. 1000 Hz
c. 500 rads
24. For Figure 16–53, let L  200 mH.
a. If vL  100 sin377t V, what is iL?
b. If iL  10 sin(2p  400t  60) mA, what is vL?
25. For Figure 16–53, if
a. vL  40 sin(qt  30) V, iL  364 sin(qt  60) mA, and L  2 mH,
what is f?
b. iL  250 sin(qt  40) A, vL  40 sin(qt  v) V, and f  500 kHz,
what are L and v?
26. Repeat Problem 21 if the given voltages and currents are for a capacitor
instead of an inductor.
27. What is the reactance of a 5-F capacitor at
a. 60 Hz
b. 1000 Hz
c. 500 rads
28. For Figure 16–54, e  100 sin qt and C  5 F. Determine iC at
a. 60 Hz
b. 1000 Hz
c. 500 rads
566
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
e
iL


L
vL
+
−
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–53
R
i
e
v
+
−
+
−
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–52
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

29. For Figure 16–54, let C  50 F.
a. If vC  100 sin377t V, what is iC?
b. If iC  10 sin(2p  400t  60) mA, what is vC?
30. For Figure 16–54, if
a. vC  362 sin(qt  33) V, iC  94 sin(qt  57) mA, and C  2.2 mF,
what is f?
b. iC  350 sin(qt  40) mA, vC  3.6 sin(qt  v) V, and f  12 kHz,
what are C and v?
16.7
The Impedance Concept
31. Determine the impedance of each circuit element of Figure 16–55.
Problems
567
48 
(a)
(b) 0.1 H, 60 Hz
(c) 10 F, ω = 2000 rad/s
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–55
32. If E  100 V∠0 is applied across each of the circuit elements of
Figure 16–56:
a. Determine each current in phasor form.
b. Express each current in time domain form.
33. If the current through each circuit element of Figure 16–56 is 0.5 A∠0:
a. Determine each voltage in phasor form.
b. Express each voltage in time domain form.
50 
IR
(a)
j25 
IL
(b)
1j10 
IC
(c)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–56
34. For each of the following, determine the impedance of the circuit element
and state whether it is resistive, inductive, or capacitive.
a. V  240 V∠30, I  4 A∠30.
b. V  40 V∠30, I  4 A∠60.
c. V  60 V∠30, I  4 A∠60.
d. V  140 V∠30, I  14 mA∠120.
e
iC


C
vC
+
−
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–54
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

35. For each circuit of Figure 16–57, determine the unknown.
568
Chapter 16 | R, L, and C Elements and the Impedance Concept
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–58
The source to use here is the power voltage source. 
36. a. If VL  120 V ∠67, L  600 H, and f  10 kHz, what is IL?
b. If IL  48 mA ∠43, L  550 mH, and f  700 Hz, what is VL?
c. If VC  50 V ∠36, C  390 pF, and f  470 kHz, what is IC?
d. If IC  95 mA ∠87, C  6.5 nF, and f  1.2 MHz, what is VC?
16.8
Computer Analysis of ac Circuits
37. Create the circuit of Figure 16–58 on your screen. (To access the power 
ac source, right-click View and ensure that Power Source Components is
selected. Use your mouse to locate its icon on your screen, click and the
source attaches to your pointer. Move it to your workspace screen and click
to place. To locate the ammeter, click View and ensure that Measurement
Components is selected. Use your mouse to locate its icon and place it on
your screen.) Double-click the ammeter symbol and set Mode to AC. Click
the ONOFF power switch to energize the circuit. Compare the measured
reading against the theoretical value.
MultiSim
MultiSim
E
IL = 2 A∠90°
100 V∠0°
(a) L = 0.2 H.
Determine f
IC = 0.4 A∠90°
100 V∠0°
(b) f = 100 Hz.
Determine C
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 16–57
38. Multisim can be used to plot capacitive reactance versus frequency. Create
the Multisim equivalent of the PSpice circuit of Figure 16–46. Click
Simulate, Analyses, AC Analysis, set FSTART to 10 Hz and FSTOP to 1 kHz.
Set Sweep type as Decade and Vertical scale as Linear. Click Output, create
the expression V(1)/I(C1), then click Simulate. You should get a magnitude
graph similar to Figure 16–46 on your screen.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
569
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. a. 6∠90
b. 4∠90
c. 4.24∠45
d. 7.21∠56.3
2. a. j4
b. 3  j0
c. j2
d. 3.83  j3.21
3. 12∠40
4. 88  j7; 16  j15; 0.0113  j 0.0009; 
0.0333  j0.0312
5. 288∠100; 2∠150
6. a. 14.70  j2.17
b. 8.94  j7.28
7. 18.0 sin(qt  56.3)
8. 7.07 A, 14.14 A, and 3.54 A for the branch currents, 12.7 A for total current.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
1. 50 sin(qt  30) A
2. 50 sin(qt  60) A
3. 50 sin(qt  120) A
4. 0.637 H
5. 3.98 F
6. a. Voltage and current are in phase. Therefore, R.
b. Current leads by 90. Therefore, C.
c. Current leads by 90. Therefore, C.
d. Current lags by 90. Therefore, L.
e. 9.43∠122.0
f. 2.24∠63.4
g. 3.61∠123.7
e. 3  j5.20
f. 2.35  j0.855
g. 1.64  j0.599
39. Create the circuit of Figure 16–53 on your screen. Use a source of 100 V∠0,
L  0.2 H, and f  50 Hz. Solve for current IL (magnitude and angle). See
note below.
40. Plot the reactance of a 2.387-H inductor versus frequency from 1 Hz to
500 Hz and compare to Figure 16–29. Use a linear X-axis scale.
41. For the circuit of Problem 39, plot current magnitude versus frequency from
f  1 Hz to f  20 Hz. Measure the current at 10 Hz and verify with your
calculator.
Note: PSpice does not permit sourceinductor loops. To get around this, add a very
small resistor in series, for example, R  0.00001 .
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Active Power
Apparent Power
Average Power
Eddy Currents
Effective Resistance
Instantaneous Power
Power Factor
Power Factor Correction
Power Triangle
Reactive Power
Real Power
Skin Effect
VAR (Volt-Amps Reactive)
Volt-Amperes (VA)
Wattmeter
I OUTLINE
Introduction
Power to a Resistive Load
Power to an Inductive
Load
Power to a Capacitive
Load
Power in More Complex
Circuits
Apparent Power
The Relationship between
P, Q, and S
Power Factor
ac Power Measurement
Effective Resistance
Energy Relationships for ac
Circuit Analysis Using
Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• explain what is meant by active, reactive,
and apparent power,
• compute the active power to a load,
• compute the reactive power to a load,
• compute the apparent power to a load,
• construct and use the power triangle to
analyze power to complex loads,
• compute power factor,
• explain why equipment is rated in VA instead
of watts,
• measure power in single-phase 
circuits,
• describe why effective resistance differs
from geometric resistance,
• describe energy relations in ac circuits,
• use Multisim and PSpice to study
instantaneous power.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

17
POWER IN ac CIRCUITS
I
n Chapter 4, you studied power in dc circuits. In this chapter, we turn our attention to power
in ac circuits. In ac circuits, there are additional considerations that are not present with dc.
In dc circuits, for example, the only power relationship you encounter is P  VI watts or its alter-
nate forms P  I2R and P  V 2R. This power is referred to as real power or active power and
is the power that does useful work such as light a lamp, power a heater, run an electric motor,
and so on.
In ac circuits, you also encounter active power, but for ac circuits that contain reactive ele-
ments (i.e., inductance or capacitance), a second component of power also exists. This compo-
nent, termed reactive power, represents energy that oscillates back and forth throughout the
system. For example, during the buildup of current in an inductance, energy ﬂows from the
power source to the inductance to expand its magnetic ﬁeld. When the magnetic ﬁeld collapses,
this energy is returned to the circuit. This movement of energy in and out of the inductance con-
stitutes a ﬂow of power. However, since it ﬂows ﬁrst in one direction, then in the other, it con-
tributes nothing to the average ﬂow of power from the source to the load. For this reason,
reactive power is sometimes referred to as wattless power. (A similar situation exists regarding
power ﬂow to and from the electric ﬁeld of a capacitor.)
For a circuit that contains resistive as well as reactive elements,
some energy is dissipated while the remainder is shuttled back and forth
between the reactive elements as described above; thus, both active and
reactive components of power are present. This combination of real and
reactive power is termed apparent power—see Notes.
CHAPTER PREVIEW
NOTES...
Note that real power and reactive
power are not separate “types” of
power, they are merely different
components of the total power.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

572
Chapter 17 | Power in ac Circuits
Putting It in Perspective
Henry Cavendish
CAVENDISH, AN ENGLISH CHEMIST and physicist born in 1731, is
included here, not for what he did for the emerging electrical
ﬁeld, but for what he didn’t do. A brilliant man, Cavendish was 
50 years ahead of his time, and his experiments in electricity
preceded and anticipated almost all the major discoveries that
came about over the next half century (e.g., he discovered
Coulomb’s law before Coulomb did). However, Cavendish was
interested in research and knowledge purely for its own sake
and never bothered to publish most of what he learned, in
effect depriving the world of his ﬁndings and holding back 
the development of the ﬁeld of electricity by many years.
Cavendish’s work lay unknown for nearly a century before
another great scientist, James Clerk Maxwell, had it published.
Nowadays, Cavendish is better known for his work in the gravi-
tational ﬁeld than for his work in the electrical ﬁeld. One of the
amazing things he did was to determine the mass of the earth
using the rather primitive technology of his day. I
In this chapter, we look at all three components of power. New ideas that emerge include
the concept of power factor, the power triangle, the measurement of power in ac circuits, and
the concept of effective resistance. I
Hulton Archive/Stringer/Hulton Archive/Getty Images
At any given instant, the power to a load is equal to the product of voltage times
current (Figure 17–1). This means that if voltage and current vary with time, so
will power. This time-varying power is referred to as instantaneous power and
is given the symbol p(t) or just p. Thus,
p  vi
(watts)
(17–1)
Now consider the case of sinusoidal ac. Since voltage and current are pos-
itive at various times during their cycle and negative at others, instantaneous
power may also be positive at some times and negative at others. This is illus-
trated in Figure 17–2, where we have multiplied voltage times current point by
point to get the power waveform. For example, from t  0 s to t  t1, v and i
are both positive; therefore, power is positive. At t  t1, v  0 V and thus p 
0 W. From t1 to t2, i is positive and v is negative; therefore, p is negative. From
t2 to t3, both v and i are negative; therefore power is positive, and so on. As dis-
cussed in Chapter 4, Section 4.4, a positive value for p means that power trans-
fer is in the direction of the reference arrow, while a negative value means that
it is in the opposite direction. Thus, during positive parts of the power cycle,
power ﬂows from the source to the load, while during negative parts, it ﬂows
out of the load back into the circuit.
17.1 Introduction
i(t)
p(t)
v(t)


Load
p = vi
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–1
Voltage, current, and power
references. When p is positive, power is in
the direction of the reference arrow.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The waveform p(t) of Figure 17–2 is the actual power waveform. We will
now show that the key aspects of power ﬂow embodied in this waveform can
be described in terms of active power, reactive power, and apparent power.
Section 17.2 | Power to a Resistive Load
573
0
t1
t2
t3
t4
1 cycle
p(t)
i(t)
v(t)


Energy
stored
Energy
stored
Energy
released
Energy
released
t
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–2
Instantaneous power in an ac circuit. Positive p represents power to the
load; negative p represents power returned from the load.
Active Power
Since p in Figure 17–2 represents the power ﬂowing to the load, its average will
be the average power to the load. Denote this average by the letter P. If P is pos-
itive, then, on average, more power ﬂows to the load than is returned from it. (If
P is zero, all power sent to the load is returned.) Thus, if P has a positive value, it
represents the power that is really dissipated by the load. For this reason, P is
called real power. In modern terminology, real power is also called active power.
Thus, active power is the average value of the instantaneous power, and the terms
real power, active power, and average power mean the same thing. (We usually
refer to it simply as power.) In this book, we use the terms interchangeably.
Reactive Power
Consider again Figure 17–2. During the intervals that p is negative, power is
being returned from the load. (This can only happen if the load contains reac-
tive elements: L or C.) The portion of power that ﬂows into the load then back
out is called reactive power. Since it ﬁrst ﬂows one way then the other, its
average value is zero; thus, reactive power contributes nothing to the average
power to the load.
Although reactive power does no useful work, it cannot be ignored. Extra
current is required to create reactive power, and this current must be supplied
by the source; this also means that conductors, circuit breakers, switches, trans-
formers, and other equipment must be made physically larger to handle the
extra current. This increases the cost of a system. (This is one of the reasons
that reactive power is a major concern of power system engineers.) 
As noted, the waveform of Figure 17–2 embodies both the real and reac-
tive aspects of power. In this chapter, we learn how to separate them for pur-
poses of analysis and measurement. We begin by looking at power to resistive,
inductive, and capacitive circuit elements separately.
First consider power to a purely resistive load (Figure 17–3). Here, current is
in phase with voltage. Assume i  Imsin qt and v  Vmsin qt. Then,
p  vi  (Vmsin qt)(Imsin qt)  VmImsin2 qt
17.2 Power to 
a Resistive Load
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Therefore,
p  
Vm
2
Im
 (1  cos 2 qt)
(17–2)
where we have used the trigonometric identity sin2 qt  1⁄2 (1  cos 2 qt) from
inside the front cover of the book.
A sketch of p versus time is shown in Figure 17–3(b). Note that p is always
positive (except where it is momentarily zero). This means that power ﬂows
only from the source to the load. Since none is ever returned, all power deliv-
ered by the source is absorbed by the load. We therefore conclude that power
to a pure resistance consists of active power only. Note also that the frequency
of the power waveform is double that of the voltage and current waveforms.
(This is conﬁrmed by the double-frequency component 2q in Equation 17–2.)
Average Power
Inspection of the power waveform of Figure 17–3 shows that its average value
lies halfway between zero and its peak value of VmIm. That is,
P  VmIm2
(You can also get the same result by averaging Equation 17–2 as we did in
Chapter 15.) Since V (the magnitude of the rms value of voltage) is Vm2 and
I (the magnitude of the rms value of current) is Im2, this can be written as
P  VI. Thus, average power to a purely resistive load is
P  VI
(watts)
(17–3)
Alternate forms are obtained by substituting V  IR and I  VR into
Equation 17–3. They are
P  I2R
(watts)
(17–4)
 V2R
(watts)
(17–5)
Thus, the active power relationships for resistive circuits are the same for ac as
for dc.
574
Chapter 17 | Power in ac Circuits
(a)
v
p


i


e
Heat
Load
R
© Cengage Learning 2013
0
1 cycle
p(t)
i(t)
v(t)
VmIm
`
1
t
(b)
T
2
T
Average
power
VmIm
2
FIGURE 17–3
Power to a purely resistive load. The peak value of p is VmIm.
CircuitSim 17-1 
17.3 Power to an
Inductive Load
For a purely inductive load as in Figure 17–4(a), current lags voltage by 90.
If we select current as reference, i  Imsin qt and v  Vmsin(qt  90). A
sketch of p versus time (obtained by multiplying v times i) then looks as
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

shown in (b). Note that during the first quarter-cycle, p is positive and hence
power flows to the inductance, while during the second quarter-cycle, p is
negative and all power transferred to the inductance during the first quarter-
cycle flows back out. Similarly for the third and fourth quarter-cycles. Thus,
the average power to an inductance over a full cycle is zero, that is, there are
no power losses associated with a pure inductance. Consequently, PL  0 W,
and the only power flowing in the circuit is reactive power. This is true in gen-
eral, that is, the power that ﬂows into and out of a pure inductance is reactive
power only.
To determine this power, consider again Equation 17–1.
With v  Vmsin(qt  90) and i  Imsin qt, pL  vi becomes
pL  VmImsin(qt  90)sin qt
After some trigonometric manipulation, this reduces to
pL  VI sin 2 qt
(17–6)
where V and I are the magnitudes of the rms values of the voltage and current,
respectively.
The product VI in Equation 17–6 is deﬁned as reactive power and is given
the symbol QL. Because it represents “power” that alternately ﬂows into, then
out of the inductance, QL contributes nothing to the average power to the load
and, as noted earlier, is sometimes referred to as wattless power. As you will
see in Section 17.8, however, reactive power is of major concern in the design
and operation of electrical power systems.
Since QL is the product of voltage times current, its unit is the volt-amp (VA).
To indicate that QL represents reactive volt-amps, an “R” is appended to yield
a new unit, the VAR (volt-amps reactive). Thus,
QL  VI
(VAR)
(17–7)
Substituting V  IXL and I  VXL yields the following alternate forms:
QL  I2XL  V
XL
2

(VAR)
(17–8)
Section 17.3 | Power to an Inductive Load
575
v
pL


i
(a) Let i = Im sin ωt
  v = Vm sin (ωt  90°)
0
1 cycle
pL(t)
i(t)
v(t)
VI
1VI
`
Energy
stored
Energy
stored
Energy
released
Energy
released
t
T
4
T
2
3T
4
T
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–4
Power to a purely inductive load. Energy stored during each quarter-cycle is
returned during the next quarter-cycle. Average power is zero.
CircuitSim 17-2 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For a purely capacitive load, current leads voltage by 90. Taking current as ref-
erence, i  Imsin qt and v  Vmsin(qt  90). Multiplication of v times i yields
the power curve of Figure 17–5. Note that negative and positive loops of the
power wave are identical; thus, over a cycle, the power returned to the circuit
by the capacitance is exactly equal to that delivered to it by the source. This
means that the average power to a capacitance over a full cycle is zero, that is,
there are no power losses associated with a pure capacitance. Consequently,
PC  0 W, and the only power flowing in the circuit is reactive power. This is
true in general, that is, the power that ﬂows into and out of a pure capacitance
is reactive power only. This reactive power is given by
pC  vi  VmImsin qt sin(qt  90)
which reduces to
pC  VI sin 2 qt
(17–9)
576
Chapter 17 | Power in ac Circuits
17.4 Power to a
Capacitive Load
0
1 cycle
pC(t)
i(t)
v(t)
VI
VI

Energy
released
Energy
released
Energy
stored
Energy
stored
(b)
v
pC


i
© Cengage Learning 2013
(a) Let i = Im sin ωt
v = Vm sin (ωt  90°)
FIGURE 17–5
Power to a purely capacitive load. Average power is zero.
where V and I are the magnitudes of the rms values of the voltage and current
respectively. Now deﬁne the product VI as QC. This product represents reactive
power. That is,
QC  VI
(VAR)
(17–10)
Since V  IXC and I  VXC, QC can also be expressed as
QC  I2XC  X
V
C
2

(VAR)
(17–11)
By convention, reactive power to capacitance is deﬁned as negative. Thus,
if I  4 A and XC  2 	, then I2XC  (4 A)2(2 	)  32 VAR. We can either
explicitly include the minus sign as QC  32 VAR or imply it by stating that
Q represents capacitive VARs, that is, QC  32 VAR (cap.).
By convention, QL is taken to be positive. Thus, if I  4 A and XL  2 	,
QL  (4 A)2(2 	)  32 VAR. Note that the VAR (like the watt) is a scalar
quantity with magnitude only and no angle.
CircuitSim 17-3 
CircuitSim 17-4 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The relationships described previously were developed using the load of 
Figure 17–1. However, they hold true for every element in a circuit, no
matter how complex the circuit or how its elements are interconnected.
Further, in any circuit, total real power PT is found by summing real power
to all circuit elements, while total reactive power QT is found by summing
reactive power, taking into account that inductive Q is positive and capaci-
tive Q is negative.
Section 17.5 | Power in More Complex Circuits
577
EXAMPLE 17–1        
For each circuit of Figure 17–6, determine real and reactive power.
Solution
Only voltage and current magnitudes are needed.
a. I  100 V25 	  4 A. P  VI  (100 V)(4 A)  400 W. Q  0 VAR.
b. I  100V20 	  5A. Q  VI  (100V)(5A)  500VAR (ind.). P  0 W.
c. I  100 V40 	  2.5 A. Q  VI  (100 V)(2.5 A)  250 VAR (cap.). 
P  0 W.
The answer for (c) can also be expressed as Q  250 VAR.
100 V∠0°
I
R


(a) R  25 Ω
100 V∠0°
I
XL


(b) XL  20 Ω
100 V∠0°
I
XC


(c) XC  40 Ω
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–6
1. If the power at some instant in Figure 17–1 is p  27 W, in what direc-
tion is the power at that instant?
2. For a purely resistive load, v and i are in phase. Given v  10 sin qt V and 
i  5 sin qt A. Using graph paper, carefully plot v and i at 30 intervals.
Now multiply the values of v and i at these points and plot the power. 
[The result should look like Figure 17–3(b).]
a. From the graph, determine the peak power and average power.
b. Compute power using P  VI and compare to the average value deter-
mined in (a).
3. Repeat Example 17–1 using Equations 17–4, 17–5, 17–8, and 17–11.
Answers
1. From the load to the source.
2. a. 50 W; 25 W
b. Same
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
17.5 Power in More
Complex Circuits
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In terms of determining total P and Q, it does not matter how the circuit or
system is connected or what electrical elements it contains. Elements can be
connected in series, in parallel, or in series-parallel, for example, and the
system can contain electric motors and the like, and total P is still found by
summing the power to individual elements, while total Q is found by alge-
braically summing their reactive powers.
578
Chapter 17 | Power in ac Circuits
EXAMPLE 17–2       
For the RL circuit of Figure 17–7(a), I  5 A. Determine P and Q.
Solution
P  I2R  (5 A)2(3 	)  75 W
Q  QL  I2XL  (5 A)2(4 	)  100 VAR (ind.)
These can be represented symbolically as in Figure 17–7(b).
5 A
(a)
 R = 3 
 XL = 4 
P
Q
75 W
100 VAR
(b) Symbolic representation
P
Q
(ind.)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–7
From the terminals, P and Q are the same for both (a) and (b).
EXAMPLE 17–3       
For the RC circuit of Figure 17–8(a), determine P and Q.
Solution
P  V2R  (40 V)2(20 	)  80 W
Q  QC  V2XC  (40 V)2(80 	)  20 VAR (cap.)
These can be represented symbolically as in Figure 17–8(b).
20  80 
V
40 V


V




(a)
20 VAR
80 W
P
Q
(cap.)
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–8
From the terminals, P and Q are the same for both (a) and (b).
It is sometimes convenient to show power to circuit elements symbolically
as illustrated in the next example.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 17.5 | Power in More Complex Circuits
579
EXAMPLE 17–4        
a. For Figure 17–9(a), compute PT and QT.
b. Reduce the circuit to its simplest form.
Solution
a. P  I2R  (20 A)2(3 )  1200 W
QC1  I2XC1  (20 A)2(6 )  2400 VAR (cap.)
QC2 
 
(2
(1
0
0
0

V
)
)2
  4000 VAR (cap.)
QL 
 
(20
5
0

V)2
  8000 VAR (ind.)
These are represented symbolically in part (b). PT  1200 W and QT 
2400 VAR  4000 VAR  8000 VAR  1600 VAR. Thus, the load is
net inductive as shown in (c).
b. QT  I2Xeq. Thus, Xeq  QTI 2  (1600 VAR)(20 A)2  4 	. Circuit
resistance remains unchanged. Thus, the equivalent is as shown in (d).
V2
2
XL
V2
2
XC2
FIGURE 17–9


(a)
20 A
10 Ω
200 V
5 Ω
XL 
R  3 Ω
XC1  6 Ω
XC2
(b)
PT
QT
1200 W
2400 VAR
(cap.)
4000
VAR
(cap.)
8000
VAR
(ind.)
(c)
20 A
1200 W
1600
VAR
(ind.)
(d)
Xeq 
R
3 Ω
j 4 Ω
© Cengage Learning 2013
CircuitSim 17-5 
For the circuit of Figure 17–10, PT  1.9 kW and QT  900 VAR (ind.).
Determine P2 and Q2.
Answer
300 W, 400 VAR (cap.)
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
1.4 kW
800 VAR
P2 = ?
Q2 = ?
200 W
500 VAR
PT
QT
(ind.)
Load 2
Load 3
Load 1
(ind.)
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–10
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

When a load has voltage V across it and current I through it as in Figure 17–11,
the power that appears to flow to it is VI. However, if the load contains both
resistance and reactance, this product represents neither real power nor reactive
power. Since VI appears to represent power, it is called apparent power.
Apparent power is given the symbol S and has units of volt-amperes (VA).
Thus,
S  VI
(VA)
(17–12)
where V and I are the magnitudes of the rms voltage and current, respectively.
Since V  IZ and I  VZ, S can also be written as
S  I2Z  V 2Z
(VA)
(17–13)
For small equipment (such as found in electronics), VA is a convenient unit.
However, for heavy power apparatus (Figure 17–12), it is too small and kVA
(kilovolt-amps) is frequently used, where
S  
10
V
0
I
0

(kVA)
(17–14)
In addition to its VA rating, it is common practice to rate electrical appa-
ratus in terms of its operating voltage. Once you know these two, it is easy to
determine rated current. For example, a piece of equipment rated 250 kVA,
4.16 kV has a rated current of I  SV  (250 
 103 VA)(4.16 
 103 V) 
60.1 A.
580
Chapter 17 | Power in ac Circuits
17.6 Apparent Power
I
S
V


Load
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–11
Apparent power S  VI.
FIGURE 17–12
Power apparatus is rated in apparent power. The transformer shown is a
167-kVA unit.
Courtesy Carte International Ltd.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The power triangle in this case has a negative imaginary part as indicated in
Figure 17–15.
The power relationships may be written in generalized forms as
S  P  Q
(17–18)
and
S  VI*
(17–19)
where P  P∠0, QL  jQL, QC  jQC, and I* is the conjugate of current
I—see Note. These relationships hold true for all networks regardless of what
they contain or how they are conﬁgured.
Section 17.7 | The Relationship between P, Q, and S
581
Until now, we have treated real, reactive, and apparent power separately. However,
they are related by a very simple relationship through the power triangle.
The Power Triangle
Consider the series circuit of Figure 17–13(a). Let the current through the cir-
cuit be I  I∠0, with phasor representation (b). The voltages across the resis-
tor and inductance are VR and VL, respectively. As noted in Chapter 16, VR is
in phase with I, while VL leads it by 90. Kirchhoff’s voltage law applies for ac
voltages in phasor form. Thus, V  VR  VL as indicated in (c).
The voltage triangle of (c) may be redrawn as in Figure 17–14(a) with mag-
nitudes of VR and VL replaced by IR and IXL, respectively. Now multiply all quan-
tities by I. This yields sides of I2R, I2XL, and hypotenuse VI as indicated in (b).
Note that these represent P, Q, and S, respectively, as indicated in (c). This is
called the power triangle. From the geometry of this triangle, you can see that
S  P2  Q2
L
(17–15)
Alternatively, the relationship between P, Q, and S may be expressed as a
complex number:
S  P  jQL
(17–16a)
or
S  S∠v
(17–16b)
If the circuit is capacitive instead of inductive, Equation 17–16a becomes
S  P  jQC
(17–17)
17.7 The Relationship 
between P, Q,
and S
E


(a)
I
V
VR




VL


(b)
I
VR
VL
V
(c)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–13
Steps in the development
of the power triangle—continued in 
Figure 17–14.
(c) Resultant power triangle
P
QL
S
θ
© Cengage Learning 2013
(b) Multiplied by I
I2R
I2XL
VI
(a) Magnitudes only shown
IR
IXL
V
FIGURE 17–14
Steps in the development of the power triangle continued.
θ
S
P
QC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–15
Power triangle for capaci-
tive case.
NOTES...
See Chapter 16, Section 16.1 for a
discussion of complex conjugates.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

When solving problems involving power, remember that P values can be
added to get PT, and Q values to get QT (where Q is positive for inductive
elements and negative for capacitive). However, apparent power values cannot
be added to get ST, that is, ST  S1  S2  . . .  SN. Instead, you must deter-
mine PT and QT separately, then use the power triangle to obtain ST—see
Practice Problems 3, Problem 2.
582
Chapter 17 | Power in ac Circuits
EXAMPLE 17–5       
The P and Q values for a circuit are shown in Figure 17–16(a).
a. Determine the power triangle.
b. Determine the magnitude of the current supplied by the source.
Solution
a. PT  700  800  80  120  1700 W
QT  1300  600  100  1200  600 VAR  600 VAR (cap.)
ST  PT  jQT  1700  j600  1803∠ 19.4 VA
The power triangle is as shown. The load is net capacitive.
b. I  STE  1803 VA120 V  15.0 A.
120 V


80 W
100 VAR
120 W
1200 VAR
700 W
1300 VAR
(a)
(cap.)
(cap.)
(ind.)
800 W
600 VAR
(cap.)
I
FIGURE 17–16
EXAMPLE 17–6       
A generator supplies power to an electric heater, an inductive element, and a
capacitor as in Figure 17–17(a).
a. Find P and Q for each load.
b. Find total active and reactive power supplied by the generator.
c. Draw the power triangle for the combined loads and determine total apparent
power.
d. Find the current supplied by the generator.
(a)
6 Ω
24 Ω
XC 
XL
2.5 kW
heater


120 V∠0°
(b)
1.8 kVAR
ST  3081 VA
35.8°
QT 
PT  2.5 kW
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–17
19.4
PT = 1700 W
ST = 1803 VA
QT = 600 VAR
(cap.)
qT
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
CircuitSim 17-6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Real and Reactive Power Equations
An examination of the power triangle of Figures 17–14 and 17–15 shows that
P and Q may be expressed as
P  VI cos v  S cos v
(W)
(17–20)
and
Q  VI sin v  S sin v
(VAR)
(17–21)
where V and I are the magnitudes of the rms values of the voltage and current,
respectively, and v is the angle between them. P is always positive, while Q
is positive for inductive circuits and negative for capacitive circuits. Thus, if
V  120 volts, I  50 A, and v  30, P  (120)(50)cos 30  5196 W and
Q  (120)(50)sin 30  3000 VAR.
Section 17.7 | The Relationship between P, Q, and S
583
Solution
a. The components of power are as follows:
Heater:
PH  2.5 kW
QH  0 VAR
Inductor:
PL  0 W
QL  V
XL
2
  
(12
6
0

V)2
  2.4 kVAR (ind.)
Capacitor:
PC  0 W
QC  X
V
C
2
  
(1
2
2
4
0

V)2
  600 VAR (cap.)
b. PT  2.5 kW  0 W  0 W  2.5 kW
QT  0 VAR  2.4 kVAR  600 VAR  1.8 kVAR (ind.)
c. The power triangle is sketched as Figure 17–7(b). Both the hypotenuse and
the angle can be obtained easily using rectangular to polar conversion.
ST  PT  jQT  2500  j1800  3081∠35.8. Thus, apparent power is
ST  3081 VA.
d. Generator current is I  S
E
T  
30
1
8
2
1
0
V
V
A
  25.7 A
1. A 208-V generator supplies power to a group of three loads. Load 1 has an
apparent power of 500 VA with v  36.87 (i.e., it is net inductive). Load 2 has
an apparent power of 1000 VA and is net capacitive with a power triangle angle
of 53.13. Load 3 is purely resistive with power P3  200 W. Determine the
power triangle for the combined loads and the generator current.
2. Using numerical values as indicated with Figure 17–10,
a. Determine apparent power for each block, and the total apparent power to
the circuit.
b. Sum the apparent power for all blocks and show that it does not equal the
actual apparent power to the circuit.
Answers
1. ST  1300 VA, vT  22.6, I  6.25 A
2. a. 538.5 VA, 500 VA, 1612.5 VA, 2.10 KVA
b. 2.651 kVA (Not the same.)
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
CircuitSim 17-7 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The quantity cos v in Equation 17–20 is deﬁned as power factor and is given
the symbol Fp. Thus,
Fp  cos v
(17–22)
From Equation 17–20, we see that Fp may be computed as the ratio of real
power to apparent power. Thus,
cos v  PS
(17–23)
Power factor is expressed as a number or as a percent. From Equation 17–23, it is
apparent that the power factor cannot exceed 1.0 (or 100% if expressed in percent).
The power factor angle v is of interest. It can be found as
v  cos1(PS)
(17–24)
Angle v is the angle between voltage and current. For a pure resistance, there-
fore, v  0. For a pure inductance, v  90; for a pure capacitance, v  90.
For a circuit containing both resistance and inductance, v will be somewhere
between 0 and 90; for a circuit containing both resistance and capacitance,
v will be somewhere between 0 and 90.
Unity, Lagging, and Leading Power Factor
As indicated by Equation 17–23, a load’s power factor shows how much of its
apparent power is actually real power. For example, for a purely resistive circuit,
v  0 and Fp  cos 0  1.0. Therefore, P  VI (watts) and all the load’s appar-
ent power is real power. This case (Fp  1) is referred to as unity power factor.
For a load containing only resistance and inductance, the load current
lags voltage. The power factor in this case is described as lagging. On the
other hand, for a load containing only resistance and capacitance, current
leads voltage and the power factor is described as leading. Thus, an inductive
circuit has a lagging power factor, while a capacitive circuit has a leading
power factor.
A load with a very poor power factor can draw excessive current. This is
discussed next.
Why Equipment Is Rated in VA
As noted earlier, equipment is rated in terms of VA instead of watts. We now show
why. Consider Figure 17–18. Assume that the generator is rated at 600 V,
120 kVA. This means that it is capable of supplying I  120 kVA600 V  200 A.
In (a), the generator is supplying a purely resistive load with 120 kW. Since S 
P for a purely resistive load, S  120 kVA and the generator is supplying its rated
current. In (b), the generator is supplying a load with P  120 kW as before, but
Q  160 kVAR. Its apparent power is therefore S  200 kVA, which means that
the generator current is I  200 kVA600 V  333.3 A. Even though it is sup-
plying the same power as in (a), the generator is now greatly overloaded, and
damage may result as indicated in (b).
This example illustrates clearly that rating a load or device in terms of
power is a poor choice, as its current-carrying capability can be greatly
exceeded (even though its power rating is not). Thus, the size of electrical
584
Chapter 17 | Power in ac Circuits
17.8 Power Factor
CircuitSim 17-8 
600 V
Poof!


I = 333 A
120 kW
P = 120 kW
600 V


I = 200 A
120 kW
P = 120 kW
(b) S =    (120)2 ` (160)2 = 200 kVA
The generator is overloaded
(a) S = 120 kVA
Q = 0
QL = 160 kVAR
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–18
Illustrating why electrical
apparatus is rated in VA instead of watts.
Both loads dissipate 120 kW, but the cur-
rent rating of generator (b) is exceeded
because of the power factor of its load.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

apparatus (generators, interconnecting wires, transformers, etc.) required to
supply a load is governed, not by the load’s power requirements, but rather by
its VA requirements.
Power Factor Correction
The problem shown in Figure 17–18 can be alleviated by cancelling some or
all of the reactive component of power by adding reactance of the opposite type
to the circuit. This is referred to as power factor correction. If you completely
cancel the reactive component, the power factor angle is 0 and Fp  1. This is
referred to as unity power factor correction.
In practice, almost all loads, whether they be residential, industrial, or com-
mercial, are inductive (due to the presence of motors, and other inductive ele-
ments); thus, you will probably never encounter a capacitive load that needs
correcting. The upshot of this is that, in practice, virtually all power factor correc-
tion consists of adding a capacitor in order to cancel inductive effects. As is illus-
trated next, this capacitance is placed across the load and as near to it as practical.
Section 17.8 | Power Factor
585
EXAMPLE 17–7        
For the overloaded generator problem of Figure 17–18(b), a capacitance with QC 
160 kVAR is added in parallel with the load as in Figure 17–19(a). Determine
generator current I.
Solution
QT  160 kVAR  160 kVAR  0. Therefore, ST  120 kW  j0 kVAR.
Thus, ST  120 kVA, and current drops from 333 A to I  120 kVA600 V  200 A.
Thus, the generator is no longer overloaded—see Notes.
600 V
QC


(ind.)
120 kW
160 kVAR
Power factor
corrected load
I
(a) Let QC = 160 kVAR
600 V


120 kW
0 VAR
Corrected
load
(b) Load corrected to unity
power factor
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–19
Power factor correction. The parallel capacitor greatly reduces source
current.
Residential customers are not charged directly for VARs—that is, they pay
their electrical bills based solely on the number of the kilowatt-hours they use. This
is because all residential customers have essentially the same power factor, and the
power factor effect is simply built into the rates that they pay. Industrial customers,
on the other hand, often have widely differing power factors, and the utility may
have to monitor their VARs (or their power factor), as well as their watts, in order
to determine a suitable charge.
To illustrate, assume that the loads of Figures 17–18(a) and (b) are two small
industrial plants. If the utility based its charge solely on power, both customers
would pay the same amount. However, it costs the utility more to supply customer
(b) since larger conductors, larger transformers, larger switchgear, and so on are
required to handle the larger current. For this reason, industrial customers may pay
a penalty if their power factor drops below a prescribed value as set by the utility.
NOTES...
Note carefully that, what has
changed here is how much current
the source has to supply and con-
sequently, how much current the
transmission and distribution lines
between the source and capacitor
carry. Since the load itself has not
changed, it requires the same cur-
rent as before and the wires
between the capacitor and the load
must carry this larger current. (This
is why power system engineers
place corrective capacitors as close
to the load as practical.)
CircuitSim 17-9 
CircuitSim 17-10
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

586
Chapter 17 | Power in ac Circuits
EXAMPLE 17–8       
Suppose an industrial client is charged a penalty if the plant power factor drops
below 0.85. The equivalent plant loads are as shown in Figure 17–20. The
frequency is 60 Hz—see Note 3.
a. Determine PT and QT.
b. Determine what value of capacitance (in microfarads) is required to bring
the power factor up to 0.85.
c. Determine generator current before and after correction.
Solution
a. The components of power are as follows:
Lights: P  12 kW,
Q  0 kVAR
Furnace: P  I2R  (150)2(2.4)  54 kW
Q  I2X  (150)2(3.2)  72 kVAR (ind.)
Motor: vm  cos1(0.8)  36.9°. Thus, from the motor power triangle,
Qm  Pm tan vm  80 tan 36.9°  60 kVAR (ind.)
Total: PT  12 kW  54 kW  80 kW  146 kW
QT  0  72 kVAR  60 kVAR  132 kVAR (ind.)
b. The power triangle for the plant is shown in Figure 17–21(a). However, we
must correct the power factor to 0.85. Thus, we need v  cos1(0.85)
 31.8, where v is the power factor angle of the corrected load as
indicated in Figure 17–21(b). The maximum reactive power that we can
tolerate is thus QT  PT tan v  146 tan 31.8  90.5 kVAR.
Now consider Figure 17–22. QT  QC  132 kVAR, where QT 
90.5 kVAR. Therefore, QC  41.5 kVAR  41.5 kVAR (cap.). But
QC  V 2XC. Therefore, XC  V 2QC  (600)241.5 kVAR  8.67 	.
But XC  1qC. Thus, a capacitor of
C  
q
1
XC
  
(2p)(60
1
)(8.67)
  306 F
will provide the required correction—see Notes.
(a)
600 V


150 A
Lights
12 kW
Electric furnace
2.4  j3.2
Motor loads
80 kW
0.8 Fp (lag)
Plant loads
θm
Pm = 80 kW
Qm
(b) Power triangle for motor
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–20
(a) Power triangle for
the plant
42.1°
PT = 146 kW
QT = 132 kVAR
196.8 kVA
θ' = 31.8°
PT = 146 kW
171.8 
Q'T
(b) Power triangle after correction
= PT tan θ'
= 90.5 kVAR
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–21
Initial and ﬁnal power 
triangles. Note that PT does not change
when we correct the power factor, since
for the capacitor, P  0 W.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 17.8 | Power Factor
587
c. For the original circuit Figure 17–21(a), ST  196.8 kVA. Thus,
I  S
E
T  
19
6
6
0
.8
0
k
V
VA
  328 A
For the corrected circuit of Figure 17–21(b), ST  171.8 kVA and
I  
17
6
1
0
.8
0
k
V
VA
  286 A
Thus, power factor correction has dropped the source current by 42 A.
600 V
QC
1
2
(ind.)
146 kW
132 kVAR
Plant
Corrected load
PT
Q'T
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–22
NOTES...
1. Electric power companies use
special utility grade capacitors for
this job. The capacitor must be
sized both for its value of capaci-
tance and for its kVA rating.
2. Power factor correction capaci-
tors are available in ﬁxed values,
or as switched banks with auto-
matic controls that switch capaci-
tors in or out, depending on load
requirements.
3. Computer simulations for this
example are found in Section 17.12.
1. By how many amps has power factor correction reduced the motor current
of Figure 17–20?
2. Repeat Example 17–8, except correct the power factor to unity.
3. Due to plant expansion, 102 kW of purely resistive load is added to the
plant of Figure 17–20. Determine whether power factor correction is
needed to correct the expanded plant to 0.85 Fp, or better.
Answers
1. Zero—there is no change in motor current. It is the source current that is reduced.
2. 973 F, 243 A. Other answers remain unchanged.
3. Fp  0.88. No correction needed.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
1. Sketch the power triangle for Figure 17–9(c). Using this triangle, determine
the magnitude of the applied voltage.
2. For Figure 17–10, assume a source of E  240 volts, P2  300 W, and 
Q2  400 VAR (cap.). What is the magnitude of the source current I?
3. What is the power factor of each of the circuits of Figures 17–7, 17–8, and
17–9? Indicate whether they are leading or lagging.
4. Consider the circuit of Figure 17–18(b). If P  100 kW and QL  80 kVAR,
is the source overloaded, assuming it is capable of handling a 120-kVA load?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To measure power in an ac circuit, you need a wattmeter. A wattmeter is a
device that monitors current and voltage, and from these, determines power.
Most modern units are digital instruments. For digital units, Figure 17–23,
power is displayed on a numerical readout, while for analog instruments (see
Note), power is indicated by a pointer on a scale much like the analog meter of
Figure 2–22(b), Chapter 2. Note however, although their details differ, their
method of use and connection in a circuit are the same—thus, the measurement
techniques described herein apply to both.
To strengthen your understanding of the concept of power measurement,
reexamine Figures 17–1, 17–2, and 17–3. Instantaneous load power is the prod-
uct of load voltage times load current, and average power is the average of this
product. One way to implement power measurement is therefore to create a
meter with a current sensing circuit, a voltage sensing circuit, a multiplier cir-
cuit, and an averaging circuit. Figure 17–24 shows a simpliﬁed symbolic rep-
resentation of such an instrument. Current is passed through its current coil
(CC) to create a magnetic ﬁeld proportional to the current, and a solid state
sensor circuit connected across the load voltage reacts with this ﬁeld to produce
an output voltage proportional to the product of instantaneous voltage and cur-
rent (i.e., proportional to instantaneous power). An averaging circuit averages
this voltage and drives a display to indicate average power. (The scheme used
by the meter of Figure 17–23 is actually considerably more sophisticated than
this because it measures many things besides power—e.g., it measures VARs,
VA, energy, and more. However, the basic idea is conceptually correct.)
588
Chapter 17 | Power in ac Circuits
17.9 ac Power
Measurement
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–23
Multifunction power/
energy meter. It can measure active power
(W), reactive power (VARs), apparent power
(VA), power factor, energy, and more.
NOTES...
Older wattmeters, called electrody-
namometers, may still be found in
practice. They are electromechanical
devices that utilize both a stationary
coil connected in series with the load
(the current coil) and a pivoted coil
(the potential coil) connected across
the load. The interaction of the mag-
netic ﬁelds of these two coils cre-
ates a torque, and the pointer,
attached to the pivoted coil, takes up
a position on the scale corresponding
to average power—see Practice
Problems 5, Problem 2.


CC
CC  Current
           coil
Load current
Voltage
sensing
circuit
Vload


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–24
Conceptual representation of an electronic wattmeter.
Figure 17–25 shows how to connect a wattmeter into a circuit. Load current
passes through its current coil circuit, and load voltage is impressed across its
voltage sensing circuit. With this connection, the wattmeter computes and dis-
plays the product of the magnitude of the load voltage, the magnitude of the load
current, and the cosine of the angle between them, that is, Vload  Iload  cos vload—
see Notes. Thus, it measures load power. Note the  marking on the terminals.
Vload
Iload
E






Load
W
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 7–25
Connection of wattmeter.
NOTES...
You need to be very clear on what
angle to use in determining a
wattmeter’s reading. In terms of
Figure 17–24, the angle to use is the
angle between the voltage labelled
Vload and the current  labelled Load
current, using the reference polarity
for voltage and the reference direc-
tion for current shown. The diagram
of Figure 17–25 helps clarify this.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The meter is connected so that load current enters the  current terminal and
the higher potential end of the load is connected to the  voltage terminal. (On
many meters, the  voltage terminal is internally connected so that only three
terminals are brought out as in Figure 17–26.)
When power is to be measured in a low power factor circuit, a low power
factor wattmeter must be used. This is because, for low power factor loads, cur-
rents can be very high, even though the power is low. Thus, you can easily
exceed the current rating of a standard wattmeter and damage it, even though
the power indication on the meter is small.
Section 17.9 | ac Power Measurement
589
EXAMPLE 17–9        
For the circuit of Figure 17–25, what does the wattmeter indicate if
a. Vload  100 V∠0 and Iload  15 A∠60,
b. Vload  100 V∠10 and Iload  15 A∠30?
Solution
a. vload  60. Thus, P  (100)(15)cos 60  750 W,
b. vload  10  30  20. Thus, P  (100)(15)cos(20)  1410 W.
Note: For (b), since cos(20)  cos(20), it does not matter whether we
include the minus sign in the calculation.
EXAMPLE 17–10        
For Figure 17–26, determine the wattmeter reading.
E
1
2
600 W
700 VAR
W
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–26
This wattmeter has its voltage side  terminals connected internally.
It should be noted that the wattmeter reads power only for circuit elements on
the load side of the meter. In addition, if the load consists of several elements,
it reads the total power.
Solution
A wattmeter reads only active power. Thus, it indicates 600 W.
1. Determine the wattmeter reading for Figure 17–27.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
E
1
2
700 W
60 VAR
100 W
70 VAR
W
10 W
40 W
(ind.)
(cap.)
(cap.)
300 W
80 VAR
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–27
CircuitSim 17-11
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Up to now, we have assumed that resistance is constant, independent of fre-
quency. However, this is not entirely true. For a number of reasons, the resis-
tance of a circuit to ac is greater than its resistance to dc. While this effect is
small at low frequencies, it is very pronounced at high frequencies. AC resis-
tance is known as effective resistance.
Before looking at why ac resistance is greater than dc resistance, we need
to reexamine the concept of resistance itself. Recall from Chapter 3 that resis-
tance was originally defined in the dc case as opposition to current, that is,
R  VI. (This is ohmic resistance.) Building on this, you learned in Chapter 4
that P  I2R. It is this latter viewpoint that allows us to give meaning to ac
resistance. That is, we deﬁne ac or effective resistance as
Reff  I
P
2
()
(17–25)
where P is dissipated power (as determined by a wattmeter). From this, you can
see that anything that affects dissipated power affects resistance. For dc and
low-frequency ac, both deﬁnitions for R, that is, R  VI and R  PI2, yield
the same value. However, as frequency increases, other factors cause an increase
in resistance. We will now consider some of these.
Eddy Currents and Hysteresis
The magnetic ﬁeld surrounding a coil or other circuit-carrying ac current varies
with time and thus induces voltages in nearby conductive material such as
metal equipment cabinets, transformer cores, and so on. The resulting currents
(called eddy currents because they ﬂow in circular patterns like eddies in a
brook) are unwanted and create power losses called eddy current losses. Since
additional power must be supplied by the source to make up for these losses,
P in Equation 17–25 increases, increasing the effective resistance of the coil.
If ferromagnetic material is also present, an additional power loss occurs
due to hysteresis effects caused by the magnetic ﬁeld alternately magnetizing
the material in one direction, then the other. Hysteresis and eddy current losses
are important even at low frequencies, such as the 60-Hz power system fre-
quency. This is discussed in Chapter 23.
Skin Effect
AC currents create a time-varying magnetic field about a conductor,
Figure 17–28(a). This varying ﬁeld in turn induces voltage in the conductor.
This voltage is of such a nature that it drives free electrons from the center of the
wire to its periphery, Figure 17–28(b), resulting in a nonuniform distribution of
current, with current density greatest near the periphery and smallest in the
center. This phenomenon is known as the skin effect. Because the center of the
wire carries little current, its cross-sectional area has effectively been reduced,
590
Chapter 17 | Power in ac Circuits
2. (Optional problem) Research the electrodynamometer wattmeter and pre-
pare a short description complete with diagram showing its coils, pivoted
pointer, scale, and so on. The Internet is a good source of information.
Answer
1. 750 W
17.10 Effective
Resistance
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

thus increasing resistance. While skin effect is generally negligible at power
line frequencies (except for conductors larger than several hundred thousand
circular mils), it is so pronounced at microwave frequencies that the center of
a wire carries almost no current. For this reason, hollow conductors are often
used at very high frequencies instead of solid wires, as shown in Figure 17–28(c).
Radiation Resistance
At high frequencies some of the energy supplied to a circuit escapes as radi-
ated energy. For example, a radio transmitter supplies power to an antenna,
where it is converted into radio waves and radiated into space. The resistance
effect here is known as radiation resistance. This resistance is much higher than
simple dc resistance. For example, a TV transmitting antenna may have a resis-
tance of a fraction of an ohm to dc but several hundred ohms effective resis-
tance at its operating frequency.
Section 17.11 | Energy Relationships for ac
591
(a) Varying magnetic field
induces voltage within
the conductor.
i
Wire
(b) This voltage drives free electrons
toward the periphery, leaving
few electrons in the center.
Current density
varies across
the wire.
(c) At high frequencies, the
effect is so pronounced
that hollow conductors
may be used.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–28
Skin effect in ac circuits.
NOTES...
1. The resistance measured by an
ohmmeter is dc resistance.
2. Many of the effects noted here
will be treated in detail in your
various electronics courses. We
will not pursue them further.
Recall that power and energy are related by the equation p  dwdt. Thus,
energy can be found by integration as
W pdt vidt
(17–26)
Inductance
For an inductance, v  Ldidt. Substituting this into Equation 17–26, can-
celling dt, and rearranging terms yields
WL  Ld
d
i
t
idt  Lidi
(17–27)
Recall from Figure 17–4(b) that energy ﬂows into an inductor during time
interval 0 to T4 and is released during time interval T4 to T2. The process
then repeats itself. The energy stored (and subsequently released) can thus be
found by integrating power from t  0 to t  T4. Current at t  0 is 0 and cur-
rent at t  T4 is Im. Using these as our limits of integration, we ﬁnd (see Note)
WL  L
Im
0
idi  1
2
LI2m  LI2
(J)
(17–28)
where we have used I  Im–2 to express energy in terms of effective current.
17.11 Energy
Relationships 
for ac
NOTES...
The idea of stored energy has
been encountered before—for
example, Equation 17–28 appears
in Chapter 13 as Equation 13–11
and Equation 17–30 appears in
Chapter 10 as Equation 10–22.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Capacitance
For a capacitance, i  Cdvdt. Substituting this into Equation 17–26 yields
WC vCd
d
v
t
dt  Cv dv
(17–29)
Consider Figure 17–5(b). Energy stored can be found by integrating power
from T4 to T2. The corresponding limits for voltage are 0 to Vm. Thus,
WC  C
Vm
0
v dv  1
2
 CV2m  CV2
(J)
(17–30)
where we have used V  Vm2.
592
Chapter 17 | Power in ac Circuits
The power relationships described in this chapter can be investigated easily
using Multisim and PSpice. To illustrate, consider Examples 17–11 and
17–12.
17.12 Circuit Analysis
Using
Computers
EXAMPLE 17–11       
For the circuit of Figure 17–1 (Section 17.1), assume an RL load. Typical wave-
forms are then as shown in Figure 17–2. Since current is used as reference, we
will use a current source in our simulation. Additionally, because the analysis is
independent of amplitude and frequency, we have arbitrarily chosen 5 A, 100 Hz
for this source.
Multisim Solution
Read Note 1, then build the circuit of Figure 17–29(a) on your screen. Ensure
that nodes are displayed—see Note 2. Select transient analysis, set TSTOP to
0.01, select the Output tab, then add I(L1) and V(1) to the output display list—
see Notes 3 and 4. To create the instantaneous power waveform, click Add
Expression, double-click V(1), double-click *, double-click I(L1), click OK,
then Simulate. The curves of (b) should appear—see Note 5. Compare the
curves to those of Figure 17–2. Using a cursor, measure peak and trough values
for the power waveform. Record values (for use in Extended Example 17–11).
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–29
Investigating instantaneous power using Multisim.
NOTES...
1. To select the signal current
source, right-click Place and
ensure that Signal Source
Components is selected. From its
parts bin on your screen, select
Place ac Current Source.
2. To display nodes, click Options
then Sheet Properties. Under Net
names, click Show all.
3. Node numbers depend on the
order in which you wire up your
circuit. For our discussion, we
assume node numbers as shown
in Figure 17–29(a). 
4. If you have legacy software, use
$1 instead of V(1), and I1#branch
instead of I(L1).
5. If your display is jagged, increase
the number of time points.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 17.12 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
593
Extended Example 17–11
Add a wattmeter to the circuit as in Figure 17–30. To
locate the wattmeter, right-click Place and ensure that Instruments is selected.
Use your mouse pointer to locate the wattmeter in the tool bin, position it on your
screen as in Figure 17–30, then wire it in. Click the simulation ON/OFF switch
to the ON position, double-click the wattmeter to open it, then read its value.
Reconciliation of Results:
First, consider the instantaneous power waveform.
In the previous test, you should have measured peak and trough power values as
9.20 W and –6.70 W, respectively. Real power P, the average value of the power
wave, is halfway between these two extremes. Thus, P  (9.20 – 6.70)/2 = 1.25 W.
This agrees with the wattmeter reading.  Now consider P  I2R. RMS current is
I  (0.707)Im  (0.707)(5 A)  3.536 A. This yields P  (3.536)2(0.1	)  1.25
W. Thus, all results agree with theory.
PSpice Solution
Create the circuit on your screen as in Figure 17–31(a). Use current source
ISIN—see Note 1. Double-click each small parameter box and enter values as
XWM1
5A
100 Hz
0°
I1
L1
1 mH
+
V
I
–
+
–
R1
0.1 Ω
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–30
Verifying average power using a wattmeter.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–31
Investigating instantaneous power using PSpice.
NOTES...
1. PSpice represents current into
devices, not out. For this reason,
the source in Figure 17–31 must
be rotated before positioning so
that its end marked  is at the
bottom.
2. Your trace names may be differ-
ent. For purposes of this discus-
sion, we use the names indicated
in Figure 17–31. When you run
this simulation, substitute your
trace names.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

594
Chapter 17 | Power in ac Circuits
shown. Now click the New Simulation Proﬁle icon, type a name, choose
Transient, set TSTOP to 10ms, then click OK. Add voltage and current markers
as shown, then run the simulation.  Voltage and current waveforms as in Figure
17–31(b) appear. Note the legend below the trace—see Note 2. Voltage is identi-
ﬁed as V(R1:2) and current as I(L1). To plot instantaneous power, click Trace,
Add Trace, and when the dialog box opens, click V(R1:2), click the * symbol,
click I(L1), then click OK. This creates and plots the power curve V(R1:2)*I(L1).
Compare the resulting power curve to Figure 17–2. Using a cursor, measure
power at the peak and trough points of the waveform. (The peak should be about
9.17 W and the trough about 6.72 W.)
Reconciliation of Results:
Your peak and trough measurements should have
yielded approximately 9.17 W and 6.72 W, respectively. Real power P, the aver-
age value of the power wave, is halfway between these two extremes. Thus, P 
(9.17 – 6.72)/2  1.23 W. Now consider P  I2R. RMS current is I  (0.707)Im 
(0.707)(5 A)  3.536 A. Thus, P  (3.536)2(0.1 	)  1.25 W. Agreement is good.
EXAMPLE 17–12       
In this example, we investigate power factor correction. Consider Figure 17–20
from Example 17–8. The equivalent resistance of the lamp loads is RLamp 
V2/P  (600V)2/12 000  30 	. The electric furnace is represented by a 2.4-	
resistor in series with an inductance of L  XL/q = (3.2 	)/377  8.488 mH.
We also need the equivalent circuit for the motor loads. Based on the informa-
tion given, it can be shown that the equivalent circuit is a resistance of Rm 
2.88 	 in series with an inductance of Lm  5.73 mH. (You can check this out
if you like.)
Multisim Solution
Build the circuit on your screen as shown as Figure 17–32. Use the ac power
source (from the Power Source Components toolbar). To add the ammeter, right-
click Place, ensure that Measurement Components is selected, then locate Place
Ammeter (Horizontal) and position it on your screen.  Double-click the ammeter
and set its mode to AC, then click the Simulate ON/OFF switch to ON.
600 Vrms
60 Hz
0 Deg
V1 +
–
U1
x
AC 1e-009 Ohm
C1
306µF
IC=0 V
R1
30 Ω
R2
2.4 Ω
Equivalent plant load
L
8.488 mH
Correction
capacitor
Lights
Furnace
Motor
L1
5.73 mH
R3
2.88 Ω
–
+
A
0.000
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–32
Investigating power factor correction using Multisim.
Note that source current is 328 A as we computed in Example 17–8, part (c).
Now connect the capacitor to point x in your circuit and run the simulation again.
Note that source current drops to 286 A as computed in Example 17–8.
PSpice
The PSpice circuit is shown as Figure 17–33. (Conﬁgure ammeter IPRINT as
you did in Chapter 16.) Use power source VAC. Set simulation to AC Sweep/Noise
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
595
Analysis, set Start Frequency and End Frequency to 60 Hz, select Linear, set Total
Points to 1, click OK, then click the Run icon. When the simulation window
opens, click View/Output File, then scroll until you ﬁnd the answers indicated in
Figure 17–33. As indicated, the magnitude of the current, IM(V_PRINT1), is
3.280 
 102  328 A, the same as we computed in Example 17–8. Now connect
a 306-F capacitor across the load between points x-x, then run the simulation
again. Note that source current drops to 286 A as predicted in Example 17–8.
R3
2.88
L2
5.73 mH
L1
8.488 mH
R2
2.4
R1
30
X
X
IPRINT
V1
600 V
0 Vdc
FREQ
6.000E+01
3.280E+02
IM(V_PRINT1)IP(V_PRINT1)
–4.212E+01
0
+
–
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–33
Investigating power factor correction using PSpice.
Problems
17.1–17.5
1. Note that the power curve of Figure 17–4 is sometimes positive and some-
times negative. What is the significance of this? Between t  T4 and 
t  T2, what is the direction of power ﬂow?
2. What is real power? What is reactive power? Which power, real or reactive,
has an average value of zero?
3. A pair of electric heating elements is shown in Figure 17–34.
a. Determine the active and reactive power to each.
b. Determine the active and reactive power delivered by the source.
4. For the circuit of Figure 17–35, determine the active and reactive power to
the inductor.
5. If the inductor of Figure 17–35 is replaced by a 40-F capacitor and source
frequency is 60 Hz, what is QC?
6. Find R and XL for Figure 17–36.
7. For the circuit of Figure 17–37, f  100 Hz. Find
a. R
b. XC
c. C
8. For the circuit of Figure 17–38, f  10 Hz. Find
a. P
b. XL
c. L
9. For Figure 17–39, ﬁnd XC.
10. For Figure 17–40, XC  42.5 	. Find R, P, and Q.
100 V


R1
10  R2
20 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–34
FIGURE 17–35
100 V


j8 
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11. Find the total average power and the total reactive power supplied by the
source for Figure 17–41.
12. If the source of Figure 17–41 is reversed, what is PT and QT? What conclu-
sion can you draw from this?
13. Refer to Figure 17–42. Find P2 and Q3. Is the element in Load 3 inductive or
capacitive?
14. For Figure 17–43, determine PT and QT.
596
Chapter 17 | Power in ac Circuits
R
L
12.5 A
625 W
2500 VAR
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–36
5 A
250 W
150 VAR
C
R
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–37
FIGURE 17–43
FIGURE 17–42
FIGURE 17–41
FIGURE 17–40
FIGURE 17–39
FIGURE 17–38
8 
L
60 V
P
40 VAR


© Cengage Learning 2013
XC
40 Ω
360 W
480 VAR
© Cengage Learning 2013
85 V
R
XC
380.1 VA


© Cengage Learning 2013
15 Ω
40 Ω
10 Ω
R
XL
XC
4 A∠0°
© Cengage Learning 2013
2.9 kW
1.1 kVAR
(ind.)
1200 W
1400 VAR
P2
600 VAR
800 W
Q3
(ind.)
(cap.)
© Cengage Learning 2013
PT
QT
22 Ω
j6 Ω
2.5 A∠0°
10 Ω
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15. For Figure 17–44, q  10 rads. Determine
a. RT
b. R2
c. XC
d. Leq
16. For Figure 17–45, determine the total PT and QT.
17.7
The Relationship between P, Q, and S
17. For the circuit of Figure 17–7, draw the power triangle and determine the
apparent power.
18. Repeat Problem 17 for Figure 17–8.
19. Ignoring the wattmeter of Figure 17–27, determine the power triangle for the
circuit as seen by the source.
20. For the circuit of Figure 17–46, what is the source current?
21. For Figure 17–47, the generator supplies 30 A. What is R?
Problems
597
(a)
(b)
(c)
720 W
432 VAR
(ind.)
6 A
RT
Leq
I = 6 A
10 
j20
jXC
R1
4 
R3
R2
720 W
432 VAR (ind)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–48
FIGURE 17–47
FIGURE 17–46
FIGURE 17–45
FIGURE 17–44
600 V


2.4 A
R2
XL
40 
R1
20 
40 
XC
50 
(cap.)
1152 W
633.6 VAR
PT
QT
© Cengage Learning 2013
(ind.)
120 V


I
(cap.)
200 W
0 VAR
0 W
200 VAR
1200 W
800 VAR
© Cengage Learning 2013
(ind.)
(cap.)
600 V


30 A
(ind.)
6915 W
12 960 VAR
R
7450 W
17 880 VAR
1377 W
2750 VAR
© Cengage Learning 2013
22. Suppose V  100 V∠60 and I  10A∠40:
a. What is v, the angle between V and I?
b. Determine P from P  VI cos v.
c. Determine Q from Q  VI sin v.
d. Sketch the power triangle and from it, determine S.
e. Show that S  VI* gives the same answer as (d).
23. For Figure 17–48, Sgen  4835 VA. What is R?
24. Refer to the circuit of Figure 17–16:
a. Determine the apparent power for each box.
b. Sum the apparent powers that you just computed. Why does the sum not
equal ST  1803 VA as obtained in Example 17–5?
(ind.)
600 V
R


(cap.)
1014 W
4608 VAR
0 W
1912 VAR
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

17.8
Power Factor
25. Refer to the circuit of Figure 17–49:
a. Determine PT, QT, and ST.
b. Determine whether the fuse will blow.
26. A motor with an efﬁciency of 87% supplies 10 hp to a load (Figure 17–50).
Its power factor is 0.65 (lag).
a. What is the power input to the motor?
b. What is the reactive power to the motor?
c. Draw the motor power triangle. What is the apparent power to the motor?
27. To correct the circuit power factor of Figure 17–50 to unity, a power factor
correction capacitor is added.
a. Show where the capacitor is connected.
b. Determine its value in microfarads.
28. Consider Figure 17–20. The motor is replaced with a new unit requiring
Sm  (120  j35) kVA. Everything else remains the same. Find the following:
a. PT
b. QT
c. ST
d. Determine how much kVAR capacitive correction is needed to correct 
to unity Fp.
29. A small electrical utility has a 600-V, 300-kVA capacity. It supplies a factory
(Figure 17–51.) with the power triangle shown in Figure 17–51(b). This fully
loads the utility. If a power factor correcting capacitor corrects the load
to unity power factor, how much more power (at unity power factor) can the
utility sell to other customers?
17.9
ac Power Measurement
30. a. Why does the wattmeter of Figure 17–52 indicate only 1200 watts?
b. Where would the wattmeter have to be placed to measure power delivered
by the source? Sketch the modiﬁed circuit.
c. What would the wattmeter indicate in (b)?
31. Determine the wattmeter reading for Figure 17–53.
598
Chapter 17 | Power in ac Circuits
278 W
521 VAR
(ind.)
120 V


772 VA
Fp = 0.385
(lead)
182 VA
Fp = 0.8
(lag)
15-A
fuse
Ig
© Cengage Learning 2013
I
600 V
60 Hz


Motor
Po =
η =
Fp =
10 hp
0.87
0.65 (lag)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–53
FIGURE 17–52
FIGURE 17–51
FIGURE 17–50
FIGURE 17–49
600 V
36°


Motors
Lights
Other
loads
Electric
utility
300 kVA
capacity
Factory loads
P
Q
300 kVA
(b) Factory power triangle
(a)
© Cengage Learning 2013
E


300 W
0 VAR
700 W
600 VAR
1200 W
400 VAR
W
© Cengage Learning 2013
120 V∠50°
25 A∠20°


W
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

32. Determine the wattmeter reading for Figure 17–54.
Problems
599
FIGURE 17–54
120 V


W
XC  60 Ω
40 Ω
© Cengage Learning 2013
17.10
Effective Resistance
33. Measurements on an iron-core solenoid coil yield the following values: V 
80 V, I  400 mA, P  25.6 W, and R  140 	. (The last measurement was
taken with an ohmmeter.) What is the ac resistance of the solenoid coil?
17.12
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
34. Using Multisim, create the circuit of Figure 17–17 on your screen. (For the
source, use the voltage source from Power Components.) Deﬁne the parallel
RLC combination as the “load.” Add an ammeter and a wattmeter to measure
load current and load power. Using your calculator, compute the resistance 
of the heater, the inductance of the coil, and the capacitance of the capacitor,
then set these values on your Multisim circuit. Run a simulation and measure
load current, power, and power factor. Using the measured values, compute
QT. Using the applied voltage and the measured current, compute apparent
power. Compare these values of QT and ST to the values determined in
Example 17–6.
35. A 10-F capacitor has voltage v  10 sin(qt  90) V. Given f  1000 Hz,
use Multisim or  PSpice to investigate the power waveform and compare to
Figure 17–5. (PSpice users, use VSIN.)
36. The voltage waveform of Figure 17–55 is applied to a 200-F capacitor.
a. Using your calculator and the principles of Chapter 10, determine the cur-
rent through the capacitor and sketch. (Also sketch the voltage waveform
on your graph.) Multiply the two waveforms to obtain a plot of p(t).
Compute power at its max and min points.
MultiSim
MultiSim
10 V
0
1
2
10 V
v
t (ms)
3
4
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–55
b. Use PSpice to verify the results. Use voltage source VPWL. You have to
describe the waveform to the source. It has a value of 0 V at t  0, 10 V
at t  1 ms, 10 V at t  3 ms, and 0 V at t  4 ms. To set these,
double-click the source symbol and enter values via the Property Editor as
PSPICE
PSPICE
NOTES...
PSpice represents current into
devices. Thus, when you double-
click a current source symbol (ISIN,
IPWL, etc.) and specify a current
waveform, you are specifying the
current into the source. You must
take this into consideration when
you set up your current sources.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

follows: 0 for T1, 0V for V1, 1ms for T2, 10V for V2, and so on. Run the
simulation and plot voltage, current, and power using the procedure we
used to create Figure 17–31. Results should agree with those of part (a).
37. Repeat Question 36 for a current waveform identical to Figure 17–55 except
that it oscillates between 2 A and 2 A applied to a 2-mH inductor. Use cur-
rent source IPWL (see Note).
38. Repeat Question 36 except use Multisim. To create the applied voltage 
waveform, use the Piecewise_Linear_Voltage source found in the
Signal_Voltage_Sources components. Double-click it, select Enter data
points in table and enter values to describe the waveform. Click Repeat 
data during simulation, then click OK. Choose transient analysis, set TSTOP
to 0.008, click the Output tab, set items up for display, then click Simulate.
600
Chapter 17 | Power in ac Circuits
PSPICE
MultiSim
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. 100 V
2. 8.76 A
3. Figure 17–7: 0.6 (lag); Figure 17–8: 0.97
(lead); Figure 17–9: 0.6 (lag)
4. Yes. (S  128 kVA)
1600
VAR
1200 W
53.13°
2000
VA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 17–56
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

601
18 ac Series-Parallel Circuits
19 Methods of ac Analysis
20 ac Network Theorems
21 Resonance
22 Filters and the Bode Plot
23 Transformers and Coupled
Circuits
24 Three-Phase Systems
25 Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
I
IMPEDANCE NETWORKS
A
s you have already observed, the impedance of an inductor or a capacitor is
dependent upon the frequency of the signal applied to the element. When
capacitors and inductors are combined with resistors and voltage or current
sources, the circuit will behave in a predictable manner for all frequencies.
This part of the textbook examines how circuits consisting of various combi-
nations of impedances and sources behave under speciﬁc conditions. In particular,
we ﬁnd that all the laws, rules, and theorems developed previously apply to even
the most complicated impedance network.
Ohm’s law and Kirchhoff’s voltage and current laws are easily modiﬁed to give
the framework for developing methods of network analysis. Just as in dc circuits,
Thévenin’s and Norton’s theorems will allow us to simplify a complicated circuit to
a single source and corresponding impedance.
The theorems and methods of analysis are applied to numerous types of cir-
cuits which are commonly encountered throughout electrical and electronics tech-
nology. Resonant circuits and ﬁlter circuits are commonly used to restrict the range
of output frequencies for a given range of input frequencies.
The study of three-phase systems and transformers is particularly useful for
anyone interested in commercial power distribution. These topics deal with practi-
cal applications and the drawbacks of using various types of circuits.
Finally, we examine how a circuit reacts to nonsinusoidal alternating voltages.
This topic involves complex signals which are processed by impedance networks
resulting in outputs which are often dramatically different from the input. I
V
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Admittance
Admittance Diagram
Capacitive Impedance
Cutoff (or Corner)
Frequency
Impedance Diagram
Inductive Impedance
Leading and Lagging
Power Factor
Resistive Circuit
Susceptance
I OUTLINE
Ohm’s Law for ac Circuits
ac Series Circuits
Kirchhoff’s Voltage Law
and the Voltage Divider
Rule
ac Parallel Circuits
Kirchhoff’s Current Law
and the Current Divider
Rule
Series-Parallel Circuits
Frequency Effects
Applications
Circuit Analysis Using
Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• apply Ohm’s law to analyze simple series
circuits,
• apply the voltage divider rule to determine
the voltage across any element in a series
circuit,
• apply Kirchhoff’s voltage law to verify that the
summation of voltages around a closed loop is
equal to zero,
• apply Kirchhoff’s current law to verify that the
summation of currents entering a node is
equal to the summation of currents leaving
the same node,
• determine unknown voltage, current, and
power for any series/parallel circuit,
• determine the series or parallel equivalent of
any network consisting of a combination of
resistors, inductors, and capacitors.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18
ac SERIES-PARALLEL CIRCUITS
I
n this chapter we examine how simple circuits containing resistors, inductors, and capacitors
behave when subjected to sinusoidal voltages and currents. Principally, we ﬁnd that the rules
and laws which were developed for dc circuits will apply equally well for ac circuits. The major
difference between solving dc and ac circuits is that analysis of ac circuits requires using
vector algebra.
In order to proceed successfully, it is suggested that the student spend time reviewing the
important topics covered in dc analysis. These include Ohm’s law, the voltage divider rule,
Kirchhoff’s voltage law, Kirchhoff’s current law, and the current divider rule.
You will also ﬁnd that a brief review of vector algebra will make your understanding of this
chapter more productive. In particular, you should be able to add and subtract any number of
vector quantities. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

604
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
604
Chapter 3 | Resistance
Putting It in Perspective
Heinrich Rudolph Hertz
HEINRICH HERTZ WAS BORN IN HAMBURG, Germany, on February 22,
1857. He is known mainly for his research into the transmis-
sion of electromagnetic waves.
Hertz began his career as an assistant to Hermann von
Helmholtz in the Berlin Institute physics laboratory. In 1885,
he was appointed Professor of Physics at Karlsruhe
Polytechnic, where he did much to verify James Clerk
Maxwell’s theories of electromagnetic waves.
In one of his experiments, Hertz discharged an induction
coil with a rectangular loop of wire having a very small gap.
When the coil discharged, a spark jumped across the gap. He
then placed a second, identical coil close to the ﬁrst, but with
no electrical connection. When the spark jumped across the
gap of the ﬁrst coil, a smaller spark was also induced across the
second coil. Today, more elaborate antennas use similar princi-
ples to transmit radio signals over vast distances. Through fur-
ther research, Hertz was able to prove that electromagnetic
waves have many of the characteristics of light: they have the same speed as light; they travel in
straight lines; they can be reﬂected and refracted; and they can be polarized.
Hertz’s experiments ultimately led to the development of radio communication by such electri-
cal engineers as Guglielmo Marconi and Reginald Fessenden.
Heinrich Hertz died at the age of 36 on January 1, 1894. I
This section is a brief review of the relationship between voltage and current
for resistors, inductors, and capacitors. Unlike in Chapter 16, all phasors are
given as rms rather than as peak values. As you saw in Chapter 17, this
approach simpliﬁes the calculation of power.
Resistors
In Chapter 16, we saw that when a resistor is subjected to a sinusoidal voltage
as shown in Figure 18–1, the resulting current is also sinusoidal and in phase
with the voltage.
The sinusoidal voltage v  Vmsin(qt  v) may be written in phasor form as
V  V∠v. Whereas the sinusoidal expression gives the instantaneous value of
voltage for a waveform having an amplitude of Vm (volts peak), the phasor form
has a magnitude which is the effective (or rms) value. The relationship between
the magnitude of the phasor and the peak of the sinusoidal voltage is given as
V  

Vm
2

Because the resistance vector may be expressed as ZR  R∠0, we evalu-
ate the current phasor as follows:
I  Z
V
R
  
R
V
∠
∠
0
v
°
  V
R
∠v  I∠v
18.1 Ohm’s Law 
for ac Circuits
Hulton Archive/Stringer/Hulton Archive/Getty Images
NOTES...
Although currents and voltages may
be shown in either time domain (as
sinusoidal quantities) or in phasor
domain (as vectors), resistance and
reactance are never shown as sinu-
soidal quantities. The reason for this
is that whereas currents and volt-
ages vary as functions of time,
resistance and reactance do not.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If we wish to convert the current from phasor form to its sinusoidal equiv-
alent in the time domain, we would have i  Imsin(qt  v). Again, the rela-
tionship between the magnitude of the phasor and the peak value of the
sinusoidal equivalent is given as
I  

Im
2

The voltage and current phasors may be shown on a phasor diagram as in
Figure 18–2.
Because one phasor is a current and the other is a voltage, the relative
lengths of these phasors are purely arbitrary. Regardless of the angle v, we see
that the voltage across and the current through a resistor will always be in phase.
Section 18.1 | Ohm’s Law for ac Circuits
605
(a)
(b)
v
R


i
v = Vm sin (ωt + θ)
2
θ
ωt
i = Im sin (ωt + θ)
(rad)
radians
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–1
Sinusoidal voltage and current for a resistor.
j
I  I ∠θ

j

V  V ∠θ
θ
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–2
Voltage and current phasors
for a resistor.
EXAMPLE 18–1       
Refer to the resistor shown in Figure 18–3:
a. Find the sinusoidal current i using phasors.
b. Sketch the sinusoidal waveforms for v and i.
c. Sketch the phasor diagram of V and I.
Solution
a. The phasor form of the voltage is determined as follows:
v  72 sin qt ⇔V  50.9 V∠0
From Ohm’s law, the current phasor is determined to be
I  Z
V
R
  
5
1
0
8
.9

V
∠
∠
0
0
°
°
  2.83 A∠0°
which results in the sinusoidal current waveform having an amplitude of
Im  (2)(2.83 A)  4.0 A
Therefore, the current i will be written as
i  4 sin qt
b. The voltage and current waveforms are shown in Figure 18–4.
c. Figure 18–5 shows the voltage and current phasors.
18  


i
v  72 sin ωt
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

606
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
v = 72 sin ωt

ωt
i = 4 sin ωt
3
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
j

V  50.9 V∠0
I  2.83 A∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–4
FIGURE 18–5
EXAMPLE 18–2       
Refer to the resistor of Figure 18–6:
a. Use phasor algebra to ﬁnd the sinusoidal voltage, v.
b. Sketch the sinusoidal waveforms for v and i.
c. Sketch a phasor diagram showing V and I.
Solution
a. The sinusoidal current has a phasor form as follows:
i  3  103 sin(qt  40) ⇔I  2.12 mA∠40
From Ohm’s law, the voltage across the 2-k resistor is determined as
the phasor product
V  IZR
 (2.12 mA∠40°)(2 k∠0°)
 4.24 V∠40°
The amplitude of the sinusoidal voltage is
Vm  (2)(4.24 V)  6.0 V
The voltage may now be written as
v  6.0 sin(qt  40)
b. Figure 18–7 shows the sinusoidal waveforms for v and i.
c. The corresponding phasors for the voltage and current are shown in
Figure 18–8.
2 k 


v
i  3 × 10−3 sin(ωt  40)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–6
v = 6 sin (ωt  40)
ωt
40
i  3 × 10−3 sin(ωt  40)
© Cengage Learning 2013
j

V  4.24 V∠40
I  2.12 mA∠40
j
40
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–7
FIGURE 18–8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Inductors
When an inductor is subjected to a sinusoidal current, a sinusoidal voltage is
induced across the inductor such that the voltage across the inductor leads the
current waveform by exactly 90. If we know the reactance of an inductor, then
from Ohm’s law the current in the inductor may be expressed in phasor form as
I  Z
V
L
  
XL
V
∠
∠
9
v
0°
  X
V
L
∠(v  90°)
In vector form, the reactance of the inductor is given as
ZL  XL∠90
where XL  qL  2pfL.
Section 18.1 | Ohm’s Law for ac Circuits
607
EXAMPLE 18–3       
Consider the inductor shown in Figure 18–9:
a. Determine the sinusoidal expression for the current i using phasors.
b. Sketch the sinusoidal waveforms for v and i.
c. Sketch the phasor diagram showing V and I.
Solution
a. The phasor form of the voltage is determined as follows:
v  1.05 sin(qt  120) ⇔V  0.742 V ∠120
From Ohm’s law, the current phasor is determined to be
I  Z
V
L
  
0.7
2
4
5
2

V
∠
∠
9
1
0
2
°
0°
  29.7 mA∠30°
The amplitude of the sinusoidal current is
Im  (2)(29.7 mA)  42 mA
The current i is now written as
i  0.042 sin(qt  30)
b. Figure 18–10 shows the sinusoidal waveforms of the voltage and current.
c. The voltage and current phasors are shown in Figure 18–11.
XL
25 

i
v  1.05 sin(ωt  120) 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–9
v  1.05 sin(ωt  120°)
2

i  0.042 sin(ωt  30°)
30°
120°
ωt
© Cengage Learning 2013
j

V  0.742 V∠120
I  29.7 mA∠30
j
30
120
Voltage leads
current by 90°
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–10
Sinusoidal voltage and current for an inductor.
FIGURE 18–11
Voltage and current phasors
for an inductor.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Capacitors
When a capacitor is subjected to a sinusoidal voltage, a sinusoidal current
results. The current through the capacitor leads the voltage by exactly 90. If we
know the reactance of a capacitor, then from Ohm’s law the current in the capac-
itor expressed in phasor form is
I  Z
V
C
  
XC∠
V∠

v
90°
 
∠(v  90°)
In vector form, the reactance of the capacitor is given as
ZC  XC∠90
where
XC  q
1
C
  
2p
1
fC

V
XC
608
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
EXAMPLE 18–4       
Consider the capacitor of Figure 18–12.
a. Find the voltage v across the capacitor.
b. Sketch the sinusoidal waveforms for v and i.
c. Sketch the phasor diagram showing V and I.
Solution
a. Converting the sinusoidal current into its equivalent phasor form gives
i  2.4  103 sin(qt  62) ⇔I  1.70 mA∠62
From Ohm’s law, the phasor voltage across the capacitor must be
V  IZC
 (1.70 mA∠62°)(1.2 k∠90°)
 2.04 V∠28°
The amplitude of the sinusoidal voltage is
Vm  (2)(2.04 V)  2.88 V
The voltage v is now written as
v  2.88 sin(qt  28)
b. Figure 18–13 shows the waveforms for v and i.
XC
i  2.4 × 10−3 sin(ωt  62) 
1.2 k


v
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–12
FIGURE 18–13
Sinusoidal voltage and current for a capacitor.
v = 2.88 sin(ωt  28)
i = 2.4  10−3 sin(ωt  62)
28
62
π
2π
3π
ωt
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.1 | Ohm’s Law for ac Circuits
609
c. The corresponding phasor diagram for V and I is shown in Figure 18–14.
FIGURE 18–14
Voltage and current phasors for a capacitor.
j
V  2.04 V∠28
I  1.70 mA∠62
j
28
62
Current leads
voltage by 90°
© Cengage Learning 2013
1. What is the phase relationship between current and voltage for a resistor?
2. What is the phase relationship between current and voltage for a capacitor?
3. What is the phase relationship between current and voltage for an inductor?
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
The relationships between voltage and current, as illustrated in the previ-
ous three examples, will always hold for resistors, inductors, and capacitors.
A voltage source, E  10 V∠30, is applied to an inductive impedance of 50 .
a. Solve for the phasor current, I.
b. Sketch the phasor diagram for E and I.
c. Write the sinusoidal expressions for e and i.
d. Sketch the sinusoidal expressions for e and i.
Answers
a. I  0.2 A∠60
c. e  14.1 sin(qt  30)
i  0.283 sin(qt  60)
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
A voltage source, E  10 V∠30, is applied to a capacitive impedance of 20 .
a. Solve for the phasor current, I.
b. Sketch the phasor diagram for E and I.
c. Write the sinusoidal expressions for e and i.
d. Sketch the sinusoidal expressions for e and i.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

610
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
Answers
a. I  0.5 A∠120
c. e  14.1 sin(qt  30)
i  0.707 sin(qt  120)
When we examined dc circuits we saw that the current everywhere in a series
circuit is always constant. The same applies when we have series elements with
an ac source. Further, we had seen that the total resistance of a dc series circuit
consisting of n resistors was determined as the summation
RT  R1  R2  …  Rn
When working with ac circuits we no longer work with only resistance but
also with capacitive and inductive reactance. Impedance is a term used to col-
lectively determine how the resistance, capacitance, and inductance “impede”
the current in a circuit. The symbol for impedance is the letter Z and the unit
is the ohm (). Because impedance may be made up of any combination of
resistances and reactances, it is written as a vector quantity Z, where
Z  Z∠v
()
Each impedance may be represented as a vector on the complex plane,
such that the length of the vector is representative of the magnitude of the
impedance. The diagram showing one or more impedances is referred to as an
impedance diagram.
Resistive impedance ZR is a vector having a magnitude of R along the pos-
itive real axis. Purely inductive impedance ZL is a vector having a magnitude of
XL along the positive imaginary axis, while the purely capacitive impedance ZC
is a vector having a magnitude of XC along the negative imaginary axis.
Mathematically, each of the vector impedances is written as follows:
ZR  R∠0°  R  j0  R
ZL  XL∠90°  0  jXL  jXL
ZC  XC∠90°  0  jXC  jXC
An impedance diagram showing each of the preceding impedances is
shown in Figure 18–15.
All impedance vectors will appear in either the ﬁrst or the fourth quadrant,
since the resistive impedance vector is always positive.
For a series ac circuit consisting of n impedances, as shown in Figure 18–16,
the total impedance of the circuit is found as the vector sum
ZT  Z1  Z2  …  Zn
(18–1)
Consider the branch of Figure 18–17.
By applying Equation 18–1, we may determine the total impedance of the cir-
cuit as
ZT  (3   j0)  (0  j4 )  3   j4 
 5 ∠53.13°
The preceding quantities are shown on an impedance diagram as in
Figure 18–18.
18.2 ac Series Circuits
j
ZC  XC∠90  j XC
ZL  XL∠90  j XL
j
   ZR  R∠0

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–15
ZT
Z1
Z2
Zn
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–16
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

From Figure 18–18 we see that the total impedance of the series elements
consists of a real component and an imaginary component. The corresponding
total impedance vector may be written in either polar or rectangular form.
The rectangular form of an impedance is written as
Z  R 	 jX
If we are given the polar form of the impedance, then we may determine
the equivalent rectangular expression from
R  Z cos v
(18–2)
and
X  Z sin v
(18–3)
In the rectangular representation for impedance, the resistance term, R, is
the total of all resistance looking into the network. The reactance term, X, is the
difference between the total capacitive and inductive reactances. The sign for
the imaginary term will be positive if the inductive reactance is greater than the
capacitive reactance. In such a case, the impedance vector will appear in the first
quadrant of the impedance diagram and is referred to as being an inductive
impedance. If the capacitive reactance is larger, then the sign for the imaginary
term will be negative. In such a case, the impedance vector will appear in the
fourth quadrant of the impedance diagram, and the impedance is said to be
capacitive.
The polar form of any impedance will be written in the form
Z  Z∠v
The value Z is the magnitude (in ohms) of the impedance vector Z and is
determined as follows:
Z  R2
 X
2
()
(18–4)
The corresponding angle of the impedance vector is determined as
v  	tan1X
R

(18–5)
Whenever a capacitor and an inductor having equal reactances are placed in
series, as shown in Figure 18–19, the equivalent circuit of the two components
is a short circuit since the inductive reactance will be exactly balanced by the
capacitive reactance.
Section 18.2 | ac Series Circuits
611
XL
3 
4 
R
ZT
© Cengage Learning 2013
53.13
4 ∠90
3 ∠0
ZT  3   j 4 
 5 ∠53.13
4 
3 
5 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–17
FIGURE 18–18
FIGURE 18–19
XC  X
ZT  0 
XL  X
ZT  jXL  jXC
 jX  jX
 0  
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Any ac circuit having a total impedance with only a real component is
referred to as a resistive circuit. In such a case, the impedance vector ZT
will be located along the positive real axis of the impedance diagram and the
angle of the vector will be 0. The condition under which series reactances
are equal is referred to as “series resonance” and is examined in greater
detail in Chapter 21.
If the impedance Z is written in polar form, then the angle v will be posi-
tive for an inductive impedance and negative for a capacitive impedance. In the
event that the circuit is purely reactive, the resulting angle v will be either 90
(inductive) or 90 (capacitive). If we reexamine the impedance diagram of
Figure 18–18, we conclude that the original circuit is inductive.
612
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
EXAMPLE 18–5       
Consider the network of Figure 18–20.
a. Find ZT.
b. Sketch the impedance diagram for the network and indicate whether the
total impedance of the circuit is inductive, capacitive, or resistive.
c. Use Ohm’s law to determine I, VR, and VC.
Solution
a. The total impedance is the vector sum
ZT  25   j200   (j225 )
 25   j25 
 35.36 ∠45°
b. The corresponding impedance diagram is shown in Figure 18–21.
FIGURE 18–20
FIGURE 18–21
j
j225 
ZT  25   j25 
    35.36 ∠45
45
j200 
© Cengage Learning 2013
   j200   j225   j25 
VC


200 
I
XL
VR
225 
XC
ZT
10 V∠0
R  25 



© Cengage Learning 2013
Because the total impedance has a negative reactance term (j25 ), ZT
is capacitive.
c.
I 
35.3
1
6
0

V
∠
∠

0°
45°
  0.283 A∠45°
VR  (282.8 mA∠45°)(25 ∠0°)  7.07 V∠45°
VC  (282.8 mA∠45°)(225 ∠90°)  63.6 V∠45°
Notice that the magnitude of the voltage across the capacitor is many
times larger than the source voltage applied to the circuit. This example
illustrates that the voltages across reactive elements must be calculated to
ensure that maximum ratings for the components are not exceeded.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.2 | ac Series Circuits
613
EXAMPLE 18–6       
Determine the impedance Z which must be within the indicated block of
Figure 18–22 if the total impedance of the network is 13 ∠22.62.
Solution
Converting the total impedance from polar to rectangular form, we get
ZT  13 ∠22.62 ⇔12   j5 
Now, we know that the total impedance is determined from the summation
of the individual impedance vectors, namely
ZT  2   j10   Z  12   j5 
Therefore, the impedance Z is found as
Z  12   j5   (2   j10 )
 10   j5 
 11.18 ∠26.57°
In its most simple form, the impedance Z will consist of a series
combination of a 10- resistor and a capacitor having a reactance of 5 .
Figure 18–23 shows the elements that may be contained within Z to satisfy the
given conditions.
EXAMPLE 18–7       
Find the total impedance for the network of Figure 18–24. Sketch the imped-
ance diagram showing Z1, Z2, and ZT.
Solution
ZT  Z1  Z2
 (50   j90 )  (30   j30 )
 (80   j60 )  100 ∠36.87°
The polar forms of the vectors Z1 and Z2 are as follows:
Z1  50   j90   102.96 ∠60.95°
Z2  30   j30   42.43 ∠45°
The resulting impedance diagram is shown in Figure 18–25.
FIGURE 18–23
ZT  13 ∠22.62
R
2 
10 
XL
Z
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–22
R
10 
5 
XC
Z  10   j 5
 11.18  ∠26.57
© Cengage Learning 2013
ZT
30   j 30 
Z2
50   j 90 
Z1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–24
FIGURE 18–25
j
ZT  100 ∠36.87
   Z2 42.43 ∠45
60.95
36.87
45
Z1  102.96 ∠60.95
j
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The phase angle v for the impedance vector Z  Z∠v provides the phase
angle between the voltage V across Z and the current I through the impedance.
For an inductive impedance the voltage will lead the current by v. If the imped-
ance is capacitive, then the voltage will lag the current by an amount equal to
the magnitude of v.
The phase angle v is also useful for determining the average power dissi-
pated by the circuit. In the simple series circuit shown in Figure 18–26, we
know that only the resistor will dissipate power.
The average power dissipated by the resistor may be determined as
follows:
P  VRI 
 I2R
(18–6)
Notice that Equation 18–6 uses only the magnitudes of the voltage,
current, and impedance vectors. Power is never determined by using phasor
products.
Ohm’s law provides the magnitude of the current phasor as
I  V
Z

Substituting this expression into Equation 18–6, we obtain the expression
for power as
P  V
Z2
2
R  V
Z
2
R
Z

(18–7)
From the impedance diagram of Figure 18–27, we see that
cos v  R
Z

The previous chapter had defined the power factor as Fp  cos v, where v
is the angle between the voltage and current phasors. We now see that for a
series circuit, the power factor of the circuit can be determined from the mag-
nitudes of resistance and total impedance.
Fp  cos v  R
Z

(18–8)
The power factor, Fp, is said to be leading if the current leads the voltage
(capacitive circuit) and lagging if the current lags the voltage (inductive
circuit).
Now substituting the expression for the power factor into Equation 18–7,
we express power delivered to the circuit as
P  VI cos v
Since V  IZ, power may be expressed as
P  VI cos v  I2Z cos v  V
Z
2
 cos v
(18–9)
V
2
R
R
614
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
FIGURE 18–26
XL
R
ZT
I
VR
V




© Cengage Learning 2013
   Z  Z∠θ
R
XL

j
θ
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–27
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.2 | ac Series Circuits
615
EXAMPLE 18–8       
Refer to the circuit of Figure 18–28.
FIGURE 18–28
4  


I
e  20	2 sin ωt
3  
ZT
R
XC
© Cengage Learning 2013
    I  4.0 A∠53.13
j
53.13
E  20 V∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–29
a. Find the impedance ZT.
b. Calculate the power factor of the circuit.
c. Determine I.
d. Sketch the phasor diagram for E and I.
e. Find the average power delivered to the circuit by the voltage source.
f. Calculate the average power dissipated by both the resistor and the capacitor.
Solution
a. ZT  3   j4   5 ∠53.13
b. Fp  cos v  3 
5   0.6 (leading)
c. The phasor form of the applied voltage is
E  
(2

)(2
2
0 V)
∠0°  20 V∠0°
which gives a current of
I  
5 
2
∠
0

V∠
53
0
.
°
13°
  4.0 A∠53.13°
d. The phasor diagram is shown in Figure 18–29.
From this phasor diagram, we see that the current phasor for the capaci-
tive circuit leads the voltage phasor by 53.13.
e. The average power delivered to the circuit by the voltage source is
P  (20 V)(4 A) cos 53.13  48.0 W
f. The average power dissipated by the resistor and capacitor will be
PR  (4 A)2(3 ) cos 0°  48 W
PC  (4 A)2(4 ) cos 90°  0 W
(as expected!)
Notice that the power factor used in determining the power dissipated by
each of the elements is the power factor for that element and not the total
power factor for the circuit.
As expected, the summation of powers dissipated by the resistor and
capacitor is equal to the total power delivered by the voltage source.
CircuitSim 18-1 
CircuitSim 18-1A
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

616
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
A circuit consists of a voltage source E  50 V∠25 in series with L  20 mH,
C  50 F, and R  25 . The circuit operates at an angular frequency of
2 krad
s.
a. Determine the current phasor, I.
b. Solve for the power factor of the circuit.
c. Calculate the average power dissipated by the circuit and verify that this 
is equal to the average power delivered by the source.
d. Use Ohm’s law to ﬁnd VR, VL, and VC.
Answers
a. I  1.28 A∠25.19
b. Fp  0.6402 lagging
c. P  41.0 W
d. VR  32.0 V∠25.19
VC  12.8 V∠115.19
VL  51.2 V∠64.81
When a voltage is applied to impedances in series, as shown in Figure 18–30,
Ohm’s law may be used to determine the voltage across any impedance as
Vx  IZx
The current in the circuit is
I  Z
E
T

Now, by substitution we arrive at the voltage divider rule for any series
combination of elements as
Vx  Z
Z
T
xE
(18–10)
Equation 18–10 is very similar to the equation for the voltage divider rule
in dc circuits. The fundamental differences in solving ac circuits are that we use
impedances rather than resistances and that the voltages found are phasors.
Because the voltage divider rule involves solving products and quotients
of phasors, we generally use the polar form rather than the rectangular form of
phasors.
Kirchhoff’s voltage law must apply for all circuits whether they are dc or
ac circuits. However, because ac circuits have voltages expressed in either sinu-
soidal or phasor form, Kirchhoff’s voltage law for ac circuits may be stated as
follows:
The phasor sum of voltage drops and voltage rises around a closed loop
is equal to zero.
When adding phasor voltages, we find that the summation is generally
done more easily in rectangular form than in the polar form.
18.3 Kirchhoff’s
Voltage Law
and the Voltage
Divider Rule
E
Z1
Z2
Zn
Zx
2
1
Vx
2
1
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–30
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.3 | Kirchhoff’s Voltage Law and the Voltage Divider Rule
617
EXAMPLE 18–9       
Consider the circuit of Figure 18–31.
a. Find ZT.
b. Determine the voltages VR and VL using the voltage divider rule.
c. Verify Kirchhoff’s voltage law around the closed loop.
Solution
a. ZT  5 k  j12 k  13 k∠67.38°
b. VR 
13
5
k
k
∠
∠
67
0
.
°
38°
(26 V∠0°)  10 V∠67.38°
VL 
13
12
k
k
∠
∠
67
9
.
0
3
°
8°
(26 V∠0°)  24 V∠22.62°
c. Kirchhoff’s voltage law around the closed loop will give
26 V∠0°  10 V∠67.38°  24 V∠22.62°  0
(26  j0)  (3.846  j9.231)  (22.154  j9.231)  0
(26  3.846  22.154)  j(0  9.231  9.231)  0
0  j0  0
12 k 
I
E  26 V∠0
5 k 
R
XL




VL
VR


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–31
EXAMPLE 18–10       
Consider the circuit of Figure 18–32:
a. Calculate the sinusoidal voltages v1 and v2 using phasors and the voltage
divider rule.
b. Sketch the phasor diagram showing E, V1, and V2.
c. Sketch the sinusoidal waveforms of e, v1, and v2.
Solution
a. The phasor form of the voltage source is determined as
e  100 sin qt ⇔E  70.71 ∠V 0
Applying VDR, we get
V1 
(70.71 V∠0°)

8
8
9
0
.
.
4
6
4
2


∠
∠


6
2
3
9
.
.
4
7
3
4
°
°
(70.71 V∠0°)
 78.4 V∠33.69°
and
V2 
(70.71 V∠0°)

8
5
0
0
.6
.0
2
0


∠
∠

5
2
3
9
.1
.7
3
4
°
°
(70.71 V∠0°)
 43.9 V∠82.87°
30   j40 

(40   j80 )  (30   j40 )
40   j80 

(40   j80 )  (30   j40 )
e  100 sin ωt




v2
v1


Z1
40   j80 
Z2
30   j40 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–32
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

618
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
The sinusoidal voltages are determined to be
v1  (2)(78.4)sin(qt  33.69°)
 111 sin(qt  33.69°)
and
v2  (2)(43.9)sin(qt  82.87°)
 62.0 sin(qt  82.87°)
b. The phasor diagram is shown in Figure 18–33.
c. The corresponding sinusoidal voltages are shown in Figure 18–34.
j
V2  43.9 V∠82.87
E  70.71 V∠0
j
82.87
V1  78.4 V∠33.69
33.69
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–33
e
82.9°
111 V
ωt
v1
33.7°
v2
3
100 V
62.0 V
(rad)

2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–34
1. Express Kirchhoff’s voltage law as it applies to ac circuits.
2. What is the fundamental difference between how Kirchhoff’s voltage law is
used in ac circuits and how it is used in dc circuits?
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
A circuit consists of a voltage source E  50 V∠25 in series with L  20 mH,
C  50 F, and R  25 . The circuit operates at an angular frequency of 2 krad
s.
a. Use the voltage divider rule to determine the voltage across each element 
in the circuit.
b. Verify that Kirchhoff’s voltage law applies for the circuit.
Answers
a. VL  51.2 V∠64.81, VC  12.8 V∠115.19
VR  32.0 V∠25.19
b. 51.2 V∠64.81  12.8 V∠115.19  32.0 V∠25.19  50 V∠25
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.4 | ac Parallel Circuits
619
The admittance Y of any impedance is deﬁned as a vector quantity which is
the reciprocal of the impedance Z.
Mathematically, admittance is expressed as
YT  Z
1
T
  
ZT
1
∠v
 Z
1
T
∠v  YT∠v
(S)
(18–11)
where the unit of admittance is the siemens (S).
In particular, we have seen that the admittance of a resistor R is called con-
ductance and is given the symbol YR. If we consider resistance as a vector
quantity, then the corresponding vector form of the conductance is
YR  
R∠
1
0°
  R
1
∠0°  G∠0°  G  j0
(S)
(18–12)
If we determine the admittance of a purely reactive component X, the resul-
tant admittance is called the susceptance of the component and is assigned the
symbol B. The unit for susceptance is siemens (S). In order to distinguish between
inductive susceptance and capacitive susceptance, we use the subscripts L and C,
respectively. The vector forms of reactive admittance are given as follows:
YL  
XL∠
1
90°
  X
1
L
∠90°  BL∠90°  0  jBL
(S)
(18–13)
YC  
XC∠
1
90°
  X
1
C
∠90°  BC∠90°  0  jBC
(S)
(18–14)
In a manner similar to impedances, admittances may be represented on the
complex plane in an admittance diagram as shown in Figure 18–35.
The lengths of the various vectors are proportional to the magnitudes
of the corresponding admittances. The resistive admittance vector G is
shown on the positive real axis, whereas the inductive and capacitive admit-
tance vectors YL and YC are shown on the negative and positive imaginary
axes, respectively.
18.4 ac Parallel
Circuits
j

j
YR  G ∠0
YL  BL ∠90  j BL
YC  BC ∠90  j BC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–35
Admittance diagram show-
ing conductance (YR) and susceptance (YL
and YC).
EXAMPLE 18–11        
Determine the admittances of the following impedances. Sketch the corre-
sponding admittance diagram.
a. R  10 
b. XL  20 
c. XC  40 
Solution
a. YR  R
1
  
10 
1
∠0°
  100 mS∠0°
b. YL  X
1
L
  
20 
1
∠90°
  50 mS∠90°
c. YC  X
1
C
  
40 ∠
1
90°
  25 mS∠90°
The admittance diagram is shown in Figure 18–36.
j
YR  100 mS∠0
YL  50 mS∠90
YC  25 mS∠90
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–36
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For any network of n admittances as shown in Figure 18–37, the total
admittance is the vector sum of the admittances of the network.
Mathematically, the total admittance of a network is given as
YT  Y1  Y2  …  Yn
(S)
(18–15)
620
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
YT
Z1
Z2
Zn
Y1
Y2
Yn
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–37
The resultant impedance of a parallel network of n impedances is deter-
mined to be
ZT  Y
1
T
 
ZT 
()
(18–16)
1

Z
1
1
  Z
1
2
  …  Z
1
n

1

Y1  Y2  …  Yn
EXAMPLE 18–12       
Find the equivalent admittance and impedance of the network of Figure 18–38.
Sketch the admittance diagram.
YT
R
40 
XL
30 
XC
60 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–38
Solution
The admittances of the various parallel elements are
Y1  
40 
1
∠0°
  25.0 mS∠0°  25.0 mS  j0
Y2  
60 ∠
1
90°
  16.6 mS∠90°  0  j16.6 mS
Y3  
30 
1
∠90°
  33.3 mS∠90°  0  j33.3 mS
The total admittance is determined as
YT  Y1  Y2  Y3
 25.0 mS  j16.6 mS  (j33.3 mS)
 25.0 mS  j16.6 mS
 30.0 mS∠33.69°
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Two Impedances in Parallel
By applying Equation 18–14 for two impedances, we determine the equivalent
impedance of two impedances as
ZT  
Z
Z
1 
1Z
Z
2
2

()
(18–17)
From the preceding expression, we see that for two impedances in parallel, the
equivalent impedance is determined as the product of the impedances over the
sum. Although the expression for two impedances is very similar to the expres-
sion for two resistors in parallel, the difference is that the calculation of imped-
ance involves the use of complex algebra.
Section 18.4 | ac Parallel Circuits
621
This results in a total impedance for the network of
ZT  Y
1
T


30.0 mS∠
1
33.69°

 33.3 ∠33.69°
The admittance diagram is shown in Figure 18–39.
j
YR  25.0 mS∠0
YL  33.3 mS∠90
YC  16.7 mS∠90
YT  30.0 mS∠33.7
33.70
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–39
EXAMPLE 18–13        
Find the total impedance for the network shown in Figure 18–40.
Solution
ZT 
 
50
50
k
∠

9
∠
0°
0°
  1 k∠90°
(200 ∠90°)(250 ∠90°)

j200   j250 
FIGURE 18–40
ZT
XC
200 
XL
250 
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The previous example illustrates that unlike total parallel resistance, the
total impedance of a combination of parallel reactances may be much larger
than either of the individual impedances. Indeed, if we are given a parallel
combination of equal inductive and capacitive reactances, the total impedance
of the combination is equal to infinity (namely an open circuit). Consider the
network of Figure 18–41.
The total impedance ZT is found as
ZT 
 
X
0
2
∠
∠
0
0
°
°
  ∠0°
Because the denominator of the preceding expression is equal to zero, the
magnitude of the total impedance will be undefined (Z  ). The magnitude is
undefined and the algebra yields a phase angle v  0, which indicates that the
vector lies on the positive real axis of the impedance diagram.
Whenever a capacitor and an inductor having equal reactances are placed
in parallel, the equivalent circuit of the two components is an open circuit.
The principle of equal parallel reactances will be studied in a later chapter
dealing with “resonance.”
Three Impedances in Parallel
Equation 18–16 may be solved for three impedances to give the equivalent
impedance as
ZT 
()
(18–18)
although this is less useful than the general equation.
Z1Z2Z3

Z1Z2  Z1Z3  Z2Z3
(XL∠90°)(XC∠90°)

jXL  jXC
622
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
ZT
XC  X
XL  X
ZT  
(open circuit)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–41
EXAMPLE 18–14       
Find the equivalent impedance of the network of Figure 18–42.
FIGURE 18–42
ZT
R
2 k
XL
3 k
XC
2 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
Solution
ZT 



 1.90 k∠18.43°
And so the equivalent impedance of the network is
ZT  1.80 k  j0.6 k
12  109 ∠0°

6.325  106∠18.43°
12  109 ∠0°

6  106  j2  106
12  109 ∠0°

6  106∠90°  4  106∠90°  6  106∠0°
(2 k∠0°)(3 k∠90°)(2 k∠90°)

(2 k∠0°)(3 k∠90°)  (2 k∠0°)(2 k∠90°)  (3 k∠90°)(2 k∠90°)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.4 | ac Parallel Circuits
623
Calculator Hint:
In Chapter 5, it was shown that the equivalent value of several resistors in parallel can be
found using the x1 key found on all scientiﬁc calculators. If your calculator is able to perform operations on
complex numbers, a similar method can be used for solving the equivalent impedance of any circuit, even one
with reactive elements such as in Figure 18–42. The following keystrokes show how ZT is determined for a typ-
ical scientiﬁc calculator. Recognizing that all impedances are in k, we can avoid needless keystrokes by
simply entering the numerical values as follows:
Depending on your calculator, your display will appear similar to the following:
2
x1

2

i
(
(
i
3
ENTER

ENTER
)
x1
)
x1
x1
A circuit consists of a current source, i  0.030 sin 500t, in parallel with L 
20 mH, C  50 F, and R  25 .
a. Determine the voltage V across the circuit.
b. Solve for the power factor of the circuit.
c. Calculate the average power dissipated by the circuit and verify that 
this is equal to the power delivered by the source.
d. Use Ohm’s law to ﬁnd the phasor quantities, IR, IL, and IC.
Answers
a. V  0.250 V∠61.93
b. Fp  0.4705 lagging
c. PR  2.49 mW  PT
d. IR  9.98 mA∠61.98
IC  6.24 mA∠151.93
IL  25.0 mA∠28.07
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
A circuit consists of a 2.5-Arms current source connected in parallel with a
resistor, an inductor, and a capacitor. The resistor has a value of 10  and
dissipates 40 W of power.
a. Calculate the values of XL and XC if XL  3XC.
b. Determine the magnitudes of current through the inductor and the capacitor.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

624
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
Answers
a. XL  26.7 , XC  8.89 
b. IL  0.75 A, IC  2.25 A
The current divider rule for ac circuits has the same form as for dc circuits with
the notable exception that currents are expressed as phasors. For a parallel net-
work as shown in Figure 18–43, the current in any branch of the network may
be determined using either admittance or impedance.
Ix  Y
Y
T
xI
or
Ix  Z
Z
T
x
I
(18–19)
18.5 Kirchhoff’s
Current Law 
and the Current
Divider Rule
FIGURE 18–43
ZT
Z2
Zx
Zn
I1
I2
In
Ix
Z1
YT
Y2
Yx
Yn
Y1
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
For two branches in parallel the current in either branch is determined from
the impedances as
I1  
Z1
Z

2
Z2
I
(18–20)
Also, as one would expect, Kirchhoff’s current law (KCL) must apply to any
node within an ac circuit. For such circuits, KCL may be stated as follows:
The summation of current phasors entering and leaving a node is equal
to zero.
EXAMPLE 18–15       
Calculate the current in each of the branches in the network of Figure 18–44.
Solution
I1 
j2
2
0
5
0
0



∠
j2
9
5
0
0
°

(2 A∠0°)

2
5
5
0
0


∠
∠


9
9
0
0
°
°
(2 A∠0°)  10 A∠0°
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.5 | Kirchhoff’s Current Law and the Current Divider Rule
625
and
I2 
j20
2
0
0

0 

∠
j2
9
5
0
0
°

(2 A∠0°)

5
2
0
00


∠
∠

9
9
0
0
°
°
(2 A∠0°)  8 A∠180°
The preceding results illustrate that the currents in parallel reactive compo-
nents may be signiﬁcantly larger than the applied current. If the current through the
component exceeds the maximum current rating of the element, severe damage
may occur.
I  2 A∠0
XL
200 
XC
250 
I1
I2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–44
EXAMPLE 18–16        
Refer to the circuit of Figure 18–45:
ZT
R
20 k
XL
1 k
XC
1 k


I1
I2
I3
IT
a
E  5 V∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–45
a. Find the total impedance, ZT.
b. Determine the supply current, IT.
c. Calculate I1, I2, and I3 using the current divider rule.
d. Verify Kirchhoff’s current law at node a.
Solution
a. Because the inductive and capacitive reactances are in parallel and have
the same value, we may replace the combination with an open circuit.
Consequently, only the resistor R needs to be considered. As a result
ZT  20 k∠0°
b.
IT  
20
5
k
V

∠
∠
0°
0°
  250 A∠0°
c.
I1 
2
2
0
0
k
k


∠
∠
0
0
°
°
(250 A∠0°)  250 A∠0°
I2 
2
1
0
k
k


∠
∠
9
0
0
°
°
(250 A∠0°)  5.0 mA∠90°
I3 
1
2
k
0

k
∠


∠
9
0
0
°
°
(250 A∠0°)  5.0 mA∠90°
CircuitSim 18-2 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

626
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
d. Notice that the currents through the inductor and capacitor are 180 out
of phase. By adding the current phasors in rectangular form, we have
IT  250 A  j5.0 mA  j5.0 mA  250 A  j0  250 A∠0
This result satisﬁes Kirchhoff’s current law at the node.
1. Express Kirchhoff’s current law as it applies to ac circuits.
2. What is the fundamental difference between how Kirchhoff’s current law is
applied to ac circuits and how it is applied to dc circuits?
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
a. Use the current divider rule to determine current through each branch in
the circuit of Figure 18–46.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 7
b. Verify that Kirchhoff’s current law applies to the circuit of Figure 18–46.
Answers
a. IL  176 A∠69.44
IR  234 A∠20.56
IC  86.8 A∠110.56
b. Iout  Iin  250 A
XL
40 
R
30 
XC
80 
IL
IR
IC
250 μA∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–46
We may now apply the analysis techniques of series and parallel circuits in
solving more complicated circuits. As in dc circuits, the analysis of such cir-
cuits is simpliﬁed by starting with easily recognized combinations. If neces-
sary, the original circuit may be redrawn to make further simpliﬁcation more
apparent. Regardless of the complexity of the circuits, we ﬁnd that the funda-
mental rules and laws of circuit analysis must apply in all cases.
Consider the network of Figure 18–47.
We see that the impedances Z2 and Z3 are in series. The branch containing
this combination is then seen to be in parallel with the impedance Z1.
18.6 Series-Parallel
Circuits
CircuitSim 18-3 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The total impedance of the network is expressed as
ZT  Z1  (Z2  Z3)
Solving for ZT gives the following:
ZT  (2   j8 )(2   j5   6   j7 )
 (2   j8 )  (8   j2 )


 5.832 ∠30.96°  5.0   j3.0 
(8.246 ∠75.96°)(8.246 ∠14.04°)

11.66 ∠30.96°
(2   j8 )(8   j2 )

2   j8   8   j2 )
Section 18.6 | Series-Parallel Circuits
627
ZT
Z2
2   j5 
Z3
6   j7 
Z1
2   j8 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–47
EXAMPLE 18–17        
Determine the total impedance of the network of Figure 18–48. Express the
impedance in both polar form and rectangular form.
Solution
After redrawing and labelling the given circuit, we have the circuit
shown in Figure 18–49.
XL
12 
R
4 
XC2
8 
XC1
18 
ZT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–48
FIGURE 18–49
ZT
Z3
Z2
Z1
Z1  j18 
Z2  j12   12 ∠90
Z3  4   j8   8.94 ∠63.43
© Cengage Learning 2013
The total impedance is given as
ZT  Z1  Z2  Z3
where
Z1  j18   18∠90°
Z2  j12   12∠90°
Z3  4   j8   8.94 ∠63.43°
We determine the total impedance as
ZT  j18  

 j18  
107
5
.3
.6

6∠
∠
4
2
5
6
°
.57°

 j18   19.0 ∠18.43°
 j18   18   j6 
 18   j24   30 ∠53.13°
(12 ∠90°)(8.94 ∠63.43°)

j12   4   j8 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

628
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
EXAMPLE 18–18       
Consider the circuit of Figure 18–50:
FIGURE 18–50
50 V∠0


2 k 
1 k 
R2
XL
Z2
Z1
I1
I2
I3
2 k 
XC
Z3
R1
1 k 
© Cengage Learning 2013
a. Find ZT.
b. Determine the currents I1, I2, and I3.
c. Calculate the total power provided by the voltage source.
d. Determine the average powers P1, P2, and P3 dissipated by each of the
impedances. Verify that the average power delivered to the circuit is the
same as the power dissipated by the impedances.
Solution
a. The total impedance is determined by the combination
ZT  Z1  Z2  Z3
For the parallel combination we have
Z2  Z3 

 4.472 k∠26.57°  4.0 k  j2.0 k
b. And so the total impedance is
ZT  5 k  j2 k  5.385 k∠21.80°
I1 
 9.285 mA∠21.80°
Applying the current divider rule, we get
I2 
 18.57 mA∠68.20°
(2 k∠90°)(9.285 mA∠21.80°)

1 k  j2 k  j2 k
50 V∠0°

5.385 k∠21.80°
(2.236 k∠63.43°)(2 k∠90°)

1 k∠0°
(1 k  j2 k)(j2 k)

1 k  j2 k  j2 k
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.6 | Series-Parallel Circuits
629
and
I3 

 20.761 mA∠85.23°
c.
PT  (50 V)(9.285 mA)cos 21.80°
 431.0 mW
d. Because only the resistors will dissipate power, we may use P  I2R:
P1  (9.285 mA)2(1 k)  86.2 mW
P2  (18.57 mA)2(1 k)  344.8 mW
Alternatively, the power dissipated by Z2 may have been determined as 
P  I2Z cos v:
P2  (18.57 mA)2(2.236 k)cos 63.43  344.8 mW
Since Z3 is purely capacitive, it will not dissipate any power:
P3  0
By combining these powers, the total power dissipated is found:
PT  86.2 mW  344.8 mW  0  431.0 mW
(checks!)
(2.236 k∠63.43°)(9.285 mA∠21.80°)

1 k∠0°
(1 k  j2 k)(9.285 mA∠21.80°)

1 k  j2 k  j2 k
Refer to the circuit of Figure 18–51:
a. Calculate the total impedance, ZT.
b. Find the current I.
c. Use the current divider rule to ﬁnd I1 and I2.
d. Determine the power factor for each impedance, Z1 and Z2.
e. Determine the power factor for the circuit.
f. Verify that the total power dissipated by impedances Z1 and Z2 is equal to
the power delivered by the voltage source.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 8
ZT
Z1
I1
Z1  20   j40 
Z2  10   j10 
I2
I


20 
Z2
E  20 V∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–51
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

630
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
Answers
a. ZT  18.9 ∠45
b. I  1.06 A∠45
c. I1  0.354 A∠135, I2  1.12 A∠26.57
d. FP(1)  0.4472 leading, FP(2)  0.7071 lagging
e. FP  0.7071 leading
f. PT  15.0 W, P1  2.50 W, P2  12.5 W
P1  P2  15.0 W  PT
As we have already seen, the reactance of inductors and capacitors depends on
frequency. Consequently, the total impedance of any network having reactive
elements is also frequency dependent. Any such circuit would need to be ana-
lyzed separately at each frequency of interest. We will examine several fairly
simple combinations of resistors, capacitors, and inductors to see how the var-
ious circuits operate at different frequencies. Some of the more important com-
binations will be examined in greater detail in later chapters that deal with
resonance and ﬁlters.
RC Circuits
As the name implies, RC circuits consist of a resistor and a capacitor. The com-
ponents of an RC circuit may be connected either in series or in parallel as
shown in Figure 18–52.
18.7 Frequency Effects
FIGURE 18–52
R
C
(a) Series RC circuit
(b) Parallel RC circuit
R
C
© Cengage Learning 2013
Consider the RC series circuit of Figure 18–53. Recall that the capacitive
reactance, XC, is given as
XC  q
1
C
  
2p
1
fC

The total impedance of the circuit is a vector quantity expressed as
ZT  R  jq
1
C
  R  jq
1
C

ZT  
1 
jq
j
C
qRC

(18–21)
If we define the cutoff or corner frequency for an RC circuit as
qc  R
1
C
  1
t

(rad
s)
(18–22)
1 F
C
1 k
ZT
R
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–53
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

or equivalently as
fc  
2p
1
RC

(Hz)
(18–23)
then several important points become evident.
For q  qc
10 (or f  fc
10) Equation 18–21 can be expressed as
ZT  
1
j

qC
j0
  jq
1
C

and for q  10qc, the expression of Equation 18–21 can be simplified as
ZT  
0 
jq
j
C
qRC
  R
Solving for the magnitude of the impedance at several angular frequencies,
we have the results shown in Table 18–1.
If the magnitude of the impedance ZT is plotted as a function of angular
frequency q, we get the graph of Figure 18–54. Notice that the abscissa and
ordinate of the graph are not scaled linearly, but rather logarithmically. This
allows for the display of results over a wide range of frequencies.
Section 18.7 | Frequency Effects
631
Angular
Frequency, 
(rads)
XC ()
ZT ()
0


1
1 M
1 M
10
100 k
100 k
100
10 k
10.05 k
200
5 k
5.099 k
500
2 k
2.236 k
1000
1 k
1.414 k
2000
500
1118
5000
200
1019
10 k
100
1005
100 k
10
1000
TABLE 18–1
© Cengage Learning 2013
10
20
50
100
200
500
1000
2 k
5 k
10 k
20 k
50 k
100 k
100 k
10 k
1 k
ZT (Ω)
ω (rad/s)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–54
Impedance versus angular frequency for the network of Figure 18–53.
The graph illustrates that the reactance of a capacitor is very high (effec-
tively an open circuit) at low frequencies. Consequently, the total impedance of
the series circuit will also be very high at low frequencies. Second, we notice
that as the frequency increases, the reactance decreases. Therefore, as the fre-
quency gets higher, the capacitive reactance has a diminished effect in the cir-
cuit. At very high frequencies (typically for q  10qc), the impedance of the
circuit will effectively be R  1 k.
Consider the parallel RC circuit of Figure 18–55. The total impedance, ZT,
of the circuit is determined as
ZT  
Z
Z
R 
RZ
Z
C
C
 

jq
R
C



1 
jq
j
C
qRC

Rjq
1
C


R  jq
1
C

C
1 mF
R
1 kV
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–55
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

which may be simplified as
ZT  
1 
R
jqRC

(18–24)
As before, the cutoff frequency is given by Equation 18–22. Now, by
examining the expression of Equation 18–24 for q  qc
10, we have the fol-
lowing result:
ZT  
1 
R
j0
  R
For q  10qc, we have
ZT  
0 
R
jqRC
  jq
1
C

If we solve for the impedance of the circuit in Figure 18–55 at various angular
frequencies, we obtain the results of Table 18–2.
Plotting the magnitude of the impedance ZT as a function of angular fre-
quency q, we get the graph of Figure 18–56. Notice that the abscissa and ordi-
nate of the graph are again scaled logarithmically, allowing for the display of
results over a wide range of frequencies.
632
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
Angular
Frequency, 
(rads)
XC ()
ZT ()
0

1000
1
1 M
1000
10
100 k
1000
100
10 k
995
200
5 k
981
500
2 k
894
1 k
1 k
707
2 k
500
447
5 k
200
196
10 k
100
99.5
100 k
10
10
TABLE 18–2
© Cengage Learning 2013
ZT (V)
2
20
50 100 200 500
1
10
5
10
20
50
ω (rad/s)
ωC
100
200
500
1000
1 k
2 k 5 k 10 k 20 k 50 k100 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–56
Impedance versus angular frequency for the network of Figure 18–55.
The results indicate that at dc ( f  0 Hz) the capacitor, which behaves as
an open circuit, will result in a circuit impedance of R  1 k. As the frequency
increases, the capacitor reactance approaches 0 , resulting in a corresponding
decrease in circuit impedance.
RL Circuits
RL circuits may be analyzed in a manner similar to the analysis of RC circuits.
Consider the parallel RL circuit of Figure 18–57.
R
1 k
XL
1 H
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–57
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The total impedance of the parallel circuit is found as follows:
ZT  
Z
Z
R 
RZ
Z
L
L

 
R
R

(jq
jq
L)
L

(18–25)
ZT 
If we define the cutoff or corner frequency for an RL circuit as
qc  R
L
  1
t

(rad
s)
(18–26)
or equivalently as
fc  
2p
R
L

(Hz)
(18–27)
then several important points become evident.
For q  qc
10 (or f  fc
10) Equation 18–25 can be expressed as
ZT  
1
j

qL
j0
  jqL
The previous result indicates that for low frequencies, the inductor has a very
small reactance, resulting in a total impedance which is essentially equal to the
inductive reactance.
For q  10qc, the expression of Equation 18–25 can be simplified as
ZT 
 R
The preceding results indicate that for high frequencies, the impedance of
the circuit is essentially equal to the resistance, due to the very high impedance
of the inductor.
Evaluating the impedance at several angular frequencies, we have the
results of Table 18–3.
When the magnitude of the impedance ZT is plotted as a function of angu-
lar frequency q, we get the graph of Figure 18–58.
jqL

0  jq R
L

jqL

1  jq R
L

Section 18.7 | Frequency Effects
633
Angular
Frequency, 
(rads)
XL ()
ZT ()
0
0
0
1
1
1
10
10
10
100
100
99.5
200
200
196
500
500
447
1 k
1 k
707
2 k
2 k
894
5 k
5 k
981
10 k
10 k
995
100 k
100 k
1000
TABLE 18–3
© Cengage Learning 2013
ZT (V)
2
100
1
10
5
10
20
50
ω (rad/s)
100
200
500
1000
1 k
10 k
100 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–58
Impedance versus angular
frequency for the network of Figure 18–57.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

RLC Circuits
When numerous capacitive and inductive components are combined with resis-
tors in series-parallel circuits, the total impedance ZT of the circuit may rise
and fall several times over the full range of frequencies. The analysis of such
complex circuits is outside the scope of this textbook. However, for illustrative
purposes we examine the simple series RLC circuit of Figure 18–59.
The impedance ZT at any frequency will be determined as
ZT  R  jXL  jXC
 R  j(XL  XC)
At very low frequencies, the inductor will appear as a very low impedance
(effectively a short circuit), while the capacitor will appear as a very high
impedance (effectively an open circuit). Because the capacitive reactance will
be much larger than the inductive reactance, the circuit will have a very large
capacitive reactance. This results in a very high circuit impedance, ZT.
As the frequency increases, the inductive reactance increases, while the
capacitive reactance decreases. At some frequency, f0, the inductor and the
capacitor will have the same magnitude of reactance. At this frequency, the reac-
tances cancel, resulting in a circuit impedance which is equal to the resistance
value.
As the frequency increases still further, the inductive reactance becomes
larger than the capacitive reactance. The circuit becomes inductive and the
magnitude of the total impedance of the circuit again rises. Figure 18–60 shows
how the impedance of a series RLC circuit varies with frequency.
The complete analysis of the series RLC circuit and the parallel RLC cir-
cuit is left until we examine the principle of resonance in a later chapter.
634
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
R
XL
XC
ZT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–59
FIGURE 18–60
f (Hz)
ZT (V)
fo
R
© Cengage Learning 2013
1. For a series network consisting of a resistor and a capacitor, what will be the
impedance of the network at a frequency of 0 Hz (dc)? What will be the
impedance of the network as the frequency approaches inﬁnity?
2. For a parallel network consisting of a resistor and an inductor, what will be
the impedance of the network at a frequency of 0 Hz (dc)? What will be the
impedance of the network as the frequency approaches inﬁnity?
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Given the series RC network of Figure 18–61, calculate the cutoff frequency
in hertz and in radians per second. Sketch the frequency response of ZT (mag-
nitude) versus angular frequency q for the network. Show the magnitude ZT at
qc
10, qc, and 10qc.
Answers
qc  96.7 rad
s, fc  15.4 Hz
At 0.1 qc: ZT  472 k, At qc: ZT  66.5 k, At 10 qc: ZT  47.2 k
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 9
FIGURE 18–61
R
47 kV
C 5 0.22 mF
ZT
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.8 | Applications
635
As we have seen, we may determine the impedance of any ac circuit as a vector
Z  R 	 jX. This means that any ac circuit may now be simpliﬁed as a series
circuit having a resistance and a reactance, as shown in Figure 18–62.
Additionally, an ac circuit may be represented as an equivalent parallel circuit
consisting of a single resistor and a single reactance as shown in Figure 18–63.
Any equivalent circuit will be valid only at the given frequency of operation.
We will now examine the technique used to convert any series impedance
into its parallel equivalent. Suppose that the two circuits of Figure 18–62 and
Figure 18–63 are exactly equivalent at some frequency. These circuits can be
equivalent only if both circuits have the same total impedance, ZT, and the
same total admittance, YT.
From the circuit of Figure 18–62, the total impedance is written as
ZT  RS 	 jXS
Therefore, the total admittance of the circuit is
YT  Z
1
T
  
RS 	
1
jXS

Multiplying the numerator and denominator by the complex conjugate, we
obtain the following:
YT 
 
R
R
S
S
2


j
X
X
S
S
2

(18–28)
YT  
RS2
R

S
XS2
  j
RS2
X

S
XS2

Now, from the circuit of Figure 18–63, the total admittance of the parallel
circuit may be found from the parallel combination of RP and XP as
YT  R
1
P
  
	
1
jXP

which gives
YT  R
1
P
  jX
1
P

(18–29)
Two vectors can only be equal if both the real components are equal and the
imaginary components are equal. Therefore the circuits of Figure 18–62 and
Figure 18–63 can only be equivalent if the following conditions are met:
RP  
RS2
R

S
XS2

(18–30)
and
XP  
RS2
X

S
XS2

(18–31)
In a similar manner, we have the following conversion from a parallel cir-
cuit to an equivalent series circuit:
RS  
RP
R
2
P

XP
X
2
P2

(18–32)
RS  jXS

(RS 	 jXS)(RS  jXS)
18.8 Applications
YT
ZT
RS
XS
© Cengage Learning 2013
RP
YT
ZT
XP
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–62
FIGURE 18–63
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and
XS  

RP
R
2
P

2X
X
P
P2

(18–33)
636
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
EXAMPLE 18–19       
A circuit has a total impedance of ZT  10   j50 . Sketch the equivalent
series and parallel circuits.
Solution
The series circuit will be an inductive circuit having RS  10  and 
XLS  50 .
The equivalent parallel circuit will also be an inductive circuit having the
following values:
RP 
(10 )
1
2
0


(50 )2
  260 
XLP 
(10 )
5
2
0


(50 )2
  52 
The equivalent series and parallel circuits are shown in Figure 18–64.
EXAMPLE 18–20       
A circuit has a total admittance of YT  0.559 mS∠63.43. Sketch the equiva-
lent series and parallel circuits.
Solution
Because the admittance is written in polar form, we ﬁrst convert to
the rectangular form of the admittance.
GP  (0.559 mS) cos 63.43°  0.250 mS
⇔
RP  4.0 k
BCP  (0.559 mS) sin 63.43°  0.500 mS
⇔
XCP  2.0 k
The equivalent series circuit is found as
RS 
(4
(
k
4

k
)

2
)

(2
(
k
2

k
)

2
)2
  0.8 k
and
XCS 
(4
(
k
4

k
)

2
)

2(2
(2
k
k
)
)2
  1.6 k
FIGURE 18–64
RP
RS
10 V
50 V
XLS
260 V XLP
52 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.8 | Applications
637
The equivalent circuits are shown in Figure 18–65.
FIGURE 18–65
RP
RS
0.8 kV
1.6 kV
XCS
4 kV
XCP
2 kV
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 18–21        
Refer to the circuit of Figure 18–66.
a. Find ZT.
b. Sketch the equivalent series circuit.
c. Determine IT.
Solution
a. The circuit consists of two parallel networks in series. We apply
Equations 18–32 and 18–33 to arrive at equivalent series elements for
each of the parallel networks as follows:
RS1 
 4 k
XCS 
 8 k
and
RS2 
 3 k
XLS 
 9 k
(30 k)2(10 k)

(30 k)2  (10 k)2
(30 k)(10 k)2

(30 k)2  (10 k)2
(20 k)2(10 k)

(20 k)2  (10 k)2
(20 k)(10 k)2

(20 k)2  (10 k)2
FIGURE 18–66
R2
30 k
XL
10 k
R1
10 k
20 k


XC
ZT
200 V∠0
IT
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

638
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
The equivalent circuits are shown in Figure 18–67.
FIGURE 18–67
R2
RS2
3 k
9 k
XLS
30 k
XL
10 k
10 k
XC
20 k
R1
RS1
XCS
4 k
8 k
(a)
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
1 k 
200 V∠0
7 k 
RT
XT


IT
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–68
The total impedance of the circuit is found to be
ZT  (4 k  j8 k)  (3 k  j9 k)  7 k  j1 k  7.071 k∠8.13
b. Figure 18–68 shows the equivalent series circuit.
c. IT 
7.07
2
1
00
k
V∠
∠
0
8
°
.13°
  28.3 mA∠8.13°
An inductor of 10 mH has a series resistance of 5 .
a. Determine the parallel equivalent of the inductor at a frequency of 1 kHz.
Sketch the equivalent showing the values of LP (in henries) and RP.
b. Determine the parallel equivalent of the inductor at a frequency of 1 MHz.
Sketch the equivalent showing the values of LP (in henries) and RP.
c. If the frequency were increased still further, predict what would happen to
the values of LP and RP.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 5
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
A network has an impedance of ZT  50 k∠75 at a frequency of 5 kHz.
a. Determine the most simple equivalent series circuit (L and R).
b. Determine the most simple equivalent parallel circuit.
Answers
a. RS  12.9 k, LS  1.54 H
b. RP  193 k, LP  1.65 H
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 10
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.9 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
639
Multisim
In this section we will use Multisim to simulate how sinusoidal ac measure-
ments are taken with an oscilloscope. The “measurements” are then interpreted
to verify the ac operation of circuits. You will use some of the display features
of the software to simplify your work. The following example provides a guide
through each step of the procedure.
18.9 Circuit Analysis
Using Computers
PSPICE
EXAMPLE 18–22        
Given the circuit of Figure 18–69.
FIGURE 18–69
FIGURE 18–70
L  6.366 mH
30 
R
10 V∠0°


VR


I
1000 Hz
© Cengage Learning 2013
© Cengage Learning 2013
a. Determine the current I and the voltage VR.
b. Use Multisim to display the resistor voltage vR and the source voltage e.
Use the results to verify the results of part (a).
Solution
a. XL  2p(1000 Hz)(6.366  103 H)  40 
Z  30   j40   50 ∠53.13°
I 
50
1

0
∠
V
5
∠
3
0
.1
°
3°
  0.200 A∠53.13°
VR  (0.200 A∠53.13°)(30 )  6.00 V∠53.13°
b. Use the schematic editor to input the circuit shown in Figure 18–70.
CircuitSim 18-4 
MultiSim
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

640
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
The ac voltage source is obtained from the Signal Source Family. The proper-
ties of the voltage source are changed by double-clicking on the symbol and
then selecting the Value tab. Change the values as follows:
Voltage (Pk):
14.14 V
Frequency:
1 kHz
Phase:
0 Deg
After double-clicking on the oscilloscope (XSC1), change the settings as
follows:
Time base:
200sDiv
Channel A:
5VDiv  
Channel B:
5VDiv
At this point, you can click on the Run tool and observe an oscilloscope dis-
play that will be very similar to what you would see in the lab. However, we can
reﬁne the display to provide information that is even more useful.
Click on the View menu and select Grapher. You will likely observe many
cycles in the display window. In order to obtain a more useful display, it is nec-
essary to change some of the display properties. 
In the Grapher View window, click on the Edit menu and select Properties.
Click on the Bottom Axis tab and adjust the range to provide a display of one
cycle (T  1.00 ms). A suitable range will be from 0.020 to 0.021 s, although
any other 1-ms display will be equally useful. 
Since we would like to be able to measure the phase angle, it is necessary
to provide a grid and cursors on the graph. This is done by clicking on both the
Show Grid tool and on the Show Cursors tool. After moving the cursors, it is
possible to determine the phase relationship between VR and E directly from the
table of data. The display will appear similar to that shown in Figure 18–71.
After positioning the cursors on the peaks of the voltage waveforms and
using the display window, we are able to obtain various measurements for the
circuit. The phase angle of the resistor voltage with respect to the source voltage
is found by using the difference between the cursors in the bottom axis, dx 
149.5554 s. Now we have
v 
 360°  53.84°
149.55 s
1000 s
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–71
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PSpice
In the following example we will use the Probe postprocessor of PSpice to
show how the impedance of an RC circuit changes as a function of frequency.
The Probe output will provide a graphical result that is very similar to the fre-
quency responses determined in previous sections of this chapter.
Section 18.9 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
641
The amplitude of the resistor voltage is 8.483 V, which results in an rms value
of 6.00 V. As a result of the measurements we have
VR  6.00 V∠53.84
and
I  
6 V∠
3

0
5

3.84°
  0.200 A∠53.84°
These values correspond very closely to the theoretical results calculated in part (a)
of the example.
EXAMPLE 18–23        
Refer to the network of Figure 18–72. Use PSpice to input the circuit. Run the
Probe postprocessor to provide a graphical display of network impedance as a
function of frequency from 50 Hz to 500 Hz.
Solution
Since PSpice is unable to analyze an incomplete circuit, it is neces-
sary to provide a voltage source (and ground) for the circuit of Figure 18–72.
The input impedance is not dependent on the actual voltage used, and so we
may use any ac voltage source. In this example we arbitrarily select a voltage 
of 10 V.
• Open the CIS Demo software.
• Open a new project and call it Ch 18 PSpice 1. Ensure that the Analog or
Mixed-Signal Circuit Wizard is activated.
• Enter the circuit as shown in Figure 18–73. Simply click on the voltage
value and change its value to 10V from the default value of 1V. (There must
be no spaces between the magnitude and the units.)
• Click on PSpice, New Simulation Proﬁle and give a name such as
Example 18–23 to the new simulation. The Simulation Settings dialog box
will open.
• Click on the Analysis tab and select AC Sweep
Noise as the Analysis type.
Select General Settings from the Options box.
• Select Linear AC Sweep Type (quite often, logarithmic frequency sweeps
such as Decade are used). Enter the following values into the appropriate
dialog boxes. Start Frequency; 50, End Frequency: 500, Total Points: 1001.
Click OK.
• Click on PSpice and Run. The Probe postprocessor will appear on the
screen.
R1
1 kV
1 mF
ZT
C
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–72
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

642
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
• Click on Trace and Add Trace. You may simply click on the appropriate
values from the list of variables and use the division symbol to result 
in impedance. Enter the following expression into the Trace Expres-
sion box:
V(R1:1)I(R1)
Notice that the preceding expression is nothing other than an application of
Ohm’s law. The resulting display is shown in Figure 18–74.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–73
FIGURE 18–74
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 18.9 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
643
Given the circuit of Figure 18–75.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 11
FIGURE 18–75
C  0.5305 μF
4k 
100 Hz 
R
10 V∠0°


VR


I
© Cengage Learning 2013
a. Determine the current I and the voltage VR.
b. Use Multisim to display the resistor voltage vR and the source voltage, e.
Use the results to verify the results of part (a).
Answers
a. I  2.00 mA∠36.87, VR  8.00 V∠36.87
b. vR  11.3 sin(qt  36.87), e  14.1 sin qt
Use PSpice to input the circuit of Figure 18–55. Use the Probe postprocessor
to obtain a graphical display of the network impedance as a function of fre-
quency from 100 Hz to 2000 Hz.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 12
Y
ou are working in a small industrial plant where several small motors are
powered by a 60-Hz ac line voltage of 120 Vac. Your supervisor tells you
that one of the 2-hp motors that was recently installed draws too much cur-
rent when the motor is under full load. You take a current reading and ﬁnd
that the current is 14.4 A. After doing some calculations, you determine that
even if the motor is under full load, it shouldn’t require that much current.
However, you have an idea. You remember that a motor can be repre-
sented as a resistor in series with an inductor. If you could reduce the effect
of the inductive reactance of the motor by placing a capacitor across the
motor, you should be able to reduce the current since the capacitive reactance
will cancel the inductive reactance.
While keeping the motor under load, you place a capacitor into the cir-
cuit. Just as you suspected, the current goes down. After using several differ-
ent values, you observe that the current goes to a minimum of 12.4 A. It is at
this value that you have determined that the reactive impedances are exactly
balanced. Sketch the complete circuit and determine the value of capacitance
that was added into the circuit. Use the information to determine the value of
the motor’s inductance. (Assume that the motor has an efﬁciency of 100%.)
Putting It into Practice
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

644
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
Problems
18.1
Ohm’s Law for ac Circuits
1. For the resistor shown in Figure 18–76:
a. Find the sinusoidal current i using phasors.
b. Sketch the sinusoidal waveforms for v and i.
c. Sketch the phasor diagram for V and I.
2. Repeat Problem 1 for the resistor of Figure 18–77.
3. Repeat Problem 1 for the resistor of Figure 18–78.
4. Repeat Problem 1 for the resistor of Figure 18–79.
200  


v  25 sinωt
i
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–76
FIGURE 18–77
FIGURE 18–78
FIGURE 18–79
FIGURE 18–80
FIGURE 18–81
FIGURE 18–82
FIGURE 18–83
6 k 


v
I  30 mA∠40
© Cengage Learning 2013
47 k 


V  62 V∠30
i
© Cengage Learning 2013
33  


v
i  10 sin(ωt  60)
© Cengage Learning 2013
680  


v
i  2.0  10–3 sinωt
© Cengage Learning 2013
5 k 


i
v  2.3 sin(ωt  120)
© Cengage Learning 2013
L  30 mH 


v
I  5 A∠ 60
f  1 kHz 
© Cengage Learning 2013
C  0.47 F 


V  200 mV∠90
i
f  1 kHz 
© Cengage Learning 2013
5. For the component shown in Figure 18–80:
a. Find the sinusoidal voltage v using phasors.
b. Sketch the sinusoidal waveforms for v and i.
c. Sketch the phasor diagram for V and I.
6. For the component shown in Figure 18–81:
a. Find the sinusoidal current i using phasors.
b. Sketch the sinusoidal voltages for v and i.
c. Sketch the phasor diagram for V and I.
7. For the component shown in Figure 18–82:
a. Find the sinusoidal voltage v using phasors.
b. Sketch the sinusoidal voltages for v and i.
c. Sketch the phasor diagram for V and I.
8. For the component shown in Figure 18–83:
a. Find the sinusoidal current i using phasors.
b. Sketch the sinusoidal voltages for v and i.
c. Sketch the phasor diagram for V and I.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9. For the component shown in Figure 18–84:
a. Find the sinusoidal voltage v using phasors.
b. Sketch the sinusoidal voltages for v and i.
c. Sketch the phasor diagram for V and I.
10. Repeat Problem 5 for the component shown in Figure 18–85.
Problems
645
11. Repeat Problem 5 for the component shown in Figure 18–86.
12. Repeat Problem 5 for the component shown in Figure 18–87.
18.2
ac Series Circuits
13. Find the total impedance of each of the networks shown in Figure 18–88.
14. Repeat Problem 13 for the networks of Figure 18–89.
0.01 F 


v
C
i  6.25  10–3 sin 10 000 t
© Cengage Learning 2013
i
v  8 cos(200t   30)
L
240 H 


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–84
FIGURE 18–86
FIGURE 18–87
FIGURE 18–85
150 mH
i  22.5  10–3 cos(20 000 t  20)


v
L
© Cengage Learning 2013
0.0033 F 


i
C
v  170 sin(377t   40)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–89
ZT
Z1
30   j40 
Z2
80 ∠60
(a)
ZT
Z1
30 ∠20°
Z2
55 ∠−30°
Z3
20 ∠−90
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
15. Refer to the network of Figure 18–90.
a. Determine the series impedance Z that will result in the given total
impedance, ZT. Express your answer in rectangular and polar forms.
b. Sketch an impedance diagram showing ZT and Z.
16. Repeat Problem 15 for the network of Figure 18–91.
17. A circuit consisting of two elements has a total impedance of ZT  2 k∠15
at a frequency of 18 kHz. Determine the values in ohms, henries, or farads of
the unknown elements.
ZT
3.3 k
3 k
1.5 k
4.2 k
5.9 k
XL
R1
R2
XC1
XC2
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
R
30 
25 
ZT
XC
XL
35 
(a)
FIGURE 18–88
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

646
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
ZT  100 ∠30
R
47 
36 
XL
Z
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–90
FIGURE 18–91
FIGURE 18–92
ZT  90 ∠25
Z1
16 ∠30
Z
R
25 
© Cengage Learning 2013
ZT  50 ∠60
L
20 mH
10 
R
Z
© Cengage Learning 2013
18. A network has a total impedance of ZT  24.0 k∠30 at a frequency of
2 kHz. If the network consists of two series elements, determine the values in
ohms, henries, or farads of the unknown elements.
19. Given that the network of Figure 18–92 is to operate at a frequency of 
1 kHz, what series components R and L (in henries) or C (in farads) 
must be in the indicated block to result in a total circuit impedance of 
ZT  50 ∠60?
20. Repeat Problem 19 for a frequency of 2 kHz.
21. Refer to the circuit of Figure 18–93.
a. Find ZT, I, VR, VL, and VC.
b. Sketch the phasor diagram showing I, VR, VL, and VC.
c. Determine the average power dissipated by the resistor.
d. Calculate the average power delivered by the voltage source. Compare the
result to (c).
22. Consider the circuit of Figure 18–94.
a. Find ZT, I, VR, VL, and VC.
b. Sketch the phasor diagram showing I, VR, VL, and VC.
c. Write the sinusoidal expressions for the current i and the voltages e, vR,
vC, and vL.
d. Sketch the sinusoidal current and voltages found in (c).
e. Determine the average power dissipated by the resistor.
f. Calculate the average power delivered by the voltage source. Compare the
result to (e).
FIGURE 18–93
FIGURE 18–94
XL
20 
50 
XC


E  120 V∠0


I
VL


VR
40 
R


VC
ZT
© Cengage Learning 2013
R
4 k
6 k
XL


E  10 V∠0


I
VR


VC
3 k
XC


VL
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23. Refer to the circuit of Figure 18–95.
a. Determine the circuit impedance, ZT.
b. Use phasors to solve for i, vR, vC, and vL.
c. Sketch the phasor diagram showing I, VR, VL, and VC.
d. Sketch the sinusoidal expressions for the current and voltages found in (b).
e. Determine the average power dissipated by the resistor.
f. Calculate the average power delivered by the voltage source. Compare the
result to (e).
Problems
647
24. Refer to the circuit of Figure 18–96.
a. Determine the value of the capacitor reactance, XC, needed so that the
resistor in the circuit dissipates a power of 200 mW.
b. Using the value of XC from (a), determine the sinusoidal expression for
the current i in the circuit.
18.3
Kirchhoff’s Voltage Law and the Voltage Divider Rule
25. a. Suppose a voltage of 10 V∠0 is applied across the network in 
Figure 18–88(a). Use the voltage divider rule to ﬁnd the voltage appearing
across each element.
b. Verify Kirchhoff’s voltage law for the network.
26. a. Suppose a voltage of 240 V∠30 is applied across the network in 
Figure 18–89(a). Use the voltage divider rule to ﬁnd the voltage appearing
across each impedance.
b. Verify Kirchhoff’s voltage law for each network.
27. Given the circuit of Figure 18–97:
a. Find the voltages VC and VL.
b. Determine the value of R.
XL
47 
36 
XC


e  24 sin(ωt)


i
vC


vL
20 
R


vR
ZT
© Cengage Learning 2013
R
100 V
XC
1
2
e 5 10 sin(ωt)
i
50 V
XL
P 5 200 mW
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–95
FIGURE 18–96
XL
63.3 
VR  125 V∠60
XC


E  250 V∠0


VC


VL
20 
R


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–97
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18.4
ac Parallel Circuits
31. Determine the input impedance, ZT, for each of the networks of Figure 18–101.
32. Repeat Problem 31 for Figure 18–102.
33. Given the circuit of Figure 18–103.
a. Find ZT, IT, I1, I2, and I3.
b. Sketch the admittance diagram showing each of the admittances.
c. Sketch the phasor diagram showing E, IT, I1, I2, and I3.
d. Determine the average power dissipated by the resistor.
e. Find the power factor of the circuit and calculate the average power deliv-
ered by the voltage source. Compare the answer to the result obtained in (d).
28. Refer to the circuit of Figure 18–98.
a. Find the voltages VR and VL.
b. Determine the value of XC.
29. Refer to the circuit of Figure 18–99:
a. Find the voltage across XC.
b. Use Kirchhoff’s voltage law to ﬁnd the voltage across the unknown
impedance.
c. Calculate the value of the unknown impedance Z.
d. Determine the average power dissipated by the circuit.
648
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
R
20 


E  10 V∠30


VR  4 V∠20


VC
30 
XC


VZ
Z
© Cengage Learning 2013
R1
100 


E  600 V∠30


VR


VL
200 
XL


VZ
Z
PT  500 W
I  2 A∠θ
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–99
FIGURE 18–100
XL
20 
XC


E  120 V∠0


VL

 VR
50 
R


VC  118.8 V∠45
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–98
30. Given that the circuit of Figure 18–100 has a current with a magnitude of
2.0 A and dissipates a total power of 500 W:
a. Calculate the value of the unknown impedance Z. (Hint: Two solutions
are possible.)
b. Calculate the phase angle v of the current I.
c. Find the voltages VR, VL, and VZ.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34. Refer to the circuit of Figure 18–104.
a. Find ZT, IT, I1, I2, and I3.
b. Sketch the admittance diagram for each of the admittances.
c. Sketch the phasor diagram showing E, IT, I1, I2, and I3.
d. Determine the expressions for the sinusoidal currents iT, i1, i2, and i3.
e. Sketch the sinusoidal voltage e and current iT.
f. Determine the average power dissipated by the resistor.
g. Find the power factor of the circuit and calculate the average power deliv-
ered by the voltage source. Compare the answer to the result obtained in (f).
35. Refer to the network of Figure 18–105.
a. Determine ZT.
b. Given the indicated current, use Ohm’s law to ﬁnd the voltage, V, across
the network.
Problems
649
ZT
200 
500 
460 
(a)
(b)
ZT
500 
3 k
6 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–101
FIGURE 18–102
ZT
600 
900 
1800 
(a)
(b)
ZT
50 k
3 k
6 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–103
ZT
20 k
1 k
0.8 k


I1
I2
I3
IT
E  10 V∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36. Consider the network of Figure 18–106.
a. Determine ZT.
b. Given the indicated current, use Ohm’s law to ﬁnd the voltage, V, across
the network.
c. Solve for I2 and I.
37. Determine the impedance, Z2, that will result in the total impedance shown
in Figure 18–107.
38. Determine the impedance, Z2, that will result in the total impedance shown
in Figure 18–108.
650
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
ZT
25 kV
1 mF
20 mH
1
2
I1
I2
I3
IT
e 5 50 sin(10 000t)
R
C
L
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–104
ZT
Z1
3 k  j4 k
Z2
6 k  j8 k


V
I  30 mA∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
ZT
Z1
30   j60 
Z2
10   j40 


V
I
I1  100 mA∠30
I2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–105
FIGURE 18–107
FIGURE 18–108
FIGURE 18–106
ZT  4 ∠60
Z1
2   j5 
Z2
© Cengage Learning 2013
ZT  1.2 k∠0
Z1
3 k  j1 k
Z2
© Cengage Learning 2013
18.5
Kirchhoff’s Current Law and the Current Divider Rule
39. Solve for the current in each element of the networks in Figure 18–101 if the
current applied to each network is 10 mA∠30.
40. Repeat Problem 39 for Figure 18–102.
41. Use the current divider rule to ﬁnd the current in each of the elements in
Figure 18–109. Verify that Kirchhoff’s current law applies.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
651
44. Assume that the circuit of Figure 18–112 has a current I with a magnitude
of 3 A:
a. Determine the current IR through the resistor.
b. Calculate the value of capacitive reactance XC.
c. What is the phase angle of the current I?
18.6
Series-Parallel Circuits
45. Refer to the circuit of Figure 18–113.
a. Find ZT, IL, IC, and IR.
b. Sketch the phasor diagram showing E, IL, IC, and IR.
c. Calculate the average power dissipated by the resistor.
d. Use the circuit power factor to calculate the average power delivered by
the voltage source. Compare the answer to the results obtained in (c).
46. Refer to the circuit of Figure 18–114.
a. Find ZT, I1, I2, and I3.
b. Sketch the phasor diagram showing E, I1, I2, and I3.
c. Calculate the average power dissipated by each of the resistors.
d. Use the circuit power factor to calculate the average power delivered by
the voltage source. Compare the answer to the results obtained in (c).
XL
5 k
R
4 k
XC
20 k
IL
IC
IR
1 mA∠0
a
© Cengage Learning 2013
XL
10 
R
20 
XC
20 
IR
IL  4 A∠30
IC
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
I
50 
R
IR
IL  5 A∠0


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–109
FIGURE 18–110
FIGURE 18–112
FIGURE 18–111
I
XC
R
IR
IC  2 A∠0
10 
© Cengage Learning 2013
42. Given that IL  4 A∠30 in the circuit of Figure 18–110, ﬁnd the currents I,
IC, and IR. Verify that Kirchhoff’s current law applies for this circuit.
43. Suppose that the circuit of Figure 18–111 has a current I with a magnitude
of 8 A:
a. Determine the current IR through the resistor.
b. Calculate the value of resistance, R.
c. What is the phase angle of the current I?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

49. Refer to the circuit of Figure 18–117:
a. Find ZT, I1, I2, and I3.
b. Determine the voltage V.
652
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
XC
30 E
60 E


IL
E  120 V∠0
IC
IR


5 E
XL
VR
R
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–113
FIGURE 18–114
FIGURE 18–115
20 V∠0


9 k 
3 k 
30 k 
ZT
8 k 
I2
I3



V
I1
4 k 
© Cengage Learning 2013
20 V∠0


2  
6  
4 
ZT
3  
I1
I2



IT
6 
Vab
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
47. Refer to the circuit of Figure 18–115.
a. Find ZT, IT, I1, and I2.
b. Determine the voltage Vab.
48. Consider the circuit of Figure 18–116.
a. Find ZT, IT, I1, and I2.
b. Determine the voltage V.
FIGURE 18–116
FIGURE 18–117
20 
40 
30 
1 
ZT
10 


5 V∠0
V
I1
I2
IT


© Cengage Learning 2013
ZT
10 k
10 k
9 k
I1
I2
I3
1 mA∠0
R1
XC
XL


3 k
R2
V
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
653
50. Refer to the circuit of Figure 18–118:
a. Find ZT, I1, I2, and I3.
b. Determine the voltage V.
FIGURE 18–118
400 k
50 k
40 k
I1
I2
R2 = 20 k
1 A∠0
R1
XC
XL


I3
V
© Cengage Learning 2013
(a)
30 k
10 k
2.5 k
(b)
90 
270 
300 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–119
18.7
Frequency Effects
51. A 50-k resistor is placed in series with a 0.01-F capacitor. Determine the
cutoff frequency qC (in rad
s) and sketch the frequency response (ZT vs. q)
of the network.
52. A 2-mH inductor is placed in parallel with a 2-k resistor. Determine the
cutoff frequency qC (in rad
s) and sketch the frequency response (ZT vs. q)
of the network.
53. A 100-k resistor is placed in parallel with a 0.47-F capacitor. Determine
the cutoff frequency fC (in Hz) and sketch the frequency response (ZT vs. f )
of the network.
54. A 2.7-k resistor is placed in parallel with a 20-mH inductor. Determine the
cutoff frequency fC (in Hz) and sketch the frequency response (ZT vs. f ) of
the network.
18.8
Applications
55. Convert each of the networks of Figure 18–119 into an equivalent series 
network consisting of two elements.
56. Convert each of the networks of Figure 18–119 into an equivalent parallel
network consisting of two elements.
57. Show that the networks of Figure 18–120 have the same input impedance at
frequencies of 1 krad
s and 10 krad
s. (It can be shown that these networks
are equivalent at all frequencies.)
FIGURE 18–120
(a)
(b)
100 
10 F
100 mH
100 
R
L
C
R
R
100 
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

654
Chapter 18 | ac Series-Parallel Circuits
FIGURE 18–121
25 H
50 
150 
ZT
(a)
(b)
100 
100 
100 
ZT
100 H
© Cengage Learning 2013
58. Show that the networks of Figure 18–121 have the same input impedance at
frequencies of 5 rad
s and 10 rad
s.
398 μF
3 
R
C
VR
100 Hz 
20 V∠0°




VC


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–122
0.955  H
5 k
R
L
VR
2 kHz 
26 V∠0°




VL


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 18–123
18.9
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
59. Given the circuit of Figure 18–122:
a. Use Multisim to simultaneously display the capacitor voltage vC and e.
Record your results and determine the phasor voltage VC.
b. Interchange the positions of the resistor and the capacitor relative to the
ground. Use Multisim to simultaneously display the resistor voltage vR
and e. Record your results and determine the phasor voltage VR.
c. Compare your results to those obtained in Example 18–8.
60. Given the circuit of Figure 18–123:
a. Use Multisim to display the inductor voltage vL and e. Record your results
and determine the phasor voltage VL.
b. Interchange the positions of the resistor and the inductor relative to the
ground. Use Multisim to display the inductor voltage vR and e. Record
your results and determine the phasor voltage VR.
c. Compare your results to those obtained in Example 18–9.
61. A 50-k resistor is placed in series with a 0.01-F capacitor. Use PSpice to
input these components into a circuit. Run the Probe postprocessor to provide a
graphical display of the network impedance as a function of frequency from
50 Hz to 500 Hz. Let the frequency sweep logarithmically in octaves.
PSPICE
MultiSim
MultiSim
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

62. A 2-mH inductor is placed in parallel with a 2-k resistor. Use PSpice to
input these components into a circuit. Run the Probe postprocessor to
provide a graphical display of the network impedance as a function of
frequency from 50 kHz to 500 kHz. Let the frequency sweep logarithmically
in octaves.
63. A 100-k resistor is placed in parallel with a 0.47-F capacitor. Use PSpice
to input these components into a circuit. Run the Probe postprocessor to
provide a graphical display of the network impedance as a function of fre-
quency from 0.1 Hz to 10 Hz. Let the frequency sweep logarithmically in
octaves.
64. A 2.7-k resistor is placed in parallel with a 20-mH inductor. Use PSpice
to input these components into a circuit. Run the Probe postprocessor to
provide a graphical display of the network impedance as a function of fre-
quency from 100 kHz to 1 MHz. Let the frequency sweep logarithmically 
in octaves.
Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
655
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. Current and voltage are in phase.
2. Current leads voltage by 90.
3. Voltage leads current by 90.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
1. The phasor sum of voltage drops and rises around a closed loop is equal 
to zero.
2. All voltages must be expressed as phasors, that is,
V  V∠v  V cos v  jV sin v.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
1. The phasor sum of currents entering a node is equal to the phasor sum of
currents leaving the same node.
2. All currents must be expressed as phasors, that is,
I  I∠v  I cos v  jI sin v.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
1. At f  0 Hz, Z   (open circuit). As f →, Z  R.
2. At f  0 Hz, Z  0 (short circuit). As f →, Z  R.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 5
a. RP  795 , LP  10.1 mH
b. RP  790 M, LP  10.0 mH
c. As f is increased, RP gets larger and LP remains constant at 10 mH.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Balanced Bridges
Dependent Sources
Hay Bridge
Independent Sources
Maxwell Bridge
Schering Bridge
I OUTLINE
Dependent Sources
Source Conversion
Mesh (Loop) Analysis
Nodal Analysis
Delta-to-Wye and Wye-to-
Delta Conversions
Bridge Networks
Circuit Analysis Using
Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• convert an ac voltage source into its
equivalent current source, and conversely,
convert a current source into an equivalent
voltage source,
• solve for the current or voltage in a circuit
having either a dependent current source 
or a dependent voltage source,
• set up simultaneous linear equations to solve
an ac circuit using mesh analysis,
• use complex determinants to ﬁnd the
solutions for a given set of linear equations,
• set up simultaneous linear equations to solve
an ac circuit using nodal analysis,
• perform delta-to-wye and wye-to-delta
conversions for circuits having reactive
elements,
• solve for the balanced condition in a given ac
bridge circuit. In particular, you will examine
the Maxwell, Hay, and Schering bridges,
• use Multisim to analyze bridge circuits,
• use PSpice to calculate current and voltage
in an ac circuit.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

19
METHODS OF ac ANALYSIS
T
o this point, we have examined only circuits having a single ac source. In this chapter, we
continue our study by analyzing multisource circuits and bridge networks. You will ﬁnd that
most of the techniques used in analyzing ac circuits parallel those of dc circuit analysis.
Consequently, a review of Chapter 8 will help you understand the topics of this chapter.
Near the end of the chapter, we examine how computer techniques are used to analyze
even the most complex ac circuits. It must be emphasized that although computer techniques
are much simpler than using a pencil and calculator, there is virtually no knowledge to be gained
by mindlessly entering data into a computer. We use the computer merely as a tool to verify our
results and to provide a greater dimension to the analysis of circuits. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

658
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
The voltage and current sources we have worked with up to now have been
independent sources, meaning that the voltage or current of the supply was
not in any way dependent upon any voltage or current elsewhere in the circuit.
In many ampliﬁer circuits, particularly those involving transistors, it is possi-
ble to explain the operation of the circuits by replacing the device with an
equivalent electronic model. These models often use voltage and current
sources which have values dependent upon some internal voltage or current.
Such supplies are called dependent sources. Figure 19–1 compares the sym-
bols for both independent and dependent sources.
Although the diamond is the accepted symbol for representing dependent
sources, many articles and textbooks still use a circle. In this textbook we use
both forms of the dependent source to familiarize the student with the various
notations. The dependent source has a magnitude and phase angle determined
by voltage or current at some internal element multiplied by a constant, k. The
magnitude of the constant is determined by parameters within the particular
model, and the units of the constant correspond to the required quantities in the
equation.
19.1 Dependent
Sources
Putting It in Perspective
Hermann Ludwig Ferdinand von Helmholtz
HERMANN HELMHOLTZ WAS BORN IN POTSDAM (near Berlin,
Germany) on August 31, 1821. Helmholtz was a leading 
scientist of the nineteenth century, whose legacy includes
contributions in the ﬁelds of acoustics, chemistry, mathe-
matics, magnetism, electricity, mechanics, optics, and 
physiology.
Helmholtz graduated from the Medical Institute in
Berlin in 1843 and practiced medicine for ﬁve years as 
a surgeon in the Prussian army. From 1849 to 1871,
he served as a professor of physiology at universities 
in Königsberg, Bonn, and Heidelberg. In 1871, Helmholtz
was appointed Professor of Physics at the University 
of Berlin.
Helmholtz’s greatest contributions were as a mathemati-
cal physicist, where his work in theoretical and practical
physics led to the proof of the Law of Conservation of
Energy in his paper “Über die Erhaltung der Kraft,” 
published in 1847. He showed that mechanics, heat, light, electricity, and magnetism were simply
manifestations of the same force. His work led to the understanding of electrodynamics (the
motion of charge in conductors), and his theory of the electromagnetic properties of light set the
groundwork for later scientists to understand how radio waves are propagated.
For his work, the German emperor Kaiser Wilhelm I made Helmholtz a noble in 1883. 
This great scientist died on September 8, 1894, at the age of 73. I
© CORBIS
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 19.1 | Dependent Sources
659
(a) Independent sources
(b) Dependent sources


E
I




V
I
k1V


k2V
k3I
k4I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–1
EXAMPLE 19–1        
Refer to the resistor shown in Figure 19–2. Determine the voltage VR across the
resistor given that the controlling voltage has the following values:
a. V  0 V
b. V  5 V∠30
c. V  3 V∠150
Solution
Notice that the dependent source of this example has a constant, gm,
called the transconductance. Here, gm  4 mS.
a.
I  (4 mS)(0 V)  0
VR  0 V
b.
I  (4 mS)(5 V∠30)  20 mA∠30
VR  (20 mA∠30)(2 k)  40 V∠30
c.
I  (4 mS)(3 V∠150)  12 mA∠150
VR  (12 mA∠150)(2 k)  24 V∠150
1
2
V
Given: gm 5 4 mS
I 5 gmV
R
2 kV
1
2
VR
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–2
The circuit of Figure 19–3 represents a simpliﬁed model of a transistor ampliﬁer.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
1
2
V
hfe 5 120
R
4 V
1
2
VR
hfe I
2 kV
hie
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

When we are working with dc circuits, the analysis of a circuit is often simpli-
ﬁed by replacing the source (whether a voltage source or a current source) with
its equivalent. The conversion of any ac source is similar to the method used in
dc circuit analysis.
A voltage source E in series with an impedance Z is equivalent to a cur-
rent source I having the same impedance Z in parallel. Figure 19–4 shows the
equivalent sources.
From Ohm’s law, we perform the source conversion as follows:
I  E
Z

and
E  IZ
It is important to realize that the two circuits of Figure 19–4 are equivalent
between points a and b. This means that any network connected to points a and
b will behave exactly the same regardless of which type of source is used.
However, the voltages or currents within the sources will seldom be the same.
In order to determine the current through or the voltage across the source
impedance, the circuit must be returned to its original state.
660
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
Determine the voltage VR for each of the following applied voltages:
a. V  10 mV∠0
b. V  2 mV∠180
c. V  0.03 V∠90
Answers
a. 2.4 mV∠180; b. 0.48 mV∠0; c. 7.2 mV∠90
19.2 Source
Conversion
E 5 IZ
1
2
a
a
b
b
E
Z
I 5
Z
Z
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–4
EXAMPLE 19–2       
Convert the voltage source of Figure 19–5 into an equivalent current source.
Solution
ZT  3   j4   5 ∠53.13°
I  
5
1

0
∠
V
5
∠
3.
0
1
°
3°
  2 A∠53.13°
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 19.2 | Source Conversion
661
The equivalent current source is shown in Figure 19–6.
© Cengage Learning 2013
10 V∠0


a
b
3 
4 
R
XL
FIGURE 19–5
FIGURE 19–6
2 A∠53.13
a
b
3 
4 
R
XL
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 19–3        
Convert the current source of Figure 19–7 into an equivalent voltage source.
Solution
The impedance of the parallel combination is determined to be
Z 

4
8
4
0
.7
0
2

∠
∠
2

6
9
.5
0
7
°
°

 17.89 ∠63.43°  8   j16 
and so
E  (240 mA∠30°)(17.89 ∠63.43°)
 4.29 V∠33.43°
The resulting equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 19–8.
(40 ∠0°)(20  ∠90°)

40   j20 
240 mA∠30
a
b
20 
40 
R
XC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–7
FIGURE 19–8
4.29V∠33.43


8 
16 
Z  8   j16   17.89 ∠63.43 
4.29V∠146.57


8 
16 
a
b
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

It is possible to use the same procedure to convert a dependent source into
its equivalent provided that the controlling element is external to the circuit in
which the source appears. If the controlling element is in the same circuit as the
dependent source, this procedure cannot be used.
662
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
EXAMPLE 19–4       
Convert the current source of Figure 19–9 into an equivalent voltage source.
R1
I  I∠0
R2
25 k
a
b
100I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–9
Solution
In the circuit of Figure 19–9 the controlling element, R1, is in a sep-
arate circuit. Therefore, the current source is converted into an equivalent volt-
age source as follows:
E  (100I1)(Z)
 (100I1)(25 k∠0°)
 (2.5  106 )I1
The resulting voltage source is shown in Figure 19–10. Notice that the equiv-
alent voltage source is dependent on the current, I, just as the original current
source.
R1
I  I∠0
R2
25 k
a
b
(2.5  106 ) I


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–10
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 19.3 | Mesh (Loop) Analysis
663
Convert the voltage sources of Figure 19–11 into equivalent current sources.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
5 V∠30
16 k∠30


Z
(a)
a
b
3 V


2 k
0.05 F
ω  5 krad/s
0.03 mA∠30
8 k


V
(b)
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–11
Answers
a. I  0.3125 mA∠60 (from b to a) in parallel with Z  16 k∠30
b. I  0.161 mA∠93.43 (from a to b) in parallel with Z  2 k  j4 k
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Given a 40-mA∠0 current source in parallel with an impedance, Z. Determine
the equivalent voltage source for each of the following impedances:
a. Z  25 k∠30
b. Z  100  ∠90
c. Z  20 k  j16 k
Mesh analysis allows us to determine each loop current within a circuit, regard-
less of the number of sources within the circuit. The following steps provide a
format which simpliﬁes the process of using mesh analysis:
1. Convert all sinusoidal expressions into equivalent phasor notation. Where
necessary, convert current sources into equivalent voltage sources.
2. Redraw the given circuit, simplifying the given impedances wherever pos-
sible and labelling the impedances (Z1, Z2, etc.).
3. Arbitrarily assign clockwise loop currents to each interior closed loop
within a circuit. Show the polarities of all impedances using the assumed
current directions. If an impedance is common to two loops, it may be
thought to have two simultaneous currents. Although in fact two currents
will not occur simultaneously, this maneuver makes the algebraic calcula-
tions fairly simple. The actual current through a common impedance is the
vector sum of the individual loop currents.
4. Apply Kirchhoff’s voltage law to each closed loop in the circuit, writing
each equation as follows:
	 (ZI)  	 E
19.3 Mesh (Loop)
Analysis
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If the current directions are originally assigned in a clockwise direction, then
the resulting linear equations may be simpliﬁed to the following format:
Loop 1:
(Z1)I1  (Z12)I2  …  (Z1n)In  (E1)
Loop 2:
(Z21)I1  (Z2)I2  …  (Z2n)In  (E2)
.
.
.
.
.
.
Loop n:
(Zn1)I1  (Zn2)I2  …  (Zn)In  (En)
In the preceding format, 	Zx is the summation of all impedances around
loop x. The sign in front of all loop impedances will be positive.
	Zxy is the summation of impedances that are common between loop
x and loop y. If there is no common impedance between two loops, this
term is simply set to zero. All common impedance terms in the linear equa-
tions are given negative signs.
	Ex is the summation of voltage rises in the direction of the assumed cur-
rent Ix. If a voltage source has a polarity such that it appears as a voltage drop
in the assumed current direction, then the voltage is given a negative sign.
5. Solve the resulting simultaneous linear equations using substitution or
determinants. If necessary, refer to Appendix B for a review of solving simul-
taneous linear equations.
664
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
EXAMPLE 19–5       
Solve for the loop equations in the circuit of Figure 19–12.


XC
R2
R3
R1
XL
3 
3 
1 
2 
4 
I
E1  5 V∠0
1.25 A∠90
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–12
Solution
Step 1: The current source is ﬁrst converted into an equivalent voltage source as
shown in Figure 19–13.


XC
R2
R3
R1
3 
3 
1 
2 
4 
E2
E1  5 V∠0
5 V∠0
E2  (1.25 A∠90) (4 ∠90)
 5 V∠0)


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–13
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 19.3 | Mesh (Loop) Analysis
665
Steps 2 and 3: Next the circuit is redrawn as shown in Figure 19–14. The imped-
ances have been simpliﬁed and the loop currents are drawn in a clockwise direction.


E2
E1  5 V∠0
5 V∠0
Z1  3   j3 


Z2  1   j0
Z3  2   j4 
Z2
Z3
I1
I2
Z1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–14
Step 4: The loop equations are written as
Loop 1:
(Z1  Z2)I1  (Z2)I2  E1
Loop 2:
(Z2)I1  (Z2  Z3)I2  E2
When the values of Z1, Z2, Z3, E1, and E2 are entered, the simpliﬁed linear
equations may be written as:
Loop 1:
(4  j3)I1  (1  j0)I2  50°
Loop 2:
(1  j0)I1  (3  j4)I2  50°
Using determinants, we can solve for these equations as follows:
I1 

 

2
2
3
0


j
j
7
20

 
2
2
8
4
.
.
2
0
8
4
∠
∠

16
1
.9
3
3
5
°
°

 1.18 A∠151.93°
and
I2 

(20
2

3
j

15
j
)
7
 (5)

 

2
2
3
5


j
j
7
15

 
2
2
9
4
.1
.0
5
4
∠
∠
1
1
4
6
9
.
.
9
0
3
4
°
°

 1.21 A∠132.11°
(5)(4  j3)  (5)(1)

23  j7
(15  j20)  5

(3  j3)  (6  j6  j212)  (2  j4)
(5)(3  j4)  (5)(1)

(3  j3)(1)  (3  j3)(2  j4)  (1)(2  j4)
Calculator Hint: A scientiﬁc 
calculator such as the Sharp 
EL-506W permits you to enter
the complex number calcula-
tions in either polar or rectan-
gular format.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

666
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
EXAMPLE 19–6       
Given the circuit of Figure 19–15, write the loop equations and solve for the
loop currents. Determine the voltage, V.


XC
R1
R2
XL
6 
3 
2 
4 
E2
I  1 A∠40
12 V∠0
V


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–15
Solution
Step 1: Converting the current source into an equivalent voltage source gives us
the circuit of Figure 19–16.


XC
R2
XL
6 
3 
2 
4 
E2
E1  3 V∠40
12 V∠0
V




© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–16
Steps 2 and 3: After simplifying the impedances and assigning clockwise loop
currents, we have the circuit of Figure 19–17.
Step 4: The loop equations for the circuit of Figure 19–17 are as follows:
Loop 1:
(Z1  Z2)I1  (Z2)I2  E1
Loop 2:
(Z2)I1  (Z2  Z3)I2  E2
which, after substituting the impedance values into the expressions, become
Loop 1:
(3   j2 )I1  ( j4 )I2  3 V∠40
Loop 2:
( j4 )I2  (6   j4 )I2  12 V∠0


E2
E1  3 V∠40
12 V∠0
Z1  3   j2 


Z2  0  j4 
Z3  6  
Z2
Z3
I1
I2
Z1

 





© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–17
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 19.3 | Mesh (Loop) Analysis
667
Step 5: Solve for the currents.
The solutions are determined as
I1  0.7887 A∠120.14°
and
I2  1.304 A∠156.00°
The current through the 4- inductive reactance (in a downward direction) is
I  I1  I2
 (0.7887 A∠120.14°)  (1.304 A∠156.00°)
 (0.3960 A  j0.6821 A)  (1.1913 A  j0.5304 A)
 0.795 A  j1.213 A  1.45 A∠56.75°
The voltage is now easily found from Ohm’s law as
V  IZL
 (1.45 A∠56.75°)(4 ∠90°)  5.80 V∠33.25°
EXAMPLE 19–7        
Given the circuit of Figure 19–18, write the loop equations and solve for the
loop currents.
Solution
The circuit is redrawn in Figure 19–19, showing loop currents and
impedances together with the appropriate voltage polarities.


E1  3 V∠0


R1
E2  6 V∠0
R2
1 
3 
2 
XC
XL
2 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–18


E2
E1  3 V∠0
6 V∠0


Z1
Z4
Z1 = 1 
Z2 = 2 
Z3 = j2 
Z4 = −j3 
I1
I3
Z3

 









Z2


I2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–19
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

668
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
The loop equations may now be written as
Loop 1:
(Z1  Z3)I1  (Z3)I2  (Z1)I3  E1
Loop 2:
(Z3)I1  (Z2  Z3  Z4)I2  (Z4)I3  0
Loop 3:
(Z1)I1  (Z4)I2  (Z1  Z4)I3  E2
Using the given impedance values, we have
Loop 1:
(1   j2 )I1  ( j2 )I2  (1 )I3  3 V
Loop 2:
( j2 )I1  (2   j1 )I2  (j3 )I3  0
Loop 3:
(1 )I1  (j3 )I2  (1   j3 )I3  6 V
Notice that in the preceding equations, the phase angles (v  0) for the voltages
have been omitted. This is because 3 V∠0  3 V  j0 V  3 V.
Using a calculator such as the Sharp EL-506W, we have:
I1  5.26A ∠41.25°
I2  3.18A ∠45°
I3  3.39A ∠1.03°
Given the circuit of Figure 19–20, write the mesh equations and solve for the
loop currents. Use the results to determine the current I.
Answers
I1  1.19 A∠1.58, I2  1.28 A∠46.50, I  1.01 A∠72.15
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
6 
3 
2 
4 
2 A∠30
4 V∠0


I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–20
Brieﬂy list the steps followed in using mesh analysis to solve for the loop currents
of a circuit.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Nodal analysis allows us to calculate all node voltages with respect to an arbi-
trary reference point in a circuit. The following steps provide a simple format
to apply nodal analysis.
1. Convert all sinusoidal expressions into equivalent phasor notation. If nec-
essary, convert voltage sources into equivalent current sources.
19.4 Nodal Analysis
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2. Redraw the given circuit, simplifying the given impedances wherever pos-
sible and relabelling the impedances as admittances (Y1, Y2, etc.).
3. Select and label an appropriate reference node. Arbitrarily assign subscripted
voltages (V1, V2, etc.) to each of the remaining n nodes within the circuit.
4. Indicate assumed current directions through all admittances in the circuit.
If an admittance is common to two nodes, it is considered in each of the
two node equations.
5. Apply Kirchhoff’s current law (KCL) to each of the n nodes in the circuit,
writing each equation as follows:
	(YV)  	Isources
The resulting linear equations may be simpliﬁed to the following format:
Node 1:
(Y1)V1  (Y12)V2  …  (Y1n)Vn  (I1)
Node 2:
(Y21)V1  (Y2)V2  …  (Y2n)Vn  (I2)
.
.
.
.
.
.
Node n:
(Yn1)V1  (Yn2)V2  …  (Yn)Vn  (In)
In this format, 	Yx is the summation of all admittances connected to
node x. The sign in front of all node admittances will be positive.
	Yxy is the summation of common admittances between node x and
node y. If there are no common admittances between two nodes, this term
is simply set to zero. All common admittance terms in the linear equations
will have a negative sign.
	Ix is the summation of current sources entering node x. If a current
source leaves the node, the current is given a negative sign.
6. Solve the resulting simultaneous linear equations using substitution or
determinants.
Section 19.4 | Nodal Analysis
669
EXAMPLE 19–8        
Given the circuit of Figure 19–21, write the nodal equations and solve for the
node voltages.
Solution
The circuit is redrawn in Figure 19–22, showing the nodes and a sim-
pliﬁed representation of the admittances.
The nodal equations are written as
Node 1:
(Y1  Y2)V1  (Y2)V2  I1
Node 2:
(Y2)V1  (Y2  Y3)V2  I2
4 
2 
I2
2 
I1  1 A∠0
2 A∠0
R
XL
XC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–21
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

670
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
Now, substituting the values of admittance into the nodal equations, we get
Node 1:
(0.5  j0.5)V1  (j0.5)V2  1∠0°
Node 2:
(j0.5)V1  (j0.25)V2  2∠0°
which, when solved, results in:
V1  4.243 V∠135°
and
V2  6.324 V∠161.57°
I2  2 A∠0
I1  1 A∠0
IA
IC
IB
Y2
Y3
V1
V2
Y1  0.5 S
Y2  j 0.5 S
Y3  j 0.25 S
Y1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–22
EXAMPLE 19–9       
Use nodal analysis to determine the voltage V for the circuit of Figure 19–23.
Compare the results to those obtained when the circuit was analyzed using mesh
analysis in Example 19–6.
Solution
Step 1: Convert the voltage source into an equivalent current source as illustrated
in Figure 19–24.


XC
R1
R2
XL
6 
3 
2 
4 
E2
I1  1 A∠40
12 V∠0
V


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–23
CircuitSim 19-1 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 19.4 | Nodal Analysis
671
Steps 2, 3, and 4: The reference node is selected to be at the bottom of the circuit
and the admittances are simpliﬁed as shown in Figure 19–25.
Step 5: Applying Kirchhoff’s current law to each node, we have the following:
Node 1:
IA  IB  I1
Y1V1  Y2(V1  V2)  I1
(Y1  Y2)V1  Y2V2  I1
Node 2:
IC  IB  I2
Y3V2  Y2(V1  V2)  I2
Y2V1  (Y2  Y3)V2  I2
Now, substituting the values of admittance into the nodal equations, we get
Node 1:

1
3
  

1
j 2
V1  

1
j 2
V2  140°
Node 2:


1
j 2
V1 

1
j 2
  
j4
  1
6
V2  20°
1
4 
3 
I2
2 
I1
2 A∠0
R1
XL
XC
1 A∠40
I2   E2   12 V∠0  2 A∠0
6 
6 
6 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–24
I2
I1
2 A∠0
IA
IC
IB
Y2
Y3
V1
V2
Y1
Y1  1 S  j 0
3
Y2  0  j 1 S
2
Y3  1 S  j 1 S
6
4
1 A∠40
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–25
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

672
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
These equations are further simpliﬁed as:
Node 1:

1
3
  j 1
2
V1  j 1
2
V2  140°
Node 2:
j 1
2
V1 
1
6
  j 1
4
V2  20°
Step 6: Finally, these equations are solved as
V1  5.29 V∠48.75°
and
V2  5.80 V∠33.27°
Examining the circuit of Figure 19–23, we see that the voltage V is the
same as the node voltage V2. Therefore V  5.80 V∠33.27, which is the same
result obtained in Example 19–6. (The slight difference in phase angle is the
result of rounding error.)
EXAMPLE 19–10       
Given the circuit of Figure 19–26, write the nodal equations expressing all
coefﬁcients in rectangular form. Solve for V1, V2, and V3.
Solution
As in the previous example, we need to ﬁrst convert the voltage
source into its equivalent current source. The current source will be a phasor I4,
where
I4  X
V
C
4  
2
2

V
∠
∠

0
9
°
0°
  1.0 A∠90°
Figure 19–27 shows the circuit as it appears after the source conversion. Notice
that the direction of the current source is downward to correspond with the
polarity of the voltage source V4.
2 
I2
I1
2 A∠90
1 A∠0


2 
1 
2 
I3
2 A∠90
V2
V3
2 
2 
V1
V4
2 V∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–26
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 19.4 | Nodal Analysis
673
2 
I2
I1
2 A∠90
1 A∠0
2 
1 
2 
I3
2 A∠90
2 
2 
I4  1 A∠90
2 ∠90
I4      2 V∠0      1 	∠90
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–27
I4
I1
1 A∠90
Y2
Y3
Y1
Y5
Y4
1 A∠0
I2
I3
2 A∠90
2 A∠90
V1
V2
V3
Y1  0  j 1 S
2
Y2  0  j 1 S
2
Y3  1 S  j 0
2
Y4  0 + j 1 S
2
Y5  1 S  j 1 S
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–28
Now, by labelling the nodes and admittances, the circuit may be simpliﬁed as
shown in Figure 19–28.
The admittances of Figure 19–28 are as follows:
Y1  0 j0.5 S
Y2  0  j0.5 S
Y3  0.5 S  j0
Y4  0  j0.5 S
Y5  1.0 S  j0.5 S
Using the assigned admittances, the nodal equations are written as follows:
Node 1:
(Y1  Y2)V1  (Y2)V2  (0)V3  I1  I2
Node 2:
(Y2)V1  (Y2  Y3  Y5)V2  (Y3)V3  I2  I3
Node 3:
(0)V1  (Y3)V2  (Y3  Y4)V3  I3  I4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

674
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
By substituting the rectangular form of the admittances and current into the
preceding linear equations, we rewrite the equations as
Node 1:
(j0.5  j0.5)V1  ( j0.5)V2  (0)V3  1  j2
Node 2: (j0.5)V1  (j0.5  0.5  1  j0.5)V2  (0.5)V3  j2  j2
Node 3:
(0)V1  (0.5)V2  (0.5  j0.5)V3  j2  j1
Finally, the nodal equations are simpliﬁed as follows:
Node 1:
(0)V1  ( j0.5)V2  (0)V3  1  j2
Node 2:
( j0.5)V1  (1.5)V2  (0.5)V3  j4
Node 3:
(0)V1  (0.5)V2  (0.5  j0.5)V3  j1
These equations are solved as
V1  10.00V90°
V2  4.47V153.44°
V3  2.83V135°
Given the circuit of Figure 19–29, use nodal analysis to ﬁnd the voltages V1 and
V2. Use your results to ﬁnd the current I.
Answers
V1  4.22 V∠56.89, V2  2.19 V∠1.01, I  1.19 A∠1.85
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
XC
R1
R2
4 
3 
1 
E1  4 V∠0


XL
2 
I
V1
V2
I2  1 A∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–29
Brieﬂy list the steps followed in using nodal analysis to solve for the node volt-
ages of a circuit.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
In Chapter 8, we derived the relationships showing the equivalence of “delta”
(or “pi”) connected resistance to a “wye” (or “tee”) conﬁguration.
In a similar manner, impedances connected in a 
 conﬁguration are equiv-
alent to a unique Y conﬁguration. Figure 19–30 shows the equivalent circuits.
19.5 Delta-to-Wye 
and Wye-to-Delta
Conversions
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A 
 conﬁguration is converted to a Y equivalent by using the following:
Z1  
Za 
Z
Z
bZ
b 
c
Zc

(19–1)
Z2  
Za 
Z
Z
aZ
b 
c
Zc

(19–2)
Z3  
Za 
Z
Z
aZ
b
b
 Zc

(19–3)
The preceding conversion indicates that the impedance in any arm of a Y
circuit is determined by taking the product of the two adjacent 
 impedances
at this arm and dividing by the summation of the 
 impedances.
If the impedances of the sides of the 
 network are all equal (magnitude
and phase angle), the equivalent Y network will have identical impedances,
where each impedance is determined as
ZY  Z
3

(19–4)
A Y conﬁguration is converted to a 
 equivalent by using the following:
Za 
(19–5)
Zb 
(19–6)
Zc 
(19–7)
Any impedance in a 
 is determined by summing the possible two-
impedance product combinations of the Y and then dividing by the impedance
found in the opposite branch of the Y.
If the arms of a Y have identical impedances, the equivalent 
 will have
impedances given as
Z
  3ZY
(19–8)
Z1Z2  Z1Z3  Z2Z3

Z3
Z1Z2  Z1Z3  Z2Z3

Z2
Z1Z2  Z1Z3  Z2Z3

Z1
Section 19.5 | Delta-to-Wye and Wye-to-Delta Conversions
675
a
b
Z2
Z1
Z3
c
Zb
Za
Zc
a
c
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–30
Delta-wye equivalence.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

676
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
EXAMPLE 19–11       
Determine the Y equivalent of the 
 network shown in Figure 19–31.
Solution
Z1 
 

3
j

18
j

3
  
1
4
8
.2

4
∠
2∠

4
9
5
0
°
°

 4.242 ∠135°
 3.0   j3.0 
Z2 
 
3
j2

7 
j3
  
4
2
.
7
24

2
∠
∠
9
4
0
5
°
°

 6.364 ∠45°
 4.5   j4.5 
Z3 
 
3
5

4 
j3
  
4
5
.2
4
4

2∠
∠
4
0
5
°
°

 12.73 ∠45°
 9.0   j9.0 
In the preceding solution, we see that the given 
 network has an equivalent Y
network with one arm having a negative resistance. This result indicates that
although the 
 circuit has an equivalent Y circuit, the Y circuit cannot actually
be constructed from real components since negative resistors do not exist
(although some active components may demonstrate negative resistance char-
acteristics). If the given conversion is used to simplify a circuit we would treat
the impedance Z1  3   j3  as if the resistance actually were a negative
value. Figure 19–32 shows the equivalent Y circuit.
It is left to the student to show that the Y of Figure 19–32 is equivalent to
the 
 of Figure 19–31.
( j9 )(j6 )

3   j6   j9 
(3 )(j9 )

3   j6   j9 
(3 )(j6 )

3   j6   j9 
a
c
b
3 V
6 V
9 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–31
a
b
c
23 V
2j 3 V
9 V
2j 9 V
j 4.5 V
4.5 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–32
EXAMPLE 19–12       
Find the total impedance of the network in Figure 19–33.
Solution
If we take a moment to examine this network, we see that the circuit
contains both a Δ and a Y. In calculating the total impedance, the solution is
easier when we convert the Y to a Δ.
The conversion is shown in Figure 19–34.
3 V
3 V
6 V
a
c
b
6 V
3 V
3 V
ZT
© Cengage Learning 2013
3Ω
3Ω
3Ω
Z2
Z3
Z1
Zc
Zb
Za
a
b
c
b
a
c
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–34
FIGURE 19–33
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 19.6 | Bridge Networks
677
Za 

 
j2
3
9 
  3 
Zb 
 

9 
j3
  j3 
Zc 
 9
j3

  j3 
Now, substituting the equivalent 
 into the original network, we have the revised
network of Figure 19–35.
The network of Figure 19–35 shows that the corresponding sides of the 
 are
parallel. Because the inductor and the capacitor in the left side of the 
 have
the same values, we may replace the parallel combination of these two com-
ponents with an open circuit. The resulting impedance of the network is now
easily determined as
ZT  3 6   ( j3 )(j6 )  2   j6 
Z1Z2  Z1Z3  Z2Z3

Z3
Z1Z2  Z1Z3  Z2Z3

Z2
(3 )(j3 )  (3 )(j3 )  ( j3 )(j3 )

3 
Z1Z2  Z1Z3  Z2Z3

Z1
3 
3 
3 
3 
6 
6 
a
c
b

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–35
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
A 
 network consists of a resistor, inductor, and capacitor, each having an impedance
of 150 . Determine the corresponding Y network.
Bridge circuits, similar to the network of Figure 19–36, are used extensively in
electronics to measure the values of unknown components.
Recall from Chapter 8 that any bridge circuit is said to be balanced when
the current through the branch between the two arms is zero. In a practical cir-
cuit, component values of very precise resistors are adjusted until the current
through the central element (usually a sensitive galvanometer) is exactly equal
19.6 Bridge Networks
A Y network consists of a 60- capacitor, a 180- inductor, and a 540- resistor.
Determine the corresponding 
 network.
Answers
Za  1080   j180 , Zb  20   j120 , Zc  360   j60 
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

to zero. For ac circuits, the condition of a balanced bridge occurs when the
impedance vectors of the various arms satisfy the following condition:
Z
Z
1
3
  Z
Z
2
4

(19–9)
When a balanced bridge occurs in a circuit, the equivalent impedance of the
bridge network is easily determined by removing the central impedance and
replacing it with either an open or a short circuit. The resulting impedance of
the bridge circuit is then found as either of the following:
ZT  Z1Z2  Z3Z4
or
ZT  (Z1  Z3)(Z2  Z4)
If, on the other hand, the bridge is not balanced, then the total impedance
must be determined by performing a 
-to-Y conversion. Alternatively, the circuit
may be analyzed by using either mesh analysis or nodal analysis.
678
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
Z5
Z1
Z4
Z2
Z3
a
b
c
d
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–36
EXAMPLE 19–13       
Given that the circuit of Figure 19–37 is a balanced bridge.
a. Calculate the unknown impedance, Zx.
b. Determine the values of Lx and Rx if the circuit operates at a frequency
of 1 kHz.
Solution
a. The expression for the unknown impedance is determined from
Equation 19–9 as
Zx  
Z
Z
2Z
1
3

 
(1
3
0
0
k
k


)
∠
(1

00
20

°
)

 33.3 ∠20°
 31.3  j11.4 
b. From the preceding result, we have
Rx  31.3 
and
Lx  2
X
p
L
f  
2p(
1
1
1
0
.
0
4
0

Hz)
  1.81 mH
Z2
Zx
G


IG  0
Z1
Z3
Z1  30 k∠20
Z2  10 k∠0
Z3  100 ∠0
Rx
Lx
E
 f  1 kHz
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–37
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We will now consider various forms of bridge circuits that are used in elec-
tronic circuits to determine the values of unknown inductors and capacitors. As
in resistor bridges, the circuits use variable resistors together with very sensi-
tive galvanometer movements to ensure a balanced condition for the bridge.
However, rather than using a dc source to provide current in the circuit, the
bridge circuits use ac sources operating at a known frequency (usually 1 kHz).
Once the bridge is balanced, the value of unknown inductance or capacitance
may be easily determined by obtaining the reading directly from the instru-
ment. Most instruments using bridge circuitry will incorporate several different
bridges to enable the measurement of various types of unknown impedances.
Maxwell Bridge
The Maxwell bridge, shown in Figure 19–38, is used to determine the induc-
tance and series resistance of an inductor having a relatively large series resistance
(in comparison to XL  qL).
Section 19.6 | Bridge Networks
679
G
1
2
R1
R2
R3
Rx
Lx
C
Z4
Z2
Z3
Z1
IG 5 0
E
ω
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–38
Maxwell bridge.
Resistors R1 and R3 are adjusted to provide the balanced condition (when
the current through the galvanometer is zero: IG  0).
When the bridge is balanced, we know that the following condition must
apply:
Z
Z
1
2
  Z
Z
3
4

If we write the impedances using the rectangular forms, we obtain


 
Rx 
R3
jqLx

R2
 
Rx
R

2R
jq
3
Lx


q

C
jR
R
1
1
  j  
Rx
R

2R
jq
3
Lx

(jR1)(Rx  jqLx)  R2R3(qCR1  j)
qLxR1  jR1Rx  qR1R2R3C  jR2R3
j q
R
C
1


qR1
q
C
C
 j1

(R1)j q
1
C


R1  j q
1
C

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now, since two complex numbers can be equal only if their real parts are
equal and if their imaginary parts are equal, we must have the following:
qLxR1  qR1R2R3C
and
R1Rx  R2R3
Simplifying these expressions, we get the following equations for a Maxwell
bridge:
Lx  R2R3C
(19–10)
and
Rx  
R
R
2R
1
3

(19–11)
680
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
EXAMPLE 19–14       
a. Determine the values of R1 and R3 so that the bridge of Figure 19–39 is
balanced.
b. Calculate the current I when the bridge is balanced.
Solution
a. Rewriting Equations 19–10 and 19–11 and solving for the unknowns, we have
R3  
R
L
2C
x 
(10 k
16
)(
m
0.
H
01 F)
  160 
and
R1  
R
R
2R
x
3
  
(10 k
50
)(

160 )
  32 k
b. The total impedance is found as
ZT  (ZCR1R2)  [R3(Rx  ZLx)]
ZT  (j15.915 k)32 k10 k  [160 (50   j100.5 )]
 6.87 k∠25.6°  77.2 ∠38.0°
 6.91 k∠25.0°
The resulting circuit current is
I  
6.91
10
k
V
∠
∠

0°
25°
  1.45 mA∠25.0°
G


R1
10 k
R3
Lx
Rx
C  0.01F
IG  0
E  10 V∠0
R2
16 mH
50 
I
f  1000 Hz
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–39
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Hay Bridge
In order to measure the inductance and series resistance of an inductor having
a small series resistance, a Hay bridge is generally used. The Hay bridge is
shown in Figure 19–40.
By applying a method similar to that used to determine the values of the
unknown inductance and resistance of the Maxwell bridge, we can show that
the following equations for the Hay bridge apply:
Lx  
q2R
R
12
2
C
R3
2
C
 1

(19–12)
and
Rx  
q
q
2
2
R
R
1
1
2
R
C
2
2
R

3C
1
2

(19–13)
Section 19.6 | Bridge Networks
681
G
1
2
R1
R2
R3
Rx
Lx
C
Z4
Z2
Z3
Z1
IG 5 0
E
ω
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–40
Hay bridge.
G
1
2
R1
R2
C3
Rx
Cx
C1
Z4
Z2
Z3
Z1
IG 5 0
E
ω
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–41
Schering bridge.
Schering Bridge
The Schering bridge, shown in Figure 19–41, is a circuit used to determine the
value of unknown capacitance.
By solving for the balanced bridge condition, we have the following equa-
tions for the unknown quantities of the circuit:
Cx  
R
R
1C
2
3

(19–14)
Rx  
C
C
1R
3
2

(19–15)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

682
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
EXAMPLE 19–15       
Determine the values of C1 and C3 that will result in a balanced bridge for the
circuit of Figure 19–42.
Solution
Rewriting Equations 19–14 and 19–15, we solve for the unknown
capacitances as
C3  
R
R
2C
1
x
  
(10 k
5

M
)(

1 F)
  0.002 F
and
C1  
C
R
3R
2
x
 
(0.002
1

0
F
k
)

(200 )
  40 pF
G
1
2
R2
C3
Rx
Cx
C1
IG 5 0
E
f 5 1 kHz
5 MV
200 V
10 kV
1mF
R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–42
CircuitSim 19-2
Determine the values of R1 and R3 so that the bridge of Figure 19–43 is balanced.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
G
1
2
R1
R2
R3
Rx
Lx
C 5 0.01 mF
IG 5 0
E
f 5 1 kHz
10 kV
50 V
16 mH
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–43
Answers
R1  7916 , R3  199.6 
In some of the examples in this chapter, we analyzed circuits that resulted in as
many as three simultaneous linear equations. You have no doubt wondered if
there is a less complicated way to solve these circuits without the need for using
complex algebra. Computer programs are particularly useful for solving such ac
19.7 Circuit Analysis
Using Computers
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

circuits. Both Multisim and PSpice have individual strengths in the solution of
ac circuits. As in previous examples, Multisim provides an excellent simulation
of how measurements are taken in a lab. PSpice, on the other hand, provides
voltage and current readings, complete with magnitude and phase angle. The
following examples show how these programs are useful for examining the cir-
cuits in this chapter.
Section 19.7 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
683
EXAMPLE 19–16        
Use Multisim to show that the bridge circuit of Figure 19–44 is balanced.
G


10 k
160 k
32 k
0.01 F
E  10 V∠0
16 mH
50 
f  1000 Hz
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–44
Solution
Recall that a bridge circuit is balanced when the current through the
branch between the two arms of the bridge is equal to zero. In this example, we
will use a multimeter set on its ac ammeter range to verify the condition of the
circuit. The ammeter is selected by clicking on A, and it is set to its ac range by
clicking on the sinusoidal button. Figure 19–45 shows the circuit connections
and the ammeter reading. The results correspond to the conditions that were pre-
viously analyzed in Example 19–14. (Note: When we use Multisim, the amme-
ter may not show exactly zero current in the balanced condition. This is due to
the way the program does the calculations. Any current less than 5 μA is con-
sidered to be effectively zero.)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–45
PSPICE
MultiSim
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PSpice
684
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
Use Multisim to verify that the results obtained in Example 19–15 result in a
balanced bridge circuit. (Assume that the bridge is balanced if the galvanometer
current is less than 5 A.)
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 7
EXAMPLE 19–17       
Use PSpice to input the circuit of Figure 19–15. Assume that the circuit oper-
ates at a frequency of q  50 rads (f  7.958 Hz). Use PSpice to obtain a print-
out showing the currents through XC, R2, and XL. Compare the results to those
obtained in Example 19–6.
Solution
Since the reactive components in Figure 19–15 were given as impedance,
it is necessary to ﬁrst determine the corresponding values in henries and farads.
L  
50
4
r

ads
  80 mH
and
C  
(2 )(5
1
0 rads)
  10 mF
Now we are ready to use OrCAD Capture CIS to input the circuit as shown in
Figure 19–46. The basic steps are reviewed for you. Use the ac current source,
ISRC from the SOURCE library and place one IPRINT part from the SPECIAL
library. The resistor, inductor, and capacitor are selected from the ANALOG
library, and the ground symbol is selected by using the Place ground tool.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–46
Change the value of the current source by double-clicking on the part and
moving the horizontal scrollbar until you ﬁnd the ﬁeld titled AC. Enter 1A 40Deg
into this ﬁeld. A space must be placed between the magnitude and phase angle.
Click on Apply. In order for these values to be displayed on the schematic, you
must click on the Display button and then Value Only. Click on OK to return to
the properties editor and then close the editor by clicking on X.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 19.7 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
685
The IPRINT part is similar to an ammeter and provides a printout of the cur-
rent magnitude and phase angle. The properties of the IPRINT part are changed
by double-clicking on the part and scrolling across to show the appropriate ﬁelds.
Type OK in the AC, MAG, and PHASE ﬁelds. In order to display the selected
ﬁelds on the schematic, you must click on the Display button and then select
Name and Value after changing each ﬁeld. Since we need to measure three cur-
rents in the circuit, we could follow this procedure two more times. However, an
easier method is to click on the IPRINT part and copy the part by using
<Ctrl><C> and <Ctrl><V>. Each IPRINT will then have the same properties.
Once the rest of the circuit is completed and wired, click on the New Simula-
tion Proﬁle tool. Give the simulation a name (such as ac Branch Currents). Click
on the Analysis tab and select AC Sweep Noise as the analysis type. Type the fol-
lowing values:
Start Frequency: 7.958Hz
End Frequency: 7.958Hz
Total Points: 1
Since we do not need the Probe postprocessor to run, it is disabled by select-
ing the Probe Window tab (from the Simulation Settings dialog box). Click on
Display Probe window and exit the simulation settings by clicking on OK.
Click on the Run tool. Once PSpice has successfully run, click on the View
menu and select the Output File menu item. Scroll through the ﬁle until the cur-
rents are shown as follows:
FREQ        IM(V_PRINT1)IP(V_PRINT1)
7.958E+00   7.887E-01  -1.201E+02
FREQ        IM(V_PRINT2)IP(V_PRINT2)
7.958E+00   1.304E+00   
1.560E+02
FREQ        IM(V_PRINT3)IP(V_PRINT3)
7.958E+00   1.450E+00 
-5.673E+01
The above printout provides: I1  0.7887 A∠120.1, I2  1.304 A∠156.0,
and I3  1.450 A∠56.73. These results are consistent with those calculated
in Example 19–6.
Use PSpice to evaluate the node voltages for the circuit of Figure 19–23.
Assume that the circuit operates at an angular frequency of q  1000 rads 
( f  159.15 Hz).
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 8
T
he Schering bridge of Figure 19–74 is balanced. In this chapter, you have
learned several methods that allow you to find the current anywhere in a
circuit. Using any method, determine the current through the galvanometer
if the value of Cx  0.07 F. (All other values remain unchanged.) Repeat
the calculations for a value of Cx  0.09 F. Can you make a general state-
ment for current through the galvanometer if Cx is smaller than the value
required to balance the bridge? What general statement can be made if the
value of Cx is larger than the value in the balanced bridge?
Putting It into Practice
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

686
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
Problems
19.1
Dependent Sources
1. Refer to the circuit of Figure 19–47.
Find V when the controlling current I is the following:
a. 20 A∠0
b. 50 A∠180
c. 60 A∠60
I
60 I
R 5 1 kV
1
2
5 kV
V
25 kV
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–47
2. Refer to the circuit of Figure 19–48.
Find I when the controlling voltage, V, is the following:
a. 30 mV∠0
b. 60 mV∠180
c. 100 mV∠30
200 V
1
2
100 kV
20 kV
I
R 5 2 kV
1
2
V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–48
3. Repeat Problem 1 for the circuit of Figure 19–49.
4. Repeat Problem 2 for the circuit of Figure 19–50.
(800 V)I
2
1
1
2
40 kV
10 kV V
I
R 5 1 kV
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–49
I
(6.0 mS)V
30 kV
60 kV
R 5 2 kV
1
2
V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–50
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5. Find the output voltage, Vout, for the circuit of Figure 19–51.
6. Repeat Problem 5 for the circuit of Figure 19–52.
Problems
687
I
130 I
20 k
30 k


R2
R3
2 k


10 mV∠30
Vout
R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–51
5 k
20 k


R2
R3
1.5 k


20 mV∠0
Vout
R1


V1
(5 mS) V1
XC
2 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–52
19.2
Source Conversion
7. Given the circuits of Figure 19–53, convert each of the current sources into
an equivalent voltage source. Use the resulting circuit to ﬁnd VL.
600 
1800 


RL
30 mA∠0
VL
(a)
(b)
1 k
225 


RL
2 mA∠30
VL
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–53
8. Convert each voltage source of Figure 19–54 into an equivalent current
source.
(a)
40 
5 V∠25


(b)
40 
82 V∠70


9 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–54
9. Refer to the circuit of Figure 19–55.
a. Solve for the voltage, V.
b. Convert the current source into an equivalent voltage source and again
solve for V. Compare to the result obtained in (a).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10. Refer to the circuit of Figure 19–56.
a. Solve for the voltage, VL.
b. Convert the current source into an equivalent voltage source and again
solve for VL.
c. If I  5 A∠90, what is VL?
19.3
Mesh (Loop) Analysis
11. Consider the circuit of Figure 19–57.
a. Write the mesh equations for the circuit.
b. Solve for the loop currents.
c. Determine the current I through the 4- resistor.
12. Refer to the circuit of Figure 19–58.
a. Write the mesh equations for the circuit.
b. Solve for the loop currents.
c. Determine the current through the 25- inductor.
13. Refer to the circuit of Figure 19–59.
a. Simplify the circuit and write the mesh equations.
b. Solve for the loop currents.
c. Determine the voltage V across the 15- capacitor.
688
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
40 k
120 k


VL
(5 mS)V
10 k
I  3 A∠0
RL


V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–56
12 




4 
8 
2 
3 
5 
I
20 V∠0
30 V∠30
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–57
12 
5 
I
2 V∠40




4 V∠20
30 
25 
16 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–58
10 
V


25 




2 A∠0
9 
15 
12 
10 V∠0
15 V∠60
10 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–59
10 k
50 k


V
150 I
2 k
30 mV∠0


6 k
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–55
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14. Consider the circuit of Figure 19–60.
a. Simplify the circuit and write the mesh equations.
b. Solve for the loop currents.
c. Determine the voltage V across the 2- resistor.
15. Use mesh analysis to ﬁnd the current I and the voltage V in the circuit of
Figure 19–61.
16. Repeat Problem 15 for the circuit of Figure 19–62.
Problems
689
V


3 
3 V∠90


2 
4 
2 
4 A∠0
2 A∠45
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–60
V


18 V∠0


3 k
I


30 V∠53.13
4 k
8 k
XL
R2
5 mA∠30
XC
4 k
R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
V


30 V∠30
9 k


10 k
12 k
16 k
1 mA∠0
R1
XC1
XC2
XL
R2  4 k
R3  3 k
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–61
FIGURE 19–62
19.4
Nodal Analysis
17. Consider the circuit of Figure 19–63.
a. Write the nodal equations.
b. Solve for the node voltages.
c. Determine the current I through the 4- capacitor.
2 A∠0
6 
I
4 
3 A∠90
4 A∠90
3 
V1
V2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–63
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

19. a. Simplify the circuit of Figure 19–59, and write the nodal equations.
b. Solve for the node voltages.
c. Determine the voltage across the 15- capacitor.
20. a. Simplify the circuit of Figure 19–60, and write the nodal equations.
b. Solve for the node voltages.
c. Determine the current through the 2- resistor.
21. Use nodal analysis to determine the node voltages in the circuit of
Figure 19–61. Use the results to ﬁnd the current I and the voltage V.
Compare your answers to those obtained using mesh analysis in Problem 15.
22. Use nodal analysis to determine the node voltages in the circuit of
Figure 19–62. Use the results to find the current I and the voltage V.
Compare your answers to those obtained using mesh analysis in 
Problem 16.
19.5
Delta-to-Wye and Wye-to-Delta Conversions
23. Convert each of the 
 networks of Figure 19–65 into an equivalent Y network.
24. Convert each of the Y networks of Figure 19–66 into an equivalent 
 network.
690
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
V
V1
V2


3 
2 A∠90
3 A∠90
2 
6 
2 A∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–64
25. Using 
 → Y or Y → 
 conversion, calculate I for the circuit of Figure 19–67.
26. Using 
 → Y or Y → 
 conversion, calculate I for the circuit of Figure 19–68.
(a)
270 
a
b
c
90 
810 
(b)
18 k
36 k
9 k
a
b
c
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–65
25 
50 
75 
(a)
(b)
2 k
2 k
3 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–66
18. Refer to the circuit of Figure 19–64.
a. Write the nodal equations.
b. Solve for the node voltages.
c. Determine the voltage V across the 3- capacitor.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
691


I
10 V∠0
2 
5 
6 
15 
10 
18 
© Cengage Learning 2013
3 
25 V∠30
I


10 
3 
3 
10 
10 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–67
FIGURE 19–68


I
16 V∠0
ZT
3 k
6 k
6 k
3 k
2 k
9 k
I1
© Cengage Learning 2013
10 mA∠0
10 k


2 k
8 k
5 H
0.2 F
0.1 F
V1


V

  1 krad/s
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–69
FIGURE 19–70
500 mV∠0
1 


2 
3 
4 
2 
G
IG  0
I
Z2
© Cengage Learning 2013
G


IG  0
20 V∠0
I
25 k
50 k
200 
5 k
Z1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–71
FIGURE 19–72
27. Refer to the circuit of Figure 19–69:
a. Determine the equivalent impedance, ZT, of the circuit.
b. Find the currents I and I1.
28. Refer to the circuit of Figure 19–70:
a. Determine the equivalent impedance, ZT, of the circuit.
b. Find the voltages V and V1.
19.6
Bridge Networks
29. Given that the bridge circuit of Figure 19–71 is balanced:
a. Determine the value of the unknown impedance.
b. Solve for the current I.
30. Given that the bridge circuit of Figure 19–72 is balanced:
a. Determine the value of the unknown impedance.
b. Solve for the current I.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

31. Show that the bridge circuit of Figure 19–73 is balanced.
692
Chapter 19 | Methods of ac Analysis
G
1
2
IG 5 0
800 V
Rx 5 500 V
2 kV
Cx 5 0.08 mF
10 V sin 2000pt 
0.2 mF
0.05 mF
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–74
32. Show that the bridge circuit of Figure 19–74 is balanced.
G
1
2
R1
R3
Rx
Lx
IG 5 0
E
1 kV
50 V
500 mH
0.01 mF
f 5 1 kHz
© Cengage Learning 2013
G
1
2
C3
Rx
Cx
C1
IG 5 0
E
1 MV
5 kV
1 kV
0.1 mF
f 5 1 kHz
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–75
FIGURE 19–76
G
1
2
100 kV
1 kV
Rx 5 5 V
IG 5 0
10 V sin 2000pt 
500 V
Lx 5 100 mH
0.2 mF
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 19–73
33. Derive Equations 19–14 and 19–15 for the balanced Schering bridge.
34. Derive Equations 19–12 and 19–13 for the balanced Hay bridge.
35. Determine the values of the unknown resistors that will result in a balanced
bridge for the circuit of Figure 19–75.
36. Determine the values of the unknown capacitors which will result in a 
balanced bridge for the circuit of Figure 19–76.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

19.7
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
37. Use Multisim to show that the bridge circuit of Figure 19–73 is balanced.
(Assume that the bridge is balanced if the galvanometer current is less 
than 5 A.)
38. Repeat Problem 37 for the bridge circuit of Figure 19–74.
39. Use PSpice to input the ﬁle for the circuit of Figure 19–21. Assume that the
circuit operates at a frequency q  2 krads. Use IPRINT and VPRINT to
obtain a printout of the node voltages and the current through each element
of the circuit.
40. Use PSpice to input the ﬁle for the circuit of Figure 19–29. Assume that the
circuit operates at a frequency q  1 krads. Use IPRINT and VPRINT to
obtain a printout of the node voltages and the current through each element
of the circuit.
41. Use PSpice to input the ﬁle for the circuit of Figure 19–68. Assume that the
circuit operates at a frequency q  20 rads. Use IPRINT to obtain a printout
of the current I.
42. Use PSpice to input the ﬁle for the circuit of Figure 19–69. Assume that the
circuit operates at a frequency q  3 krads. Use IPRINT to obtain a printout
of the current I.
Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
693
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
a. E  1000 V∠30
b. E  4 V∠90
c. E  1024 V∠38.66
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
1. Convert current sources to voltage sources.
2. Redraw the circuit.
3. Assign a clockwise current to each loop.
4. Write loop equations using Kirchhoff’s voltage law.
5. Solve the resulting simultaneous linear equations to ﬁnd the loop currents.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
1. Convert voltage sources to current sources.
2. Redraw the circuit.
3. Label all nodes, including the reference node.
4. Write nodal equations using Kirchhoff’s current law.
5. Solve the resulting simultaneous linear equations to ﬁnd the node voltages.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
Z1  150 ∠90, Z2  150 ∠90, Z3  150 ∠0
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
MultiSim
MultiSim
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Absolute Maximum
Power
Gain
Relative Maximum 
Power
I OUTLINE
Superposition Theorem—
Independent Sources
Superposition Theorem—
Dependent Sources
Thévenin’s Theorem—
Independent Sources
Norton’s Theorem—
Independent Sources
Thévenin’s and Norton’s
Theorems for
Dependent Sources
Maximum Power Transfer
Theorem
Circuit Analysis Using
Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter you will be able to
• apply the superposition theorem to
determine the voltage across or current
through any component in a given circuit,
• determine the Thévenin equivalent of circuits 
having independent and/or dependent
sources,
• determine the Norton equivalent of circuits
having independent and/or dependent
sources,
• apply the maximum power transfer theorem
to determine the load impedance for which
maximum power is transferred to the load
from a given circuit,
• use PSpice to ﬁnd the Thévenin and Norton
equivalents of circuits having either
independent or dependent sources,
• use Multisim to verify the operation 
of ac circuits.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20
ac NETWORK THEOREMS
I
n this chapter we apply the superposition, Thévenin, Norton, and maximum power transfer the-
orems in the analysis of ac circuits. Although the Millman and reciprocity theorems apply to ac
circuits as well as to dc circuits, they are omitted since the applications are virtually identical
with those used in analyzing dc circuits.
Many of the techniques used in this chapter are similar to those used in Chapter 9, and as
a result, most students will ﬁnd a brief review of dc theorems useful.
This chapter examines the application of the network theorems by considering both inde-
pendent and dependent sources. In order to show the distinctions between the methods used
in analyzing the various types of sources, the sections are labelled according to the types of
sources involved.
An understanding of dependent sources is particularly useful when working with transistor
circuits and operational ampliﬁers. Sections 20.2 and 20.5 are intended to provide the back-
ground for analyzing the operation of feedback ampliﬁers. Your instructor may ﬁnd that these
topics are best left until you cover this topic in a course dealing with such ampliﬁers.
Consequently, the omission of Sections 20.2 and 20.5 will not in any way detract from the conti-
nuity of the important ideas presented in this chapter. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

696
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
The superposition theorem states the following:
The voltage across (or current through) an element is determined by
summing the voltage (or current) due to each independent source.
In order to apply this theorem, all sources other than the one being con-
sidered are eliminated. As in dc circuits, this is done by replacing current
sources with open circuits and by replacing voltage sources with short cir-
cuits. The process is repeated until the effects due to all sources have been
determined.
Although we generally work with circuits having all sources at the same
frequency, occasionally a circuit may operate at more than one frequency at a
time. This is particularly true in diode and transistor circuits which use a dc
source to set a “bias” (or operating) point and an ac source to provide the signal
to be conditioned or ampliﬁed. In such cases, the resulting voltages or currents
are still determined by applying the superposition theorem. The topic of how to
solve circuits operating at several different frequencies simultaneously is cov-
ered in Chapter 25.
Putting It in Perspective
William Bradford Shockley
SHOCKLEY WAS BORN THE SON of a mining engineer in London,
England, on February 13, 1910. After graduating from the
California Institute of Technology and Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Shockley joined Bell Telephone Laboratories.
With his co-workers John Bardeen and Walter Brattain,
Shockley developed an improved solid-state rectiﬁer using 
a germanium crystal which had been injected with minute
amounts of impurities. Unlike vacuum tubes, the resulting
diodes were able to operate at much lower voltages without
the need for inefﬁcient heater elements.
In 1948, Shockley combined three layers of germanium 
to produce a device that was able not only to rectify a signal
but to amplify it. Thus was developed the ﬁrst transistor. Since
its humble beginning, the transistor has been improved and
decreased in size to the point where now a circuit containing
thousands of transistors can easily ﬁt into an area not much
bigger than the head of a pin.
The advent of the transistor has permitted the construction of elaborate spacecraft, unprece-
dented communication, and new forms of energy generation.
Shockley, Bardeen, and Brattain received the 1956 Nobel Prize in Physics for their discovery 
of the transistor. I
20.1 Superposition
Theorem—
Independent
Sources
Alfred Eisenstaedt/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images
NOTES...
As in dc circuits, the superposition
theorem can be applied only to 
voltage and current; it cannot be
used to solve for the total power
dissipated by an element. This is
because power is not a linear quan-
tity, but rather follows a square-law
relationship (P  V2R  I2R).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 20.1 | Superposition Theorem—Independent Sources
697
EXAMPLE 20–1        
Determine the current I in Figure 20–1 by using the superposition theorem.
2 E
5 V∠0


2 A∠0
4 E
5 E
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–1
Solution
Current due to the 5 V∠0 voltage source: Eliminating the current source, we
obtain the circuit shown in Figure 20–2.
Current source is
replaced with an open
circuit.
2 E
5 V∠0


4 E
5 E
I(1)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–2
Applying Ohm’s law, we have
I(1)  
4
5

V∠
j2
0

°
 
4.472
5

V
∠
∠

0
2
°
6.57°

 1.118 A∠26.57°
Current due to the 2 A∠0 current source: Eliminating the voltage source, we
obtain the circuit shown in Figure 20–3.
The current I(2) due to this source is determined by applying the current
divider rule:
I(2)  (2 A∠0°) 
4
4



∠
j
0
2
°



4.472
8

V
∠
∠

0
2
°
6.57°

 1.789 A∠26.57°
The total current is determined as the summation of currents I(1) and I(2):
I  I(1)  I(2)
 1.118 A∠26.57°  1.789 A∠26.57°
 (1.0 A  j0.5 A)  (1.6 A  j0.8 A)
 2.6  j1.3 A
 2.91 A∠26.57°
2 A∠0
2 
4 
5 
I(2)
Voltage source is
replaced with a
short circuit.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

698
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
EXAMPLE 20–2       
Consider the circuit of Figure 20–4:
Find the following:
a. VR and VC using the superposition theorem.
b. Power dissipated by the circuit.
c. Power delivered to the circuit by each of the sources.
Solution
a. The superposition theorem may be employed as follows:
Voltages due to the current source: Eliminating the voltage source, we obtain
the circuit shown in Figure 20–5.
The impedance “seen” by the current source will be the parallel combination 
of RZC.
Z1 
(2
2
0
0


)(


j
j
1
1
5
5

)
  
2
3
5
0

0
∠


∠
3

6
9
.8
0
7
°
°
  12 ∠53.13°
The voltage VR(1) is the same as the voltage across the capacitor, VC(1). Hence,
VR(1)  VC(1)
 (2 A∠0°)(12 ∠53.13°)
 24 V∠53.13°
Voltages due to the voltage source: Eliminating the current source, we have
the circuit shown in Figure 20–6.
The voltages VR(2) and VC(2) are determined by applying the voltage 
divider rule,
VR(2)  
20
2

0 

∠
j1
0
5
°

(20 V∠0°)
 
25
40
∠
0

V
3
∠
6.
0
8
°
7°
  16 V∠36.87°
and
VC(2)  

20
1

5 

∠
j

15
90

°
 (20 V∠0°)
 
2
3
5
0
∠
0

V
3
∠
6
9
.8
0
7
°
°
  12 V∠126.87°
Notice that VC(2) is assigned to be negative relative to the originally assumed
polarity. The negative sign is eliminated from the calculation by adding (or sub-
tracting) 180 from the corresponding calculation.
By applying superposition, we get
VR  VR(1)  VR(2)
 24 V∠53.13°  16 V∠36.87°
 (14.4 V  j19.2 V)  (12.8 V  j9.6 V)
 27.2 V  j9.6 V
 28.84 V∠19.44°
and
VC  VC(1)  VC(2)
 24 V∠53.13°  12 V∠126.87°
 (14.4 V  j19.2 V)  (7.2 V  j9.6 V)
 7.2 V  j9.6 V
 12 V∠53.13°
2 A∠0
15 


20 
R
I
E
20 V∠0




VC
VR
XC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–4
2 A∠0
15 
20 
R
I




VC(1)
VR(1)
XC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–5
15 


20 
R
20 V∠0




VC(2)
VR(2)
XC
E
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 20.1 | Superposition Theorem—Independent Sources
699
b. Since only the resistor will dissipate power, the total power dissipated by
the circuit is found as
PT  
(28
2
.
0
84

V)2
  41.60 W
c. The power delivered to the circuit by the current source is
P1  V1I cos v1
where V1  VC  12 V∠53.13 is the voltage across the current source and
v1 is the phase angle between V1 and I.
The power delivered by the current source is
P1  (12 V)(2 A) cos 53.13  14.4 W
The power delivered to the circuit by the voltage source is similarly determined as
P2  EI2 cos v2
where I2 is the current through the voltage source and v2 is the phase angle
between E and I2.
P2  (20 V)
28
2
.
0
84

V
 cos 19.44°  27.2 W
As expected, the total power delivered to the circuit must be the summation
PT  P1  P2  41.6 W
Use superposition to ﬁnd V and I for the circuit of Figure 20–7.
Answers
I  2.52 A∠25.41, V  4.45 V∠104.18
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
3 
5 V∠30
2 A∠0
4 
I




V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–7
A 20- resistor is in a circuit having three sinusoidal sources. After analyzing the
circuit, it is found that the current through the resistor due to each of the sources
is as follows:
I1  1.5 A∠20
I2  1.0 A∠110
I3  2.0 A∠0
a. Use superposition to calculate the resultant current through the resistor.
b. Calculate the power dissipated by the resistor.
c. Show that the power dissipated by the resistor cannot be found by applying
superposition, namely, PT 	 I2
1R  I2
2R  I2
3R.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 19 introduced the concept of dependent sources. We now examine ac
circuits that contain dependent sources. In order to analyze such circuits, it is
first necessary to determine whether the dependent source is conditional upon
a controlling element in its own circuit or whether the controlling element is
located in some other circuit.
If the controlling element is external to the circuit under consideration, the
method of analysis is the same as for an independent source. However, if the
controlling element is in the same circuit, the analysis follows a slightly dif-
ferent strategy. The next two examples show the techniques used to analyze cir-
cuits having dependent sources.
700
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
20.2 Superposition
Theorem—
Dependent
Sources
EXAMPLE 20–3       
Consider the circuit of Figure 20–8.
a. Determine the general expression for V in terms of I.
b. Calculate V if I  1.0 A∠0.
c. Calculate V if I  0.3 A∠90.
2 E
6 V∠0
5 I
R2




V
R1
8 E
I
R
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–8
Solution
a. Since the current source in the circuit is dependent on current through an
element that is located outside of the circuit of interest, the circuit may be
analyzed in the same manner as for independent sources.
Voltage due to the voltage source: Eliminating the current source, we obtain
the circuit shown in Figure 20–9.
V(1)  
1
8
0


 (6 V∠0°)  4.8 V∠0°
Voltage due to the current source: Eliminating the voltage source, we have the
circuit shown in Figure 20–10.
ZT  2 8   1.6 ∠0°
V(2)  VZT  (5I)(1.6 ∠0°)  8.0 I
From superposition, the general expression for voltage is determined to be
V  V(1)  V(2)
 4.8 V∠0°  8.0 I
2 E
6 V∠0
R2




V(1)
R1
8 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–9
2 
5 I
R2


V(2)
R1
8 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–10
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 20.2 | Superposition Theorem—Dependent Sources
701
b.
If I  1.0 A∠0°,
V  4.8 V∠0°  (8.0 )(1.0 A∠0°)  3.2 V
 3.2 V∠180°
c.
If I  0.3 A∠90°,
V  4.8 V∠0°  (8.0 )(0.3 A∠90°)  4.8 V  j2.4 V
 5.367 V∠26.57°
EXAMPLE 20–4        
Given the circuit of Figure 20–11, calculate the voltage across the 40- resistor.
Solution
In the circuit of Figure 20–11, the dependent source is controlled by
an element located in the circuit. Unlike the sources in the previous examples,
the dependent source cannot be eliminated from the circuit since doing so would
contradict Kirchhoff’s voltage law andor Kirchhoff’s current law.
The circuit must be analyzed by considering all effects simultaneously.
Applying Kirchhoff’s current law, we have
I1  I2  2 A∠0
From Kirchhoff’s voltage law, we have
(10 ) I1  V  0.2 V  1.2 V
I1  0.12 V
and,
I2  
40
V

  0.025 V
Combining these expressions, we have
0.12 V  0.025 V  2.0 A∠0°
0.145 V  2.0 A∠0°
V  13.79 V∠0°
10 E
0.2 V
2 A∠0
I1


V
R1
I2
R2  40 E


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–11
Determine the voltage V in the circuit of Figure 20–12.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
10 E
5 A∠0
I


V
2 E
2 I
3 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–12
Answer
V  2.73 V∠180
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Thévenin’s theorem is a method that converts any linear bilateral ac circuit
into a single ac voltage source in series with an equivalent impedance as
shown in Figure 20–13.
The resulting two-terminal network will be equivalent when it is connected
to any external branch or component. If the original circuit contains reactive
elements, the Thévenin equivalent circuit will be valid only at the frequency at
which the reactances were determined. The following method may be used to
determine the Thévenin equivalent of an ac circuit having either independent
sources or sources which are dependent upon voltage or current in some other
circuit. The outlined method may not be used in circuits having dependent
sources controlled by voltage or current in the same circuit.
1. Remove the branch across which the Thévenin equivalent circuit is to be
found. Label the resulting two terminals. Although any designation will
do, we will use the notations a and b.
2. Set all sources to zero. As in dc circuits, this is achieved by replacing volt-
age sources with short circuits and current sources with open circuits.
3. Determine the Thévenin equivalent impedance ZTh by calculating the
impedance seen between the open terminals a and b. Occasionally it may
be necessary to redraw the circuit to simplify this process.
4. Replace the sources removed in Step 3 and determine the open-circuit volt-
age across the terminals a and b. If any of the sources are expressed in sinu-
soidal form, it is ﬁrst necessary to convert these sources into an equivalent
phasor form. For circuits having more than one source, it may be necessary
to apply the superposition theorem to calculate the open-circuit voltage.
Since all voltages will be phasors, the resultant is found by using vector
algebra. The open-circuit voltage is the Thévenin voltage, ETh.
5. Sketch the resulting Thévenin equivalent circuit by including that portion
of the circuit removed in Step 1.
702
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
20.3 Thévenin’s
Theorem—
Independent
Sources
ETh


a
b
ZTh
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–13
Thévenin equivalent circuit.
EXAMPLE 20–5       
Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to ZL for the circuit of Figure 20–14.
60 E
20 V∠0


80 E
40 E
XC
XL
R
ZL
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–14
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 20.3 | Thévenin’s Theorem—Independent Sources
703
Solution
Steps 1 and 2: Removing the load impedance ZL and setting the voltage source
to zero, we have the circuit of Figure 20–15.
Step 3: The Thévenin impedance between terminals a and b is found as
ZTh  R(ZL  ZC)


44
8
.7
0
2
0


∠
∠
2
9
6
0
.
°
57°

 17.89 ∠63.43°
 8   j16 
Step 4: The Thévenin voltage is found by using the voltage divider rule as
shown in the circuit of Figure 20–16.
ETh  Vab 
(20 V∠0°)

44.7
8
2
00

V
∠
∠
2
0
6
°
.57°

 17.89 V∠26.57°
Step 5: The resultant Thévenin equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 20–17.
40 ∠0°

40   j80   j60 
(40 ∠0°)(20 ∠90°)

40   j20 
60 E
20 V∠0


80 E
40 E
XC
XL
R
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–16
60 
80 
40 
XC
XL
R
ZTh
Voltage source is
replaced with a
short circuit.
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–15
17.89 V∠26.6


8 Ex j16 E
ZL
ETh
ZTh
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–17
EXAMPLE 20–6        
Determine the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to ZL in the circuit in
Figure 20–18.
50 V∠20


30 E
60 E
XC
R
ZL
2 A∠0
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–18
CircuitSim 20-1 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

704
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
Solution
Step 1: Removing the branch containing ZL, we have the circuit of Figure 20–19.
50 V∠20
2 A∠0


30 E
60 E
XC
R
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–19
Step 2: After setting the voltage and current sources to zero, we have the circuit
of Figure 20–20.
30 E
60 E
XC
R
a
b
ZTh
Current source
replaced with an open
circuit.
Voltage source
replaced with
a short circuit.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–20
Step 3: The Thévenin impedance is determined as
ZTh  ZCZR


67
1
.
8
0
0
8
0


∠
∠


2
9
6
0
.5
°
7°

 26.83 ∠63.43°
Step 4: Because the given network consists of two independent sources, we
consider the individual effects of each upon the open-circuit voltage. The total
effect is then easily determined by applying the superposition theorem.
Reinserting only the voltage source into the original circuit, as shown in
Figure 20–21, allows us to ﬁnd the open-circuit voltage, Vab(1), by applying
the voltage divider rule:
Vab(1)  
60 
6

0 
j30 
(50 V∠20°)

67
3
.
0
0
0
8
0
∠
V

∠
26
2
.
0
5
°
7°

 44.72 V∠46.57°
(30 ∠90°)(60 ∠0°)

60   j30 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 20.3 | Thévenin’s Theorem—Independent Sources
705
30 E
60 E
XC
R
a
b




50 V∠20
Vab(1)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–21
Now, considering only the current source as shown in Figure 20–22, we deter-
mine Vab(2) by Ohm’s law:
Vab(2) 
 (2 A∠0°)(26.83 ∠63.43°)
 53.67 V∠63.43°
From the superposition theorem, the Thévenin voltage is determined as
ETh  Vab(1)  Vab(2)
 44.72 V∠46.57°  53.67 V∠63.43°
 (30.74 V  j32.48 V)  (24.00 V  j48.00 V)
 (54.74 V  j15.52 V)  56.90 V∠15.83°
Step 5: The resulting Thévenin equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 20–23.
(2 A∠0°)(30 ∠90°)(60 ∠0°)

60   j30 
2 A∠0
30 E
60 E
XC
R
a
b


Vab(2)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–22
56.9 V∠15.8


26.8 E∠ 63.43
ZL
ETh
a
b
ZTh
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–23
Refer to the circuit shown in Figure 20–24 of Practice Problems 3. List the steps
that you would use to ﬁnd the Thévenin equivalent circuit.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
a. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to the inductor in the circuit
in Figure 20–24. (Notice that the voltage source is shown as sinusoidal.)
b. Use the Thévenin equivalent circuit to ﬁnd the phasor output voltage, VL.
c. Convert the answer of (b) into the equivalent sinusoidal voltage.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Norton’s theorem converts any linear bilateral network into an equivalent cir-
cuit consisting of a single current source and a parallel impedance as shown in
Figure 20–25.
Although Norton’s equivalent circuit may be determined by ﬁrst ﬁnding the
Thévenin equivalent circuit and then performing a source conversion, we gen-
erally use the more direct method outlined next. The steps to ﬁnd the Norton
equivalent circuit are as follows:
1. Remove the branch across which the Norton equivalent circuit is to be
found. Label the resulting two terminals a and b.
2. Set all sources to zero.
3. Determine the Norton equivalent impedance, ZN, by calculating the imped-
ance seen between the open terminals a and b.
NOTE: Since the previous steps are identical to those followed for ﬁnding
the Thévenin equivalent circuit, we conclude that the Norton impedance
must be the same as the Thévenin impedance.
4. Replace the sources removed in Step 3 and determine the current that would
occur between terminals a and b if these terminals were shorted. Any volt-
ages and currents that are given in sinusoidal notation must ﬁrst be expressed
in equivalent phasor notation. If the circuit has more than one source it may
be necessary to apply the superposition theorem to calculate the total short-
circuit current. Since all currents will be in phasor form, any addition must be
done using vector algebra. The resulting current is the Norton current, IN.
5. Sketch the resulting Norton equivalent circuit by inserting that portion of
the circuit removed in Step 1.
As mentioned previously, it is possible to ﬁnd the Norton equivalent circuit
from the Thévenin equivalent by simply performing a source conversion. We
have already determined that both the Thévenin and Norton impedances are
determined in the same way. Consequently, the impedances must be equivalent,
and so we have
ZN  ZTh
(20–1)
706
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
Answers
a. ZTh  1.5 k  j2.0 k  2.5 k∠53.13, ETh  3.16 V∠63.43
b. VL  1.75 V∠60.26
c. vL  2.48 sin(2000t  60.26)
20.4 Norton’s
Theorem—
Independent
Sources
IN
a
b
ZN
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–25
Norton equivalent circuit.
0.2 RF
10 sin 2000t


R1  5 kE
C


500 mH
L
VL
R2  0.5 kE a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–24
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now, applying Ohm’s law, we determine the Norton current source from
the Thévenin voltage and impedance, namely,
IN  
E
Z
T
T
h
h

(20–2)
Figure 20–26 shows the equivalent circuits.
Section 20.4 | Norton’s Theorem—Independent Sources
707
ETh


a
b
ZTh
IN
a
b
ZN
ZN  ZTh
IN  ETh
ZTh
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–26
EXAMPLE 20–7        
Given the circuit of Figure 20–27, ﬁnd the Norton equivalent.
XL
60 E
20 V∠0


80 E
40 E
XC
R
ZL
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–27
Solution
Steps 1 and 2: By removing the load impedance, ZL, and setting the voltage
source to zero, we have the network of Figure 20–28.
Step 3: The Norton impedance may now be determined by evaluating the
impedance between terminals a and b. Hence, we have
ZN 
 
4
8
4
0
.7
0
2

∠
∠
26
9
.5
0
7
°
°

 17.89 ∠63.43°
 8   j16 
Step 4: Reinserting the voltage source, as in Figure 20–29, we ﬁnd the Norton
current by calculating the current between the shorted terminals, a and b.
(40 ∠0°)(20 ∠90°)

40   j20 
60 E
80 E
40 E
XC
XL
R
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–28
60 E
20 V∠0


80 E
40 E
XC
XL
R
Iab
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–29
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

708
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
EXAMPLE 20–8       
Find the Norton equivalent circuit external to RL in the circuit of Figure 20–31. Use
the equivalent circuit to calculate the current IL when RL  0 , 400 , and 2 k.
400 E
100 mA∠0
XC


50 V∠45
XL
400 E
400 E
R
RL
IL
0→2 kE
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–31
Solution
Steps 1 and 2: Removing the load resistor and setting the sources to zero, we
obtain the network shown in Figure 20–32.
Step 3: The Norton impedance is determined as
ZN 

 565.69 ∠45°
Step 4: Because the network consists of two sources, we determine the effects
due to each source separately and then apply superposition to evaluate the
Norton current source.
Reinserting the voltage source into the original network, we see from
Figure 20–33 that the short-circuit current between terminals a and b is easily
found by using Ohm’s law.
Iab(1) 
400
5

0 V

∠
j
4
4
5
0
°
0 


565
5
.6
0
9
V

∠
∠
4

5°
45°

 88.4 mA∠90°
(400 ∠90°)(565.69 ∠45°)

400 ∠0°
(400 ∠90°)(400   j400 )

j400   400   j400 
400 E
XC
XL
400 E
400 E
R
ZN
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–32
Because the resistor R  40  is shorted, the current is determined by the
impedances XL and XC as
IN  Iab  
j80
2

0 V

∠
j
0
6
°
0 

 
20
20

V
∠
∠

0
9
°
0°

 1.00 A∠90°
Step 5: The resultant Norton equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 20–30.
1 A∠90
ZN
ZL
ZN  8 E  j16 E  17.89 E∠63.43
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–30
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 20.4 | Norton’s Theorem—Independent Sources
709


50 V∠45
Iab(1)
a
b
400 E
400 E
R
XC
Notice that inductor
is short circuited.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–33
Since short circuiting the current source effectively removes all imped-
ances, as illustrated in Figure 20–34, the short-circuit current between terminals
a and b is given as follows:
Iab(2)  100 mA∠0°
 100 mA∠180°
Now applying the superposition theorem, the Norton current is determined
as the summation
IN  Iab(1)  Iab(2)
 88.4 mA∠90°  100 mA∠180°
 100 mA  j88.4 mA
 133.5 mA∠138.52°
Step 5: The resulting Norton equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 20–35.
Iab(2)
100 mA
These components are
short circuited.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–34
From the preceding circuit, we express the current through the load, IL, as
IL  
RL
Z

N
ZN
 IN
RL  0 :
IL  IN  133.5 mA∠138.52°
IN
a
b
ZN
IL
ZN  565.7 E∠45
133.5 mA∠138.52
RL
0→2 kE
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–35
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

710
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
RL  400 :
IL  
RL
Z

N
ZN
 IN


8
7
9
5
4
.2
.4
4
3
V

∠
∠
18
2
3
6
.
.
5
5
2
7
°
°

 84.12 mA∠156.95°
RL  2 k:
IL  
RL
Z

N
ZN
 IN


 30.92 mA∠174.06°
75.24 V∠183.52°

2433.1 ∠9.46°
(565.7 ∠45°)(133.5 mA∠138.52°)

2000   400   j400 
(565.7 ∠45°)(133.5 mA∠138.52°)

400   400   j400 
Refer to the circuit shown in Figure 20–36 (Practice Problems 4). List the steps
that you would use to ﬁnd the Norton equivalent circuit.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Find the Norton equivalent circuit external to RL in the circuit of Figure 20–36.
Use the equivalent circuit to ﬁnd the current IL.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
Answers
ZN  13.5   j4.5   14.23 ∠18.43, IN  0.333 A∠0,
IL  0.0808 A∠14.03
45 E
XC
5 V∠0
XL
20 E
40 E
IL


R1
15 E
R2
RL
45 E
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–36
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If a circuit contains a dependent source that is controlled by an element outside
the circuit of interest, the methods outlined in Sections 20.2 and 20.3 are used
to find either the Thévenin or Norton equivalent circuit.
Section 20.5 | Thévenin’s and Norton’s Theorems for Dependent Sources
711
20.5 Thévenin’s 
and Norton’s
Theorems for
Dependent
Sources
EXAMPLE 20–9        
Given the circuit of Figure 20–37, ﬁnd the Thévenin equivalent circuit external
to RL. If the voltage applied to the resistor R1 is 10 mV, use the Thévenin equiv-
alent circuit to calculate the minimum and maximum voltage across RL.
20 kE
100 I
a
b
I
R2


5 kE
R3
RL
1 kE→4 kE
R1
1 kE
10 mV
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–37
Solution
Step 1: Removing the load resistor from the circuit and labelling the remaining
terminals a and b, we have the circuit shown in Figure 20–38.
Steps 2 and 3: The Thévenin resistance is found by open circuiting the current
source and calculating the impedance observed between the terminals a and b.
Since the circuit is purely resistive, we have
RTh  20 k5 k
 
2
(2
0
0
k
k



)(5
5
k
k


)

 4 k
Step 4: The open-circuit voltage between the terminals is found to be
Vab  (100I)(4 k)
 (4 
 105 )I
As expected, the Thévenin voltage source is dependent upon the current I.
Step 5: Because the Thévenin voltage is a dependent voltage source we use the
appropriatesymbolwhensketchingtheequivalentcircuit,asshowninFigure20–39.
20 kE
100 I
R2
5 kE
R3
b
a
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–38
CircuitSim 20-2 
1 kE→4 kE


RL
ETh
(400 kE)I
a
b
RTh
4 kE
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–39
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If a circuit contains one or more dependent sources that are controlled by an
element in the circuit being analyzed, all previous methods fail to provide equiv-
alent circuits that correctly model the circuit’s behavior. In order to determine the
Thévenin or Norton equivalent circuit of a circuit having a dependent source con-
trolled by a local voltage or current, the following steps must be taken:
1. Remove the branch across which the Norton equivalent circuit is to be
found. Label the resulting two terminals a and b.
2. Calculate the open-circuit voltage (Thévenin voltage) across the two terminals
a and b. Because the circuit contains a dependent source controlled by an ele-
ment in the circuit, the dependent source may not be set to zero. Its effects
must be considered together with the effects of any independent source(s).
3. Determine the short-circuit current (Norton current) that would occur
between the terminals. Once again, the dependent source may not be set to
zero, but rather must have its effects considered concurrently with the effects
of any independent source(s).
4. Determine the Thévenin or Norton impedance by applying Equations 20–1
and 20–2 as follows:
ZN  ZTh  
E
IN
Th
(20–3)
5. Sketch the Thévenin or Norton equivalent circuit, as shown previously in
Figure 20–26. Ensure that the portion of the network that was removed in
Step 1 is reinserted as part of the equivalent circuit.
712
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
For the given conditions, we have
I  
1
1
0
k
m

V
  10 A
The voltage across the load is now determined as follows:
RL  1 k:
Vab  
1 k
1

k
4 k
(4 
 105 )(10 A)
 0.8 V
RL  4 k:
Vab  
4 k
4

k
4 k
(4 
 105 )(10 A)
 2.0 V
For an applied voltage of 10 mV, the voltage across the load resistance will
vary between 0.8 V and 2.0 V as RL is adjusted between 1 k and 4 k.
EXAMPLE 20–10       
For the circuit of Figure 20–40, ﬁnd the Norton equivalent circuit external to the
load resistor, RL.
Solution
Step 1: After removing the load resistor from the circuit, we have the network
shown in Figure 20–41.
Step 2: At ﬁrst glance, we might look into the open terminals and say that the
Norton (or Thévenin) impedance appears to be 60 k30 k  20 k.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 20.5 | Thévenin’s and Norton’s Theorems for Dependent Sources
713
a
b
30 kE
60 kE
4 I
I
R2
R1
RL
21 V∠0
50 kE
0


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–40
However, we will ﬁnd that this result is incorrect. The presence of the locally
controlled dependent current source makes the analysis of this circuit slightly
more complicated than a circuit that contains only an independent source. We
know, however, that the basic laws of circuit analysis must apply to all circuits,
regardless of the complexity. Applying Kirchhoff’s current law at node a gives
the current through R2 as
IR2  I  4I  5I
Now, applying Kirchhoff’s voltage law around the closed loop containing
the voltage source and the two resistors, gives
21 V∠0  (60 k)I  (30 k)(5I)  210 kI
which allows us to solve for the current I as
I  
2
2
1
1
V
0
∠
k
0°
  0.100 mA∠0°
Since the open-circuit voltage, Vab is the same as the voltage across R2,
we have
ETh  Vab  (30 k)(5)(0.1 mA∠0)  15 V∠0
CircuitSim 20-3 
a
b
30 kE
60 kE
4 I
Vab
I
R2
R1
21 V∠0




© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–41
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

714
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
a
b
30 kE
60 kE
4 I
I
R2
R1
Iab
21 V∠0


© Cengage Learning 2013
Step 3: The Norton current source is determined by placing a short circuit
between terminals a and b as shown in Figure 20–42.
FIGURE 20–42
a
b
60 kE
4 I
I
R1
Iab
21 V∠0


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–43
The short-circuit current Iab is now easily determined by using Kirchhoff’s current
law at node a, and so we have
IN  Iab  5I
From Ohm’s law, we have
I  
21
60
V
k
∠

0°
  0.35 mA∠0°
and so
IN  5(0.35 mA∠0)  1.75 mA∠0
Step 4: The Norton (or Thévenin) impedance is now determined from Ohm’s
law as
ZN  E
IN
Th
  
1.7
1
5
5
m
V∠
A∠
0°
0°
  8.57 k
Notice that this impedance is different from the originally assumed 20 k. In
general, this condition will occur for most circuits that contain a locally con-
trolled voltage or current source.
Step 5: The Norton equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 20–44.
Upon further inspection of this circuit we see that resistor R2 is short-circuited.
The simpliﬁed circuit is shown in Figure 20–43.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If a circuit has more than one independent source, it is necessary to deter-
mine the open-circuit voltage and short-circuit current due to each independent
source while simultaneously considering the effects of the dependent source.
The following example illustrates the principle.
Section 20.5 | Thévenin’s and Norton’s Theorems for Dependent Sources
715
a
b
8.57 kE
RN
IN x1.75 mA∠0
RL x
50 kE
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–44
a. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to RL in the circuit of 
Figure 20–45.
b. Determine the current IL when RL  0 and when RL  20 .
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
a
b
5 A∠0
IL
RL  0→20 E
2 E
2 I
10 E
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–45
Answers
a. ETh  Vab  3.33 V, ZTh  0.667 
b. For RL  0: IL  5.00 A (upward); for RL  20 : IL  0.161 A (upward)
EXAMPLE 20–11        
Find the Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits external to the load resistor in
the circuit of Figure 20–46.
RL
R1  4 kE
2 V


20 V


V
R2
10 mA
1 kE
0.8 kE
R3
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–46
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

716
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
Solution
There are several methods of solving this circuit. The following
approach uses the fewest number of steps.
Step 1: Removing the load resistor, we have the circuit shown in Figure 20–47.
R1  4 kE
2 V






20 V


V
R2
10 mA
1 kE
0.8 kE
R3
a
b
Vab
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–47
Step 2: In order to ﬁnd the open-circuit voltage, Vab of Figure 20–47, we may
isolate the effects due to each independent source and then apply superposition
to determine the combined result. However, by converting the current source
into an equivalent voltage source, we can determine the open-circuit voltage in
one step. Figure 20–48 shows the circuit that results when the current source is
converted into an equivalent voltage source.
a
b
1 kE
0.8 kE
R1 x4 kE
R3
Vab
20 V
V





10 V
2 V




© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–48
The controlling element (R1) has a voltage, V, determined as
V 
4 k
4

k
1 k
(20 V  10 V)
 8 V
which gives a Thévenin (open-circuit) voltage of
ETh  Vab  2(8 V)  0 V  8 V  20 V
 4.0 V
Step 3: The short-circuit current is determined by examining the circuit shown
in Figure 20–49.
Once again, it is possible to determine the short-circuit current by using
superposition. However, upon further reﬂection, we see that the circuit is easily
analyzed using mesh analysis. Loop currents I1 and I2 are assigned in clockwise
directions as shown in Figure 20–50.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 20.5 | Thévenin’s and Norton’s Theorems for Dependent Sources
717
a
b
1 kE
0.8 kE
R1 x4 kE
R3
Iab
20 V
V





10 V
2 V


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–49
The loop equations are as follows:
Loop 1:
(5 k)I1  (1 k)I2  10 V
Loop 2:
(1 k)I1  (1.8 k)I2  10 V  2 V
Notice that the voltage in the second loop equation is expressed in terms of the
controlling voltage across R1. We will not worry about this right now. We may
simplify our calculations by ignoring the units in the preceding equations. It is
obvious that if all impedances are expressed in k and all voltages are in volts,
then the currents I1 and I2 must be in mA. The determinant for the denominator
is found to be
D 
  9  1  8
The current I1 is solved by using determinants as follows:


The preceding result illustrates that the current I1 is dependent on the controlling
voltage. However, by examining the circuit of Figure 20–50, we see that the con-
trolling voltage depends on the current I1, and is determined from Ohm’s law as
V  (4 k)I1
or more simply as
V  4I1
1
1.8
10
10  2 V
1
1.8
5
1
a
b
1 kE
0.8 kE
R1 x4 kE
R3
Iab
I1
20 V
V





10 V
2 V



I2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–50
I1 
 
D
 3.5  0.25 V
18  (1)(10  2 V)

8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

718
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
Now, the current I1 is found as
I1  3.5  0.25(4I1)
2I1  3.5
I1  1.75 mA
which gives V  7.0 V.
Finally, the short circuit current (which in the circuit of Figure 20–50 is rep-
resented by I2) is found as


10
10  2 V
5
1
I2 

D
 7.5  1.25 V  7.5  1.25(7.0 V)
 1.25 mA
50  10 V  (10)

8
This gives us the Norton current source as
IN  Iab  1.25 mA
Step 4: The Thévenin (or Norton) impedance is determined using Ohm’s law.
ZTh  ZN  
E
IN
Th  


1.2
4
5
.0
m
V
A
  3.2 k
The resulting Thévenin equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 20–51 and the
Norton equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 20–52.
a
b
3.2 kE
ZTh
RL
ETh 4 V


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–51
a
b
3.2 kE
ZN
IN  1.25 mA
RL
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–52
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The maximum power transfer theorem is used to determine the value of load
impedance required so that the load receives the maximum amount of power from
the circuit. Consider the Thévenin equivalent circuit shown in Figure 20–56.
Section 20.6 | Maximum Power Transfer Theorem
719
Find the Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits external to the load resistor
in the circuit of Figure 20–53.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
a
b
0.8 kE
R1 x4 kE
R3
RL
R2
20 V
V





10 mA
3 V
1 kE

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–53
Answers
a
b
ETh  12 V
ZTh
4 kE
RL


© Cengage Learning 2013
a
b
4 kE
ZN
IN  3 mA
RL
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–54
FIGURE 20–55
20.6 Maximum Power
Transfer Theorem
ETh


RL
ZL
ZTh
RTh
XTh
X
a
b
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–56
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For any load impedance ZL consisting of a resistance and a reactance such
that ZL  RL  jX, the power dissipated by the load will be determined as follows:
PL  I2RL
I 
PL 
Consider only the reactance portion, X, of the load impedance for the
moment and neglect the effect of the load resistance. We see that the power dis-
sipated by the load will be maximum when the denominator is kept to a mini-
mum. If the load were to have an impedance such that jX  jXTh, then the
power delivered to the load would be given as
PL  
(RT
E
h
T

h2R
R
L
L)2

(20–4)
We recognize that this is the same expression for power as that determined
for the Thévenin equivalent of dc circuits in Chapter 9. Recall that maximum
power was delivered to the load when
RL  RTh
For ac circuits, the maximum power transfer theorem states the following:
Maximum power will be delivered to a load whenever the load has an
impedance which is equal to the complex conjugate of the Thévenin (or Norton)
impedance of the equivalent circuit.
A detailed derivation of the maximum power transfer theorem is provided
in Appendix C. The maximum power delivered to the load may be calculated
by using Equation 20–4, which is simpliﬁed as follows:
Pmax  
4
E
R
Th
T
2
h

(20–5)
For a Norton equivalent circuit, the maximum power delivered to a load is
determined by substituting ETh  INZN into the preceding expression as follows:
Pmax  
IN
4
2
R
Z
N
N2

(20–6)
ETh2RL

(RTh  RL)2  (XTh  X)2
ETh

(R
(RTh  RL)2  (XTh  X)2
720
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
EXAMPLE 20–12       
Determine the load impedance ZL that will allow maximum power to be deliv-
ered to the load in the circuit of Figure 20–57. Find the maximum power.
Solution
Expressing the Thévenin impedance in its rectangular form, we have
ZTh  500 ∠60  250   j433 
In order to deliver maximum power to the load, the load impedance must be the
complex conjugate of the Thévenin impedance. Hence,
ZL  250   j433   500 ∠–60
The power delivered to the load is now easily determined by applying
Equation 20–5:
Pmax  
4
(
(
2
2
0
50
V

)2
)
  400 mW
500 E∠60


ZL
ETh  20 V∠0
ZTh
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–57
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Occasionally it is not possible to adjust the reactance portion of a load. In
such cases, a relative maximum power will be delivered to the load when the
load resistance has a value determined as
RL  RTh2  (X  XTh)2
(20–7)
If the reactance of the Thévenin impedance is of the same type (both
capacitive or both inductive) as the reactance in the load, then the reactances
are added.
If one reactance is capacitive and the other is inductive, however, then the
reactances are subtracted.
To determine the power delivered to the load in such cases, the power will
need to be calculated by ﬁnding either the voltage across the load or the cur-
rent through the load. Equations 20–5 and 20–6 will no longer apply, since
these equations were based on the premise that the load impedance is the com-
plex conjugate of the Thévenin impedance.
Section 20.6 | Maximum Power Transfer Theorem
721
Given the circuit of Figure 20–57, determine the power dissipated by the load
if the load impedance is equal to the Thévenin impedance, ZL  500 ∠60.
Compare your answer to that obtained in Example 20–12.
Answer
P  100 mW, which is less than Pmax.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 7
EXAMPLE 20–13        
For the circuit of Figure 20–58, determine the value of the load resistor, RL, such
that maximum power will be delivered to the load.
3 kE∠53.13
ZN
IN  5 mA∠0
f  10 kHz
RL
C  0.01xRF
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–58
Solution
Notice that the load impedance consists of a resistor in series with
a capacitance of 0.010 μF. Since the capacitive reactance is determined by the
frequency, it is quite likely that the maximum power for this circuit may only
be a relative maximum, rather than the absolute maximum. For the absolute
maximum power to be delivered to the load, the load impedance would need
to be
ZL  3 k∠53.13  1.80 k  j2.40 k
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

722
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
The reactance of the capacitor at a frequency of 10 kHz is determined to be
XC 
 1.592 k
Because the capacitive reactance is not equal to the inductive reactance of the
Norton impedance, the circuit will not deliver the absolute maximum power to the
load. However, relative maximum power will be delivered to the load when
RL  RTh2  (X  XTh)2
 (1.800 k)2  (1.592 k  2.4 k)2
 1.973 k
Figure 20–59 shows the circuit with all impedance values.
1

2p(10 kHz)(0.010 F)
IN  5 mA∠0
1.80 kE
2.40 kE
RN
XN
ZN
ZL
IL
RL
XL
1.973 kE
1.592 kE
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–59
The load current will be
IL  
ZN
Z

N
ZL
 IN

(5 mA∠0°)

(5 mA∠0°)

3.
1
8
5
5
.
9
0
k
V

∠
∠
53
1
.
2
1
.
3
0
°
9°
  3.887 mA∠41.04°
We now determine the power delivered to the load for the given conditions as
PL  I2
LRL
 (3.887 mA)2(1.973 k)  29.82 mW
If we had applied Equation 20–6, we would have found the absolute maximum
power to be
Pmax 
(5 m
4
A
(1
)
.
2
8
(3
k
.0

k
)
)2
  31.25 mW
3 k∠53.13°

3.773 k  j0.808 k
1.80 k  j2.40 k

(1.80 k  j2.40 k)  (1.973 k  j1.592 k)
Refer to the Norton equivalent circuit of Figure 20–60:
a. Find the value of load resistance, RL, such that the load receives maximum
power.
b. Determine the maximum power received by the load for the given conditions.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

As demonstrated in Chapter 9, circuit analysis programs are very useful in deter-
mining the equivalent circuit between specified terminals of a dc circuit. We will
use similar methods to obtain the Thévenin and Norton equivalents of ac circuits.
Both Multisim and PSpice are useful in analyzing circuits with dependent
sources. As we have already seen, the work in analyzing such a circuit manually
is lengthy and very time consuming. In this section, you will learn how to use
PSpice to find the Thévenin equivalent of a simple ac circuit. We will also use
both programs to analyze circuits with dependent sources.
Section 20.7 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
723
FIGURE 20–60
.
ZN x450xE∠30
ZN
IN  300 mA∠0
  10 krad/s
RL
40 mH
L
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
Answers
a. RL  427 ; b. PL  11.2 W
Refer to the Thévenin equivalent circuit of Figure 20–61.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
FIGURE 20–61
ETh x28 V∠30

RL
10xRF
ZTh
ZTh  50 E∠36.87


C
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
a. Determine the value of the unknown load resistance RL that will result in a
relative maximum power at an angular frequency of 1 krads.
b. Solve for the power dissipated by the load at q1  1 krads.
c. Assuming that the Thévenin impedance remains constant at all frequencies, at
what angular frequency, q2, will the circuit provide absolute maximum power?
d. Solve for the power dissipated by the load at q2.
CircuitSim 20-4 
20.7 Circuit Analysis
Using Computers
PSPICE
MultiSim
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PSpice
The following example shows how PSpice is used to ﬁnd the Thévenin or
Norton equivalent of an ac circuit.
724
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
EXAMPLE 20–14       
Use PSpice to determine the Thévenin equivalent of the circuit in Figure 20–18.
Assume that the circuit operates at a frequency q  200 rads (f  31.83 Hz).
Compare the result to the solution of Example 20–6.
Solution
We begin by using OrCAD Capture to input the circuit as shown in
Figure 20–62.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–62
NOTES...
PSpice Note
The two symbols below are equiva-
lent. The symbol on the left is the
Multisim notation for an ac current
source, while that on the right is the
symbol used in PSpice. Notice that in
PSpice, the ac current source (shown
on the right) does not use the same
notation as that used in the textbook,
but rather appears similar to an ac
voltage source. More importantly,
notice the polarity of the PSpice
symbol. When using an ac current
source in PSpice, you may need to
rotate the symbol to correctly place
it into the circuit.
Notice that the load impedance has been removed and the value of capacitance
is shown as
C  
q
1
XC
 
(200 rad
1
s)(30 )
  166.7 F
In order to adjust for the correct source voltage and current, we select VAC and
ISRC from the source library SOURCE.slb of PSpice. The properties of 
the voltage source are set to ACMAG50 V and ACPHASE20 Deg.
Similarly, the parameters of the current source are set to ACMAG2 A and 
ACPHASE0 Deg. (Ensure that you observe the correct polarity for the current
source.) The open-circuit output voltage is displayed using VPRINT1, which
can be set to measure magnitude and phase of an ac voltage as follows:
Similarly, the properties of VPRINT1 are changed by double-clicking on the
part. Use the horizontal scrollbar to ﬁnd the AC, MAG, and PHASE cells. Once
you have entered OK in each of the cells, click on Apply. Next, click on Display
and select Name and Value from the display properties.
Once the circuit is entered, click on the New Simulation Proﬁle tool, give
the simulation a name such as Example 20–14, and set the analysis for AC
SweepNoise with a linear sweep beginning and ending at a frequency of 
31.83 Hz (1 point). As before, it is convenient to disable the Probe postproces-
sor from the Probe Window tab in the simulation settings box.
After simulating the design, the open-circuit voltage is determined by view-
ing the Output File (found in the PSpice menu). The pertinent data from the
output ﬁle is given as
FREQ        VM(a)        VP(a)
3.183E+01
5.690E+01  
1.583E+01
I1
I1
–
+
2 A
1kHz
0Deg
2 A
0Deg
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In the previous example, it was necessary to determine the Thévenin
impedance in two steps, by ﬁrst solving for the Thévenin voltage and then solv-
ing for the Norton current. It is possible to determine the value in one step by
using an additional step in the analysis. The following example shows how to
determine the Thévenin impedance for a circuit having a dependent source.
The same step may also be used for a circuit having independent sources.
The following parts in OrCAD Capture are used to represent dependent
sources:
Voltage-controlled voltage source:
E
Current-controlled current source:
F
Voltage-controlled current source:
G
Current-controlled voltage source:
H
Section 20.7 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
725
The preceding result gives ETh  56.90 V∠15.83. This is the same as the
value determined in Example 20–6. Recall that one way of determining the
Thévenin (or Norton) impedance is to use Ohm’s law, namely
ZTh  ZN  
E
IN
Th
The Norton current is found by removing the VPRINT1 device from the
circuit of Figure 20–62 and inserting an IPRINT device (ammeter) between ter-
minal a and ground. You will need to change the properties of IPRINT in a
manner similar to that described previously for the VPRINT1 part. The result is
shown in Figure 20–63.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–63
After simulating the design, the short-circuit current is determined by examining the
output ﬁle of PSpice. The pertinent data from the output ﬁle is given as
FREQ        IM(V_PRINT2)IP(V_PRINT2)
3.183E+01
2.121E+00   4.761E+01
This result gives IN  21.21 A∠47.61, and so we calculate the Thévenin imped-
ance as
ZTh 
 26.83∠63.44°
which is the same value as that obtained in Example 20–6.
56.90 V∠15.83°

2.121 A∠47.61°
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

When using dependent sources, it is necessary to ensure that any voltage-
controlled source is placed across the controlling voltage and any current-
controlled source is placed in series with the controlling current. Additionally,
each dependent source must have a speciﬁed gain. This value simply provides
the ratio between the output value and the controlling voltage or current.
Although the following example shows how to use only one type of dependent
source, you will ﬁnd many similarities between the various sources.
726
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
EXAMPLE 20–15       
Use PSpice to ﬁnd the Thévenin equivalent of the circuit shown in Figure 20–64.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–64
Solution
OrCAD Capture is used to input the circuit shown in Figure 20–64.
The voltage-controlled voltage source is obtained by clicking on the Place part
tool and selecting E from the ANALOG library. Notice the placement of the
source. Since R1 is the controlling element, the controlling terminals are placed
across this resistor. To adjust the gain of the voltage source, double-click on the
symbol. Use the scrollbar to ﬁnd the GAIN cell and type 2. In order to display
this value on the schematic, you will need to click on Display and select Name
and Value from the display properties.
As in the previous circuit, you will need to first use a VPRINT1 part to
measure the open circuit voltage at terminal a. The properties of VPRINT1
are changed by typing OK in the AC, MAG, and PHASE cells. Click on
Display and select Name and Value for each of the cells. Give the simulation
profile a name and run the simulation at a frequency of 1 kHz. The pertinent
data in the PSpice output file provides the open-circuit (Thévenin) voltage as
follows.
FREQ       
VM(N00431) 
VP(N00431)
1.000E+03
4.000E+00
1.800E+02
The VPRINT1 part is then replaced with IPRINT, which is connected
between terminal a and ground to provide the short-circuit current. Remember
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Multisim
Multisim has many similarities to PSpice in its analysis of ac circuits. The fol-
lowing example shows that the results obtained by Multisim are precisely the
same as those obtained from PSpice.
Section 20.7 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
727
to change the appropriate cells using the properties editor. The PSpice output
ﬁle gives the short-circuit (Norton) current as:
FREQ        IM(V_PRINT2)IP(V_PRINT2)
1.000E03   1.250E03   1.800E02
The Thévenin impedance is now easily determined as
ZTh  
1.2
4
5
V
mA
  3.2 k
and the resulting circuit is shown in Figure 20–65.
RTh


4 V
3.2 kE
ETh
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–65
EXAMPLE 20–16        
Use Multisim to find the Thévenin equivalent of the circuit shown in
Figure 20–47. Compare the results to those obtained in Example 20–15.
Solution
The circuit is entered as shown in Figure 20–66.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–66
All components are selected from the Virtual Components toolbar. Since we will
use an ac multimeter to measure RMS quantities, we set the amplitudes of the
voltage and current sources to 28.28 V and 14.14 mA, respectively. We use 1 kHz
as the frequency of operation, although any frequency may be used. The Voltage-
controlled voltage source is selected from the Sources parts bin and the gain is
adjusted by double-clicking on the symbol. The Value tab is selected and the
Voltage gain (E): is set to 2 V/V. The multimeter must be set to measure ac volts.
As expected, the reading on the multimeter is 4 V. Current is easily measured by
setting the multimeter onto its ac ammeter range as shown in Figure 20–67. The
current reading is 1.25 mA. A limitation of Multisim modelling is that the model
does not indicate the phase angle of the voltage or current.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

728
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
Now, the Thévenin impedance of the circuit is determined using Ohm’s law, namely
ZTh  
1.2
4
5
V
mA
  3.2 k
These results are consistent with the calculations of Example 20–11 and the
PSpice results of Example 20–15.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–67
Use PSpice to ﬁnd the Thévenin equivalent of the circuit shown in Figure 20–45.
Compare your answer to that obtained in Practice Problems 5.
Answers
ETh  Vab  3.33 V, ZTh  0.667 
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 9
Use PSpice to ﬁnd the Norton equivalent circuit external to the load resistor in
the circuit of Figure 20–31. Assume that the circuit operates at a frequency of
20 kHz. Compare your results to those obtained in Example 20–8. Hint: You
will need to place a small resistor (e.g., 1 m) in series with the inductor.
Answers
ETh  7.75 V∠176.5, IN  0.1335 A∠138.5, ZN  566∠45
The results are consistent.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 11
Use Multisim to ﬁnd the Thévenin equivalent of the circuit shown in 
Figure 20–45. Compare your answer to that obtained in Practice Problems 5
and Practice Problems 9.
Answers
ETh  Vab  3.33 V, ZTh  0.667 
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 10
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
729
I
n this chapter, you learned how to solve for the required load impedance to
enable maximum power transfer to the load. In all cases, you worked with
load impedances that were in series with the output terminals. This will not
always be the case. The circuit shown in the accompanying ﬁgure shows a
load that consists of a resistor in parallel with an inductor.
Putting It into Practice
0.2 H
2.5 RF
100 E
RL
C
a
b

R1

10 V∠0
_xx2 krad/s
© Cengage Learning 2013
Determine the value of the resistor RL needed to result in maximum power
delivered to the load. Although several methods are possible, you may ﬁnd that
this example lends itself to being solved by using calculus.
Problems
20.1
Superposition Theorem—Independent Sources
1. Use superposition to determine the current in the indicated branch of the
circuit in Figure 20–68.
2. Repeat Problem 1 for the circuit of Figure 20–69.
3. Use superposition to determine the voltage Vab for the circuit of Figure 20–68.
4. Repeat Problem 3 for the circuit of Figure 20–69.
5. Consider the circuit of Figure 20–70.
a. Use superposition to determine the indicated voltage, V.
b. Show that the power dissipated by the indicated resistor cannot be
determined by superposition.
7 E
5 A∠0
I


RL
3 E
3 E
4 E
5 V∠90
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–68
20 V∠0


2 kE
2 kE
RL
a
b
1.5 kE
1.5 kE
10 mA∠0
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–69
FIGURE 20–70
100 E
10 V∠0


600 E
100 E
RL  300 E
V
a
b
200 E
200 mA∠20


© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6. Repeat Problem 5 for the circuit of Figure 20–71.
730
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
FIGURE 20–73
FIGURE 20–72
FIGURE 20–71
3.6 V∠60
V
a
b
20 E
250 mA∠30




10 E
5 E
24 E
10 E
16 E
ZL
© Cengage Learning 2013
20 E
50 E
I
30 E
30 E
40 E
R3
R2
XC
XL
a
b



vR1
R1



36 V∠30
20 V∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
8. Repeat Problem 7 for the circuit of Figure 20–73.
9. Use superposition to determine the sinusoidal voltage, vR1 for the circuit of
Figure 20–72.
10. Repeat Problem 9 for the circuit of Figure 20–73.
4 kE
I
5 kE
2 kE
3 kE
R1
vR1
R2
XL
XC
b
a






3 mA∠0
4 mA∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
20.2
Superposition Theorem—Dependent Sources
11. Refer to the circuit of Figure 20–74.
a. Use superposition to ﬁnd VL.
b. If the magnitude of the applied voltage V is increased to 200 mV, solve
for the resulting VL.
7. Use superposition to determine the current I in the circuit of Figure 20–72.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
731
FIGURE 20–75
FIGURE 20–74
20 kE
gV


40 kE
RL
40 kE
V  100 mV∠0


6 V∠0
a
b


VL
g  4.0 mS
I1
© Cengage Learning 2013
12. Consider the circuit of Figure 20–75.
a. Use superposition to ﬁnd VL.
b. If the magnitude of the applied current I is decreased to 2 mA, solve for
the resulting VL.
13. Use superposition to ﬁnd the current I1 in the circuit of Figure 20–74.
14. Repeat Problem 13 for the circuit of Figure 20–75.
15. Find VL in the circuit of Figure 20–76.
4 mA∠0
rI
I  3mA∠0


4 kE
RL
12 kE
VL


3 kE
a
b
r  2 kE
I1
© Cengage Learning 2013
16. Find VL in the circuit of Figure 20–77.
17. Determine the voltage Vab for the circuit of Figure 20–78.
FIGURE 20–76
20 I
10 V∠0


20 E
80 E
I


VL
RL
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–77
a
b
5 mA∠0
RL
3 kE
1 kE
2 kE


V 

5 V


VL
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 20–78
3I
a
b



Vab
R1 x2 kEx
R2 x4 kEx



6 V∠0
4 V∠0
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

732
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
FIGURE 20–81
FIGURE 20–80
FIGURE 20–79
18. Determine the current I for the circuit of Figure 20–79.
20.3
Thévenin’s Theorem—Independent Sources
19. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to the load impedance of
Figure 20–68.
20. Refer to the circuit of Figure 20–80.
a. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to the indicated load.
b. Determine the power dissipated by the load.
21. Refer to the circuit of Figure 20–81.
a. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to the indicated load at a
frequency of 5 kHz.
b. Determine the power dissipated by the load if ZL  100 ∠30.
I
300 E
400 E
R1
R2
4 V
V
a
b








0.2 A∠0
0.1A∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
12 E
5 V∠0


24 E
500 mA∠0
16 E
10 E
ZL
10 E∠0
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
1 RF
10 V∠0


50 E
100 mA∠0
1 mH
a
b
ZL
© Cengage Learning 2013
22. Repeat Problem 21 for a frequency of 1 kHz.
23. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to RL in the circuit of 
Figure 20–72.
24. Repeat Problem 23 for the circuit of Figure 20–69.
25. Repeat Problem 23 for the circuit of Figure 20–70.
26. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to ZL in the circuit of 
Figure 20–71.
27. Consider the circuit of Figure 20–82.
a. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to the indicated load.
b. Determine the power dissipated by the load if ZL  20 ∠60.
28. Repeat Problem 27 if a 10- resistor is placed in series with the voltage
source.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
733
FIGURE 20–82
10 V∠0


30 E
a
b
ZL
20 E
50 E
40 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
20.4
Norton’s Theorem—Independent Sources
29. Find the Norton equivalent circuit external to the load impedance of
Figure 20–68.
30. Repeat Problem 29 for the circuit of Figure 20–69.
31. a. Using the outlined procedure, ﬁnd the Norton equivalent circuit external
to terminals a and b in Figure 20–72.
b. Determine the current through the indicated load.
c. Find the power dissipated by the load.
32. Repeat Problem 31 for the circuit of Figure 20–73.
33. a. Using the outlined procedure, ﬁnd the Norton equivalent circuit external
to the indicated load impedance (located between terminals a and b) in
Figure 20–70.
b. Determine the current through the indicated load.
c. Find the power dissipated by the load.
34. Repeat Problem 33 for the circuit of Figure 20–71.
35. Suppose that the circuit of Figure 20–81 operates at a frequency of 2 kHz.
a. Find the Norton equivalent circuit external to the load impedance.
b. If a 30- load resistor is connected between terminals a and b, ﬁnd the
current through the load.
36. Repeat Problem 35 for a frequency of 8 kHz.
20.5
Thévenin’s and Norton’s Theorems
for Dependent Sources
37. a. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to the load impedance in
Figure 20–74.
b. Solve for the current through RL.
c. Determine the power dissipated by RL.
38. a. Find the Norton equivalent circuit external to the load impedance in
Figure 20–75.
b. Solve for the current through RL.
c. Determine the power dissipated by RL.
39. Find the Thévenin and Norton equivalent circuits external to the load imped-
ance of Figure 20–76.
40. Find the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to the load impedance of
Figure 20–77.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20.6
Maximum Power Transfer Theorem
41. Refer to the circuit of Figure 20–83.
a. Determine the load impedance, ZL, needed to ensure that the load receives
maximum power.
b. Find the maximum power to the load.
42. Repeat Problem 41 for the circuit of Figure 20–84.
734
Chapter 20 | ac Network Theorems
FIGURE 20–86
FIGURE 20–85
FIGURE 20–83
FIGURE 20–84
16 E
36 V∠0


24 E
ZL
8 E
2 A∠0
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
100 E
200 E
1 kE


40 V∠60
0.5 A∠90
900 E
4 kE
ZL
a
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
6 V∠0
2 E
a
b




5 E
4 E
2 E
8 V∠30
ZL
© Cengage Learning 2013
0.2 A∠70
a
b
30 E


10 V∠40
40 E
20 E
30 E
ZL
© Cengage Learning 2013
43. Repeat Problem 41 for the circuit of Figure 20–85.
44. Repeat Problem 41 for the circuit of Figure 20–86.
45. What load impedance is required for the circuit of Figure 20–71 to ensure
that the load receives maximum power from the circuit?
46. Determine the load impedance required for the circuit of Figure 20–82 to
ensure that the load receives maximum power from the circuit.
47. a. Determine the required load impedance, ZL, for the circuit of Figure 20–81
to deliver maximum power to the load at a frequency of 5 kHz.
b. If the load impedance contains a resistor and a 1-F capacitor, determine
the value of the resistor to result in a relative maximum power transfer.
c. Solve for the power delivered to the load in (b).
48. a. Determine the required load impedance, ZL, for the circuit of Figure 20–81
to deliver maximum power to the load at a frequency of 1 kHz.
b. If the load impedance contains a resistor and a 1-F capacitor, determine
the value of the resistor to result in a relative maximum power transfer.
c. Solve for the power delivered to the load in (b).
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20.7
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
49. Use PSpice to ﬁnd the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to RL in the circuit of
Figure 20–68. Assume that the circuit operates at a frequency of q  2000 rads.
Note: PSpice does not permit a voltage source to have ﬂoating terminals.
Therefore, a large resistance (e.g., 10 G) must be placed across the output.
50. Repeat Problem 49 for the circuit of Figure 20–69.
51. Use PSpice to ﬁnd the Norton equivalent circuit external to RL in the circuit of
Figure 20–70. Assume that the circuit operates at a frequency of q  5000 rads.
Note: PSpice cannot analyze a circuit with a short-circuited inductor.
Consequently, it is necessary to place a small resistance (e.g., 1 n) in series
with an inductor.
52. Repeat Problem 51 for the circuit of Figure 20–71.
Note: PSpice cannot analyze a circuit with an open-circuited capacitor. Con-
sequently, it is necessary to place a large resistance (e.g., 10 G) in parallel
with a capacitor.
53. Use PSpice to ﬁnd the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to RL in the circuit of
Figure 20–76. Assume that the circuit operates at a frequency of f  1000 Hz.
54. Repeat Problem 53 for the circuit of Figure 20–77.
55. Use PSpice to ﬁnd the Norton equivalent circuit external to Vab in the circuit of
Figure 20–78. Assume that the circuit operates at a frequency of f  1000 Hz.
56. Repeat Problem 55 for the circuit of Figure 20–79.
57. Use Multisim to ﬁnd the Thévenin equivalent circuit external to RL in the circuit
of Figure 20–76. Assume that the circuit operates at a frequency of f  1000 Hz.
58. Repeat Problem 53 for the circuit of Figure 20–77.
59. Use Multisim to ﬁnd the Norton equivalent circuit external to Vab in the circuit
of Figure 20–78. Assume that the circuit operates at a frequency of f  1000 Hz.
60. Repeat Problem 55 for the circuit of Figure 20–79.
Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
735
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
a. I  3.39 A∠25.34
b. PT  230.4 W
c. P1  P2  P3  145 W 	 PT  230.4 W
Superposition does not apply for power.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
1. Remove the inductor from the circuit. Label the
remaining terminals as a and b.
2. Set the voltage source to zero by removing it from the
circuit and replacing it with a short circuit.
3. Determine the values of the impedance using the given
frequency. Calculate the Thévenin impedance between
terminals a and b.
4. Convert the voltage source into its equivalent phasor
form. Solve for the open-circuit voltage between termi-
nals a and b.
5. Sketch the resulting Thévenin equivalent circuit.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
1. Remove the resistor from the circuit. Label the remain-
ing terminals as a and b.
2. Set the voltage source to zero by removing it from the
circuit and replacing it with a short circuit.
3. Calculate the Norton impedance between terminals 
a and b.
4. Solve for the short-circuit current between terminals 
a and b.
5. Sketch the resulting Norton equivalent circuit.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
a. RL  80.6 
b. PL  3.25 W
c. q  3333 rads
d. PL  4.90 W
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
MultiSim
MultiSim
MultiSim
MultiSim
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Bandwidth
Damped Oscillations
Half-Power Frequencies
Parallel Resonant Circuit
Quality Factor
Resonant Circuit
Selectivity Curve
Series Resonant Circuit
I OUTLINE
Series Resonance
Quality Factor, Q
Impedance of a Series Resonant
Circuit
Power, Bandwidth, and Selectivity
of a Series Resonant Circuit
Series-to-Parallel RL and RC
Conversion
Parallel Resonance
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• determine the resonant frequency and
bandwidth of a simple series or parallel
circuit,
• determine the voltages, currents, and power
of elements in a resonant circuit,
• sketch the impedance, current, and power
response curves of a series resonant circuit,
• ﬁnd the quality factor, Q, of a resonant circuit
and use Q to determine the bandwidth for a
given set of conditions,
• explain the dependence of bandwidth on the
L/C ratio and on R for both a series and a
parallel resonant circuit,
• design a resonant circuit for a given set of
parameters,
• convert a series RL network into an
equivalent parallel network for a given
frequency.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

21
RESONANCE
I
n this chapter, we build upon the knowledge obtained in previous chapters to observe how
resonant circuits are able to pass a desired range of frequencies from a signal source to
a load. In its most simple form, the resonant circuit consists of an inductor and a capacitor
together with a voltage or current source. Although the circuit is simple, it is one of the most
important circuits used in electronics. As an example, the resonant circuit, in one of its many
forms, allows us to select a desired radio or television signal from the vast number of signals
that are around us at any time. In order to obtain all the transmitted energy for a given radio
station or television channel, we would like a circuit to have the frequency response shown
in Figure 21–1(a). A circuit having an ideal frequency response would pass all frequency
components in a band between f1 and f2, while rejecting all other frequencies. For a radio
transmitter, the center frequency, fr, would correspond to the carrier frequency of the sta-
tion. The difference between the upper and lower frequencies that we would like to pass is
called the bandwidth.
Whereas there are various conﬁgurations of resonant circuits, they all have several
common characteristics. Resonant electronic circuits contain at least one inductor and one
capacitor and have a bell-shaped response curve centered at some resonant frequency, fr, as
illustrated in Figure 21–1(b).
The response curve of Figure 21–1(b) indicates that power will be at a maximum at the
resonant frequency, fr. Varying the frequency in either direction results in a reduction of the
power. The bandwidth of the resonant circuit is taken to be the difference between the half
power points on the response curve of the filter.
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If we were to apply variable-frequency sinusoidal signals to a circuit consisting of an induc-
tor and capacitor, we would ﬁnd that maximum energy will transfer back and forth between the
two elements at the resonant frequency. In an ideal LC circuit (one containing no resistance),
these oscillations would continue unabated even if the signal source were turned off. However,
in the practical situation, all circuits have some resistance. As a result, the stored energy will
eventually be dissipated by the resistance, resulting in damped oscillations. In a manner similar
to pushing a child on a swing, the oscillations will continue indeﬁnitely if a small amount of
energy is applied to the circuit at exactly the right moment. This phenomenon illustrates the
basis of how oscillator circuits operate and therefore provides us with another application of
the resonant circuit.
In this chapter, we examine in detail the two main types of resonant circuits: the series
resonant circuit and the parallel resonant circuit. I
738
Chapter 21 | Resonance
FIGURE 21–1
f
fr
f1
f2
(a) Ideal frequency response curve
BW
P
P
BW
fr
f1
f2
P
P
P
2
f
(b) Actual response curve of a resonant circuit
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 21.1 | Series Resonance
739
Putting It in Perspective
Edwin Howard Armstrong—Radio Reception
EDWIN ARMSTRONG WAS BORN in New York City on December 18, 1890. 
As a young man, he was keenly interested in experiments involving
radio transmission and reception.
After earning a degree in electrical engineering at Columbia
University, Armstrong used his theoretical background to explain and
improve the operation of the triode vacuum tube, which had been
invented by Lee de Forest. Edwin Armstrong was able to improve the
sensitivity of receivers by using feedback to amplify a signal many
times. By increasing the amount of signal feedback, Armstrong also
designed and patented a circuit that used the vacuum tube as an
oscillator.
Armstrong is best known for conceiving the concept of super-
heterodyning, in which a high frequency is lowered to a more usable
intermediate frequency. Superheterodyning is still used in modern 
AM and FM receivers and in numerous other electronic circuits such
as radar and communication equipment.
Edwin Armstrong was the inventor of FM transmission, which 
led to greatly improved ﬁdelity in radio transmission.
Although Armstrong was a brilliant engineer, he was an uncompromising person who was
involved in numerous lawsuits with Lee de Forest and the communications giant, RCA.
After spending nearly two million dollars in legal battles, Edwin Armstrong jumped to his death
from his thirteenth-ﬂoor apartment window on January 31, 1954. I
© Bettmann/CORBIS
A simple series resonant circuit is constructed by combining an ac source with
an inductor, a capacitor, and optionally, a resistor as shown in Figure 21–2(a).
By combining the generator resistance, RG, with the series resistance, RS, and
the resistance of the inductor coil, Rcoil, the circuit may be simpliﬁed as illustrated
in Figure 21–2(b).
21.1 Series Resonance
FIGURE 21–2
(a)
E  E∠0


f
RG
RS
C
L
Rcoil


E∠0
f
R
L
(b)
C
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In this circuit, the total resistance is expressed as
R  RG  RS  Rcoil
Because the circuit of Figure 21–2 is a series circuit, we calculate the total
impedance as follows:
ZT  R  jXL  jXC
 R  j(XL  XC)
(21–1)
Resonance occurs when the reactance of the circuit is effectively elimi-
nated, resulting in a total impedance that is purely resistive. We know that the
reactances of the inductor and capacitor are given as follows:
XL  qL  2pfL
(21–2)
XC  q
1
C
  
2p
1
fC

(21–3)
Examining Equation 21–1, we see that by setting the reactances of the
capacitor and inductor equal to one another, the total impedance, ZT, is
purely resistive since the inductive reactance which is on the positive j axis
cancels the capacitive reactance on the negative j axis. The total impedance
of the series circuit at resonance is equal to the total circuit resistance, R.
Hence, at resonance,
ZT  R
(21–4)
By letting the reactances be equal we are able to determine the series res-
onance frequency qS (in radians per second) as follows:
qL  q
1
C

q2  L
1
C

(21–5)
qS  

1
LC


(rads)
Since the calculation of the angular frequency, q, in radians per second is
easier than solving for frequency, f, in hertz, we generally express our resonant
frequencies in the simpler form. Further calculations of voltage and current
will usually be much easier by using q rather than f. If, however, it becomes
necessary to determine a frequency in hertz, recall that the relationship
between q and f is as follows:
q  2pf
(rads)
(21–6)
Equation 21–6 is inserted into Equation 21–5 to give the resonant fre-
quency as
fS  
2p
1
LC


(Hz)
(21–7)
The subscript S in the preceding equations indicates that the frequency
determined is the series resonant frequency.
At resonance, the total current in the circuit is determined from Ohm’s law as
I  Z
E
T
  
E
R
∠
∠
0
0
°
°
  E
R
∠0°
(21–8)
740
Chapter 21 | Resonance
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

By again applying Ohm’s law, we ﬁnd the voltage across each of the ele-
ments in the circuit as follows:
VR  IR∠0
(21–9)
VL  IXL∠90
(21–10)
VC  IXC∠90
(21–11)
The phasor form of the voltages and current is shown in Figure 21–3.
Notice that since the inductive and capacitive reactances have the same
magnitude, the voltages across the elements must have the same magnitude but
be 180 out of phase.
We determine the average power dissipated by the resistor and the reactive
powers of the inductor and capacitor as follows:
PR  I2R
(W)
QL  I2XL
(VAR)
QC  I2XC
(VAR)
These powers are illustrated graphically in Figure 21–4.
Section 21.2 | Quality Factor, Q
741
FIGURE 21–3
j (Imaginary)
I
VC
VR  E
VL
(Real)
j
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–4
PR  I2 R
S  EI  I2 R
QC  I2 XC
QL  I2 XL
© Cengage Learning 2013
For any resonant circuit, we deﬁne the quality factor, Q, as the ratio of reac-
tive power to average power, namely,
Q  
r
a
e
v
a
e
c
r
t
a
i
g
v
e
e
p
p
o
o
w
w
e
e
r
r

(21–12)
Because the reactive power of the inductor is equal to the reactive power
of the capacitor at resonance, we may express Q in terms of either reactive
power. Consequently, the preceding expression is written as follows:
QS  
I
I
2
2
X
R
L

and so we have
QS  X
R
L  q
R
L

(21–13)
Quite often, the inductor of a given circuit will have a Q expressed in terms
of its reactance and internal resistance, as follows:
Qcoil  
R
X
co
L
il

If an inductor with a speciﬁed Qcoil is included in a circuit, it is necessary
to include its effects in the overall calculation of the total circuit Q.
21.2 Quality Factor, Q
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We now examine how the Q of a circuit is used in determining other quan-
tities of the circuit. By multiplying both the numerator and denominator of
Equation 21–13 by the current, I, we have the following:
QS  I
I
X
R
L  V
E
L
(21–14)
Now, since the magnitude of the voltage across the capacitor is equal to the
magnitude of the voltage across the inductor at resonance, we see that the voltages
across the inductor and capacitor are related to the Q by the following expression:
VC  VL  QSE
at resonance
(21–15)
Note: Since the Q of a resonant circuit is generally signiﬁcantly larger than 1,
we see that the voltage across reactive elements can be many times greater than
the applied source voltage. Therefore, it is always necessary to ensure that the
reactive elements used in a resonant circuit are able to handle the expected volt-
ages and currents.
742
Chapter 21 | Resonance
EXAMPLE 21–1       
Find the indicated quantities for the circuit of Figure 21–5.
FIGURE 21–5


R
C
L
Rcoil
10 V∠0
8 
10 mH
1 F
Qcoil  50
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
a. Resonant frequency expressed as q(rads) and f(Hz).
b. Total impedance at resonance.
c. Current at resonance.
d. VL and VC.
e. Reactive powers, QC and QL.
f. Quality factor of the circuit, QS.
Solution
a.
qS  

1
LC



(1
0 m

1
H
)(
1	F)

 10 000 rads
fS  2
q
p
  1592 Hz
b.
XL  qL  (10 000 rads)(10 mH)  100 
Rcoil  
Q
X
c
L
oil
  
10
5
0
0

  2.00 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 21.2 | Quality Factor, Q
743
RT  R  Rcoil  10.0 
ZT  10 ∠0°
c.
I  Z
E
T
  
1
1
0
0

V∠
∠
0
0
°
°
  1.0 A∠0°
d.
VL  (100 ∠90°)(1.0 A∠0°)  100 V∠90°
VC  (100 ∠90°)(1.0 A∠0°)  100 V∠90°
Notice that the voltage across the reactive elements is 10 times greater than
the applied signal voltage.
e. Although we use the symbol Q to designate both reactive power and the
quality factor, the context of the question generally provides us with a clue
as to which meaning to use.
QL  (1.0 A)2(100 )  100 VAR
QC  (1.0 A)2(100 )  100 VAR
f.
QS  Q
P
L  
10
1
0
0
V
W
AR
  10
Consider the circuit of Figure 21–6:
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
RG  50 
C
L
Rcoil
16 sin ωt
5 
2.2 mH
0.044 F
I


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–6
a. Find the resonant frequency expressed as q(rads) and f(Hz).
b. Determine the total impedance at resonance.
c. Solve for I, VL, and VC at resonance.
d. Calculate reactive powers QC and QL at resonance.
e. Find the quality factor, Qs, of the circuit.
Answers
a. 102 krads, 16.2 kHz; b. 55.0 
∠0
c. 0.206 A∠0, 46.0 V∠90, 46.0 V∠90; d. 9.46 VAR; e. 4.07
CircuitSim 21-1 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In this section, we examine how the impedance of a series resonant circuit
varies as a function of frequency. Because the impedances of inductors and
capacitors are dependent upon frequency, the total impedance of a series reso-
nant circuit must similarly vary with frequency. For algebraic simplicity, we
use frequency expressed as q in radians per second. If it becomes necessary to
express the frequency in hertz, the conversion of Equation 21–6 is used.
The total impedance of a simple series resonant circuit is written as
ZT  R  jqL  jq
1
C

 R  j
q2L
q
C
C
 1

The magnitude and phase angle of the impedance vector, ZT, are expressed
as follows:
ZT R2 
q2L
q
C
C
 1

2
(21–16)
v  tan1
q2L
q
C
RC
 1

(21–17)
Examining these equations for various values of frequency, we note that
the following conditions will apply:
When q  qS:
ZT  R
and
v  tan10  0
This result is consistent with the results obtained in the previous section.
When q  qS:
As we decrease q from resonance, ZT will get larger until q  0. At this
point, the magnitude of the impedance will be undeﬁned, corresponding to an
open circuit. As one might expect, the large impedance occurs because the
capacitor behaves like an open circuit at dc.
The angle v will occur between 0 and 90 since the numerator of the argu-
ment of the arctangent function will always be negative, corresponding to an
angle in the fourth quadrant. Because the angle of the impedance has a negative
sign, we conclude that the impedance must appear capacitive in this region.
When q  qS:
As q is made larger than resonance, the impedance ZT will increase due to
the increasing reactance of the inductor.
For these values of q, the angle v will always be within 0 and 90
because both the numerator and the denominator of the arctangent function are
positive. Because the angle of ZT occurs in the ﬁrst quadrant, the impedance
must be inductive.
Sketching the magnitude and phase angle of the impedance ZT as a func-
tion of angular frequency, we have the curves shown in Figure 21–7.
744
Chapter 21 | Resonance
21.3 Impedance of a
Series Resonant
Circuit
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Due to the changing impedance of the circuit, we conclude that if a constant-
amplitude voltage is applied to the series resonant circuit, the current and
power of the circuit will not be constant at all frequencies. In this section, we
examine how current and power are affected by changing the frequency of the
voltage source.
Applying Ohm’s law gives the magnitude of the current at resonance as
follows:
Imax  E
R

(21–18)
For all other frequencies, the magnitude of the current will be less than Imax
because the impedance is greater than at resonance. Indeed, when the fre-
quency is zero (dc), the current will be zero since the capacitor is effectively an
open circuit. On the other hand, at increasingly higher frequencies, the induc-
tor begins to approximate an open circuit, once again causing the current in the
circuit to approach zero. The current response curve for a typical series reso-
nant circuit is shown in Figure 21–8.
Section 21.4 | Power, Bandwidth, and Selectivity of a Series Resonant Circuit
745
21.4 Power,
Bandwidth, 
and Selectivity 
of a Series
Resonant Circuit
FIGURE 21–7
Impedance (magnitude and phase angle) versus angular frequency for a series resonant circuit.
ZT
R
ωS
ω
Capacitive
impedance
Inductive
impedance

ω
90
90
0
ωS
© Cengage Learning 2013
S
I
Imax  E
R

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–8
Current versus angular frequency for a series resonant circuit.
The total power dissipated by the circuit at any frequency is given as
P  I2R
(21–19)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Since the current is maximum at resonance, it follows that the power must
similarly be maximum at resonance. The maximum power dissipated by the
series resonant circuit is therefore given as
Pmax  I2maxR  E
R
2

(21–20)
The power response of a series resonant circuit has a bell-shaped curve
called the selectivity curve, which is similar to the current response. Figure 21–9
illustrates the typical selectivity curve.
Examining Figure 21–9, we see that only frequencies around qs will
permit signiﬁcant amounts of power to be dissipated by the circuit. We deﬁne
the bandwidth, BW, of the resonant circuit to be the difference between the
frequencies at which the circuit delivers half of the maximum power. The fre-
quencies q1 and q2 are called the half-power frequencies, the cutoff frequen-
cies, or the band frequencies.
746
Chapter 21 | Resonance
NOTES...
For Further Investigation
We see from Figure 21–9 that the
selectivity curve is not perfectly
symmetrical on both sides of the
resonant frequency. As a result, qs
is not exactly centered between the
half-power frequencies. However, as
Q increases, we ﬁnd that the reso-
nant frequency approaches the 
midpoint between q1 and q2. In
general, if Q  10, then we assume
that the resonant frequency is at the
midpoint of half-power frequencies.
For additional information, refer to
the Web site for this textbook. Go to
www.cengagebrain.com
and log in by entering your
user name and password.
Follow the links to For
Further Investigation and select 
The Importance of Selectivity in
Broadcast Radio.
S
P

2
1
Pmax
Pmax
2
0
BW
(rads/s)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–9
Selectivity curve.
If the bandwidth of a circuit is kept very narrow, the circuit is said to have
a high selectivity, since it is highly selective to signals occurring within a very
narrow range of frequencies. On the other hand, if the bandwidth of a circuit is
large, the circuit is said to have a low selectivity.
The elements of a series resonant circuit determine not only the frequency
at which the circuit is resonant, but also the shape (and hence the bandwidth)
of the power response curve. Consider a circuit in which the resistance, R, and
the resonant frequency, qs, are held constant. We ﬁnd that by increasing the
ratio of LC, the sides of the power response curve become steeper. This in turn
results in a decrease in the bandwidth. Inversely, decreasing the ratio of LC
causes the sides of the curve to become more gradual, resulting in an increased
bandwidth. These characteristics are illustrated in Figure 21–10.
If, on the other hand, L and C are kept constant, we ﬁnd that the bandwidth
will decrease as R is decreased and will increase as R is increased. Figure 21–11
shows how the shape of the selectivity curve is dependent upon the value of
resistance. A series circuit has the highest selectivity if the resistance of the cir-
cuit is kept to a minimum.
For the series resonant circuit the power at any frequency is determined as
P  I2R
Z
E
T

2
R
FIGURE 21–10
S
P
 Pmax
L2 < L1
C2
C1
L3 > L1
C3
C1
L1/C1
(S and R are kept constant)
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

By substituting Equation 21–16 into the preceding expression, we arrive at
the general expression for power as a function of frequency, q:
P 
(21–21)
At the half-power frequencies, the power must be
Phpf  2
E
R
2

(21–22)
Since the maximum current in the circuit is given as Imax  ER, we see
that by manipulating the preceding expression, the magnitude of current at the
half-power frequencies is
Ihpf P
R
h

pf
 2
E
R
2
2
 I

2m
2
ax

Ihpf 
(21–23)
The cutoff frequencies are found by evaluating the frequencies at which
the power dissipated by the circuit is half of the maximum power. Combining
Equations 21–21 and 21–22, we have the following:
2R2  R2 
q2L
q
C
C
 1

2
(21–24)

q2L
q
C
C
 1
  R
q2LC  1  qRC
(at half-power)
From the selectivity curve for a series circuit, we see that the two half-power
points occur on both sides of the resonant angular frequency, qs.
When q  qS, the term q2LC must be less than 1. In this case, the solution
is determined as follows:
q2LC  1  qRC
q2LC  qRC  1  0
E2R

R2 
q2L
q
C
C
 1

2
Imax

2
E2R

R2 
q2L
q
C
C
 1

2
Section 21.4 | Power, Bandwidth, and Selectivity of a Series Resonant Circuit
747
S
P

R3 > R1
(L, C are constant)
R2 < R1
R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–11
2
E
R
2
 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The solution of this quadratic equation gives the lower half-power fre-
quency as
q1 
or
q1  
2L
R 4
R
L
2
2
 L
1
C

(21–25)
In a similar manner, for q  qS, the upper half-power frequency is
q2  2
R
L
 4
R
L
2
2
 L
1
C

(21–26)
Taking the difference between Equations 21–26 and 21–25, we ﬁnd the
bandwidth of the circuit as
BW  q2  q1
 2
R
L
 4
R
L
2
2
 L
1
C
  2
R
L
 4
R
L
2
2
 L
1
C

which gives
BW  R
L

(rads)
(21–27)
If the preceding expression is multiplied by qSqS we obtain
BW  

q
q
S
S
R
L
and since QS  qSLR we further simplify the bandwidth as
BW  
q
Q
S
S
(rads)
(21–28)
Because the bandwidth may alternately be expressed in hertz, the preceding
expression is equivalent to having
BW 
(Hz)
(21–29)
fS
QS
RC  (R
C)2
 
 4
LC

2LC
748
Chapter 21 | Resonance
EXAMPLE 21–2       
Refer to the circuit of Figure 21–12.
FIGURE 21–12


10 V∠0
R
L
C
10 E
10 mH
1 RF
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 21.4 | Power, Bandwidth, and Selectivity of a Series Resonant Circuit
749
a. Determine the maximum power dissipated by the circuit.
b. Use the results obtained from Example 21–1 to determine the bandwidth
of the resonant circuit and to arrive at the approximate half-power fre-
quencies, q1 and q2.
c. Calculate the actual half-power frequencies, q1 and q2, from the given
component values. Show two decimal places of precision.
d. Solve for the circuit current, I, and power dissipated at the lower half-
power frequency, q1, found in part (c).
Solution
a.
Pmax  E
R
2
  10.0 W
b. From Example 21–1, we had the following circuit characteristics:
QS  10, qS  10 krads
The bandwidth of the circuit is determined to be
BW  qSQS  1.0 krads
If the resonant frequency were centered in the bandwidth, then the half-
power frequencies occur at approximately
q1  9.50 krads
and
q2  10.50 krads
c. q1   2
R
L
 4
R
L
2
2 L
1
C

 
(2)(
1
1
0
0

mH)
 
(4)
(
(
1
1
0
0

m
)
H
2
)2
 
(10 mH
1
)(1	F)

 500  10 012.49  9512.49 rads
(f1  1514.0 Hz)
q2  2
R
L
 4
R
L
2
2
 L
1
C

 500  10 012.49  10 512.49 rads
(f2  1673.1 Hz) 
Notice that the actual half-power frequencies are very nearly equal to the
approximate values. For this reason, if Q  10, it is often sufﬁcient to calcu-
late the cutoff frequencies by using the easier approach of part (b).
d. At q1  9.51249 krads, the reactances are as follows:
XL  qL  (9.51249 krads)(10 mH)  95.12 
XC  q
1
C
 
 105.12 
The current is now determined to be
I 
 
14.1
1
4
0

V
∠
∠

0°
45°

 0.707 A∠45°
and the power is given as
P  I2R  (0.707 A)2(10 V)  5.0 W
As expected, we see that the power at the frequency q1 is indeed equal to half
of the power dissipated by the circuit at resonance.
10 V∠0°

10   j95.12   j105.12 
1

(9.51249 krads)(1 	F)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

750
Chapter 21 | Resonance
EXAMPLE 21–3       
Refer to the circuit of Figure 21–13.
FIGURE 21–13


RL
C
L  200 RH
Rcoil  5 E
e(t)  30 sin t


vout(t)
© Cengage Learning 2013
a. Calculate the values of RL and C for the circuit to have a resonant fre-
quency of 200 kHz and a bandwidth of 16 kHz.
b. Use the designed component values to determine the power dissipated by
the circuit at resonance.
c. Solve for vout(t) at resonance.
Solution
a. Because the circuit is at resonance, we must have the following conditions:
QS  
B
f
W
S
 
2
1
0
6
0
k
k
H
H
z
z

 12.5
XL  2pfL
 2p(200 kHz)(200 	H)
 251.3 
R  RL  Rcoil  Q
XL
s

 20.1 
and so RL must be
RL  20.1 
  5 
  15.1 
Since XC  XL, we determine the capacitance as
C  
2p
1
fXC


1

2p(200 kHz)(251.3 )
 3.17 nF ( 0.00317 	F)
b. The power at resonance is found from Equation 21–20 as
Pmax  E
R
2
 
 22.4 W

3

0
2
V

2

20.1 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 21.4 | Power, Bandwidth, and Selectivity of a Series Resonant Circuit
751
c. We see from the circuit of Figure 21–13 that the voltage vout(t) may be
determined by applying the voltage divider rule to the circuit. However,
we must ﬁrst convert the source voltage from time domain into phasor
domain as follows:
e(t)  30 sin qt ⇔E  21.21 V∠0
Now, applying the voltage divider rule to the circuit, we have
Vout  
(R1 
R
jqL)
E

(5 
2

0
j
.
2
1
5

1.3 )
 21.21 V∠0°
 (251.4 ∠88.86°)(1.056 A∠0°)
 265.5 V∠88.86°
which in time domain is given as
vout(t)  375 sin(qt  88.86)
Refer to the circuit of Figure 21–14.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
FIGURE 21–14
RG  50 
C
L
Rcoil
16 sin ωt
5 
2.2 mH
0.044 F
I


© Cengage Learning 2013
CircuitSim 21-2 
a. Determine the maximum power dissipated by the circuit.
b. Use the results obtained from Practice Problems 1 to determine the
bandwidth of the resonant circuit. Solve for the approximate values of
the half-power frequencies, q1 and q2.
c. Calculate the actual half-power frequencies, q1 and q2, from the given
component values. Compare your results to those obtained in part (b).
Brieﬂy explain why there is a discrepancy between the results.
d. Solve for the circuit current, I, and power dissipated at the lower half-
power frequency, q1, found in part (c).
Answers
a. 2.33 W
b. BW  25.0 krads (3.98 kHz), q1 	 89.1 krads, q2 	 114.1 krads
c. q1  89.9 krads, q2 	 114.9 krads. The approximation assumes that the power-
frequency curve is symmetrical around qS, which is not quite true.
d. I  0.145 A∠45, P  1.16 W
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

752
Chapter 21 | Resonance
Refer to the series resonant circuit of Figure 21–15.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
FIGURE 21–15


20 mV∠0
fS  600 kHz
R
L


VL
C
BW  10 kHz
220 pF
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
Suppose the circuit has a resonant frequency of 600 kHz and a bandwidth of 10 kHz.
a. Determine the value of inductor L in henries.
b. Calculate the value of resistor R in ohms.
c. Find I, VL, and power, P, at resonance.
d. Find the approximate values of the half-power frequencies, f1 and f2.
e. Using the results of part (d), determine the current in the circuit at the lower
half-power frequency, f1, and show that the power dissipated by the resistor
at this frequency is half the power dissipated at the resonant frequency.
Consider the series resonant circuit of Figure 21–16.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)


100 mV∠0
R  20 E
L
20 mH
C
0.5 RF
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–16
a. Solve for the resonant frequency of the circuit, qS, and calculate the power
dissipated by the circuit at resonance.
b. Determine Q, BW, and the half-power frequencies, q1 and q2, in radians per
second.
c. Sketch the selectivity curve of the circuit, showing P (in watts) versus q
(in radians per second).
d. Repeat parts (a) through (c) if the value of resistance is reduced to 10 
.
e. Explain brieﬂy how selectivity depends upon the value of resistance in a
series resonant circuit.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 21.5 | Series-to-Parallel RL and RC Conversion
753
As we have already seen, an inductor will always have some series resistance
due to the length of wire used in the coil winding. Even though the resistance
of the wire is generally small in comparison with the reactances in the circuit,
this resistance may occasionally contribute tremendously to the overall circuit
response of a parallel resonant circuit. We begin by converting the series RL
network as shown in Figure 21–17 into an equivalent parallel RL network. It
must be emphasized, however, that the equivalence is only valid at a single
frequency, q.
21.5 Series-to-Parallel
RL and RC
Conversion
FIGURE 21–17
RS
XLS
ZT
YT
(a)
ZT
YT
RP
XLP
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
The networks of Figure 21–17 can be equivalent only if they each have the
same input impedance, ZT (and also the same input admittance, YT).
The input impedance of the series network of Figure 21–17(a) is given as
ZT  RS  jXLS
which gives the input admittance as
YT  Z
1
T
  
RS 
1
jXLS

Multiplying numerator and denominator by the complex conjugate, we have
YT 
 
R
R
S
S
2


j
X
X
L
L
S
S
2

(21–30)
 
RS2 
RS
XLS2
  j
RS2
X

LS
XLS2

From Figure 21–17(b), we see that the input admittance of the parallel network
must be
YT  GP  jBLP
which may also be written as
YT  R
1
P
  jX
1
LP

(21–31)
The admittances of Equations 21–30 and 21–31 can only be equal if the real
and the imaginary components are equal. As a result, we see that for a given
RS  jXLS

(RS  jXLS)(RS  jXLS)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

frequency, the following equations enable us to convert a series RL network
into its equivalent parallel network:
RP  
RS2 
RS
XLS2

(21–32)
XLP  
RS2
X

LS
XLS2

(21–33)
If we are given a parallel RL network, it is possible to show that the con-
version to an equivalent series network is accomplished by applying the fol-
lowing equations:
RS  
RP
R
2
P

XL
X
P2
LP2

(21–34)
XLS  
RP
R
2
P

2X
X
LP
LP2

(21–35)
The derivation of the preceding equations is left as an exercise for the student.
Equations 21–32 to 21–35 may be simpliﬁed by using the quality factor of
the coil. Multiplying Equation 21–32 by RSRS and then using Equation 21–13,
we have
RP  RS 
RS2 
RS2
XLS2

RP  RS(1  Q2)
(21–36)
Similarly, Equation 21–33 is simpliﬁed as
XLP  XLS 
RS2
X

LS
X
2
LS2

XLP  XLS1  Q
1
2
(21–37)
The quality factor of the resulting parallel network must be the same as for
the original series network because the reactive and the average powers must
be the same. Using the parallel elements, the quality factor is expressed as
Q  
X
R
L
S
S 
 
R
R
P
P
2
X
X
L
L
P
P
2

Q  X
R
L
P
P

(21–38)

RP
R
2
P

2X
X
LP
LP2



RP
R
2
P

XL
X
P2
LP2

754
Chapter 21 | Resonance
EXAMPLE 21–4       
For the series network of Figure 21–18, ﬁnd the Q of the coil at q  1000 rads
and convert the series RL network into its equivalent parallel network. Repeat
these steps for q  10 krads.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 21.5 | Series-to-Parallel RL and RC Conversion
755
Solution
For q  1000 rads,
XL  qL  20 
Q  
X
R
L  2.0
RP  R(1  Q2)  50 
XLP  XL1  Q
1
2  25 
The resulting parallel network for q  1000 rads is shown in Figure 21–19.
For q  10 krads,
XL  qL  200 
Q  X
R
L  20
RP  R(1  Q2)  4010 
XLP  XL1  Q
1
2  200.5 
The resulting parallel network for q  10 krads is shown in Figure 21–20.
FIGURE 21–18
R  10 E
ZT
YT
L  20 mH
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–19
ZT
YT
RP
XLP
50 E
25 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–20
ZT
YT
RP
XLP  200.5 E
4010 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 21–5        
Find the Q of each of the networks of Figure 21–21 and determine the series
equivalent for each.
Solution
For the network of Figure 21–21(a),
Q  X
R
L
P
P
  
1
2
0
50
k

  40
RS  
1 
RP
Q2
  
1
1

0 k
4

02
  6.25 
XLS  QRS  (40)(6.25 )  250 
L  X
q
L  
25
2
0
5
0
0
r

ads
  0.1 H
For the network of Figure 21–21(b),
Q  
X
R
L
P
P
  
2
9
7
0
0
0
0


  3
RS  
1 
RP
Q2
  
2
1
7

00
3

2
  270 
FIGURE 21–21
250 
10 k
ω  2500 rad/s
(a)
900 E
2700 E
  2000 rad/s
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

756
Chapter 21 | Resonance
XLS  QRS  (3)(270 )  810 
L  X
q
L  
20
8
0
1
0
0
r

ads
  0.405 H
The resulting equivalent series networks are shown in Figure 21–22.
FIGURE 21–22
6.25 
L  0.1 H
(XL  250 )
ω  2500 rad/s
(a)
270 E
  2000 rad/s
L  0.405 H
(XL  810 E)
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
Refer to the networks of Figure 21–23.
a. Find the quality factors, Q, of the networks at q1  5 krads.
b. Use the Q to ﬁnd the equivalent parallel networks (resistance and reac-
tance) at an angular frequency of q1  5 krads.
c. Repeat parts (a) and (b) for an angular frequency of q2  25 krads.
Answers
a. Qa  2.5
Qb  1.0
b. Network a:
RP  725 
XLP  290 
Network b:
RP  4 k
XLP  4 k
c. Network a:
Qa  12.5
RP  15.725 k
XLP  1.258 k
Network b:
Qb  5
RP  52 k
XLP  10.4 k
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
(a)
100 E
50 mH
(b)
2 kE
0.4 H
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–23
The previous examples illustrate two important points which are valid if
the Q of the network is large (Q  10).
1. The resistance of the parallel network is approximately Q2 larger than the
resistance of the series network.
2. The inductive reactances of the series and parallel networks are approxi-
mately equal. Hence
RP 	 Q2RS
(Q  10)
(21–39)
XLP 	 XLS
(Q  10)
(21–40)
Although we have performed conversions between series and parallel RL
circuits, it is easily shown that if the reactive element is a capacitor, the con-
versions apply equally well. In all cases, the equations are simply changed by
replacing the terms XLS and XLP with XCS and XCP, respectively. The Q of the
network is determined by the ratios
Q  
X
R
C
S
S  
X
R
C
P
P

(21–41)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 21.5 | Series-to-Parallel RL and RC Conversion
757
Consider the networks of Figure 21–24.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
1 k
0.2 F
(a)
2.5 RF
5 E
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–24
a. Find the Q of each network at a frequency of f1  1 kHz.
b. Determine the series equivalent of the network in Figure 21–24(a) and
the parallel equivalent of the network in Figure 21–24(b).
c. Repeat parts (a) and (b) for a frequency of f2  200 kHz.
Answers
a. Qa  1.26
Qb  12.7
b. Network a:
RS  388 
XCS  487 
Network b:
RP  816 
XCP  64.1 
c. Network a:
Qa  251
RS  0.0158 
XCS  3.98 
Network b:
Qb  0.0637
RP  5.02 
XCP  78.9 
Refer to the networks of Figure 21–25.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
FIGURE 21–25
(a)
L  2.5 mH
RP
ω  80 krad/s
Q  8
(b)
C  0.125 RF
  100 krad/s
Q  0.5
RP
© Cengage Learning 2013
a. Determine the resistance, RP, for each network.
b. Find the equivalent series network by using the quality factor for the given
networks.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A simple parallel resonant circuit is illustrated in Figure 21–26. The parallel
resonant circuit is best analyzed using a constant-current source, unlike the
series resonant circuit, which used a constant-voltage source.
758
Chapter 21 | Resonance
21.6 Parallel
Resonance
C
I  I∠0


V
LP
R
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–26
Simple parallel resonant circuit.
Consider the LC “tank” circuit shown in Figure 21–27. The tank circuit
consists of a capacitor in parallel with an inductor. Due to its high Q and fre-
quency response, the tank circuit is used extensively in communications equip-
ment such as AM, FM, and television transmitters and receivers.
The circuit of Figure 21–27 is not exactly a parallel resonant circuit, since
the resistance of the coil is in series with the inductance. In order to determine
the frequency at which the circuit is purely resistive, we must ﬁrst convert the
series combination of resistance and inductance into an equivalent parallel net-
work. The resulting circuit is shown in Figure 21–28.
At resonance, the capacitive and inductive reactances in the circuit of
Figure 21–28 are equal. As we have observed previously, placing equal inductive
and capacitive reactances in parallel effectively results in an open circuit at the
given frequency. The input impedance of this network at resonance is therefore
purely resistive and given as ZT  RP. We determine the resonant frequency of a
tank circuit by ﬁrst letting the reactances of the equivalent parallel circuit be equal:
XC  XLP
Now, using the component values of the tank circuit, we have
XC  
(Rcoil)
X
2
L
 XL2

q
1
C
  
(Rcoil)2
q

L
(qL)2

C
L
  (Rcoil)2  (qL)2
which may be further reduced to
q  

Factoring LC
 from the denominator, we express the parallel resonant fre-
quency as
qP  

1
LC

1  
(

R

co
L

il)

2C

(21–42)
Notice that if Rcoil2  LC, then the term under the radical is approximately
equal to 1.
Consequently, if LC  100Rcoil, the parallel resonant frequency may be
simpliﬁed as
qP 	 

1
LC


(for LC  100Rcoil)
(21–43)
Rcoil2
L2
1
LC
FIGURE 21–27
C
L
Rcoil
Q
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–28
XLP
XC
RP
Q
© Cengage Learning 2013
NOTES...
For a high-Q circuit, qP can 
be approximated as qP  

1
L
C

.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Recall that the quality factor, Q, of a circuit is deﬁned as the ratio of reac-
tive power to average power for a circuit at resonance. If we consider the par-
allel resonant circuit of Figure 21–29, we make several important observations.
Section 21.6 | Parallel Resonance
759
FIGURE 21–29
C
I  I∠0


V
L
R
IR
IC
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
The inductor and capacitor reactances cancel, resulting in a circuit voltage
simply determined by Ohm’s law as
V  IR  IR∠0
The frequency response of the impedance of the parallel circuit is shown
in Figure 21–30.
FIGURE 21–30
Impedance (magnitude and phase angle) versus angular frequency for a parallel resonant circuit.
ZT ()
R
ωP
ω
Inductive
impedance
Capacitive
impedance
θ
ωP
ω
90
90
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
Notice that the impedance of the entire circuit is maximum at resonance
and minimum at the boundary conditions (q  0 rads and q →). This result
is exactly opposite to that observed in series resonant circuits, which have min-
imum impedance at resonance. We also see that for parallel circuits, the imped-
ance will appear inductive for frequencies less than the resonant frequency, qP.
Inversely, the impedance is capacitive for frequencies greater than qP.
The Q of the parallel circuit is determined from the deﬁnition as
QP  
r
a
e
v
a
e
c
r
t
a
i
g
v
e
e
p
p
o
o
w
w
e
e
r
r

 
V
V
2
2


X
R
L

(21–44)
QP  R
XLP
 X
R
C

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

This is precisely the same result as that obtained when we converted an
RL series network into its equivalent parallel network. If the resistance of the coil
is the only resistance within a circuit, then the circuit Q will be equal to the Q of
the coil. However, if the circuit has other sources of resistance, then the additional
resistance will reduce the circuit Q.
For a parallel RLC resonant circuit, the currents in the various elements are
found from Ohm’s law as follows:
IR  V
R
  I
(21–45)
IL  
XL∠
V
90°

 
R
V
QP
∠90°
(21–46)
 QPI∠90°
IC  
XC∠
V
90°

 
R
V
QP
∠90°
(21–47)
 QPI∠90°
At resonance, the currents through the inductor and the capacitor have the
same magnitudes but are 180 out of phase. Notice that the magnitude of cur-
rent in the reactive elements at resonance is Q times greater than the applied
source current. Because the Q of a parallel circuit may be very large, we see the
importance of choosing elements that are able to handle the expected currents.
In a manner similar to that used in determining the bandwidth of a series
resonant circuit, it may be shown that the half-power frequencies of a parallel
resonant circuit are
q1  
2R
1
C
 
4R
1
2C2
 L
1
C

(rads)
(21–48)
q2  
2R
1
C
 
4R
1
2C2
 L
1
C

(rads)
(21–49)
The bandwidth is therefore
BW  q2  q1  R
1
C

(rads)
(21–50)
If the quality factor of the circuit Q  10, then the selectivity curve is very
nearly symmetrical around qP, resulting in half-power frequencies which are
located at qP  BW2.
Multiplying Equation 21–50 by qPqP results in the following:
BW  
R(q
q
P
P
C)
  X
R
CqP
BW  Q
qP
P

(rads)
(21–51)
Notice that Equation 21–51 is the same for both series and parallel reso-
nant circuits.
760
Chapter 21 | Resonance
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 21.6 | Parallel Resonance
761
EXAMPLE 21–6        
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 21–31.
FIGURE 21–31
3.6 mA∠0


V
IR
IL
500 E
0.4 RF
16 mH
© Cengage Learning 2013
a. Determine the resonant frequencies, qP(rads) and fP(Hz) of the tank circuit.
b. Find the Q of the circuit at resonance.
c. Calculate the voltage across the circuit at resonance.
d. Solve for currents through the inductor and the resistor at resonance.
e. Determine the bandwidth of the circuit in both radians per second and hertz.
f. Sketch the voltage response of the circuit, showing the voltage at the
half-power frequencies.
g. Sketch the selectivity curve of the circuit showing P(watts) versus q(rads).
Solution
a.
qP 

 12.5 krads
fP  2
q
p
  
12.5
2
k
p
rads
  1989 Hz
b.
QP  q
R
L
P 
 
5
2
0
0
0
0


  2.5 
c. At resonance, VC  VL  VR, and so
V  IR  (3.6 mA∠0) (500 
∠0)  1.8 V ∠0
d.
IL  V
ZL
L  
2
1
0
.
0
8

V
∠
∠
9
0
0
°
°
  9.0 mA∠90°
IR  I  3.6 mA∠0°
e.
BW(rads)  Q
qP
P
  
12.5
2
k
.5
rads
  5 krads
BW(Hz)  
BW
2
(r
p
ads)
  
5 k
2
r
p
ads
  795.8 Hz
f. The half-power frequencies are calculated from Equations 21–48 and 21–49
since the Q of the circuit is less than 10.
q1  
2R
1
C
 
4R
1
2C2
 L
1
C

 
0.0
1
004
 
1.6 

1
107
  
6.4 

1
109

 2500  12 748
 10 248 rads
500 

(12.5 krads) (16 mH)
1

(1
6 m
H
)(0
.4
 	
F)
1

LC

CircuitSim 21-3 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

762
Chapter 21 | Resonance
q2  
2R
1
C
 
4R
1
2C2
 L
1
C

 
0.0
1
004
 
1.6 

1
107
  
6.4 

1
109

 2500  12 748
 15 248 rads
The resulting voltage response curve is illustrated in Figure 21–32.
g. The power dissipated by the circuit at resonance is
P  V
R
2
  
(
5
1
0
.8
0
V

)2
  6.48 mW
The selectivity curve is now easily sketched as shown in Figure 21–33.
FIGURE 21–32
1.8  1.27
2

12.5
V (volts)

(krad/s)
1.8
1  10.25
2  15.25
BW  5 krad/s
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–33
12.5
P (mW)

(krad/s)

10.25
6.48
3.24

15.25
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 21–7       
Consider the circuit of Figure 21–34.
20 mA∠0
L  1 mH
R1
25 kE
C
1 nF
Rcoil  10 E
Qcoil
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–34
a. Calculate the resonant frequency, qP, of the tank circuit.
b. Find the Q of the coil at resonance.
c. Sketch the equivalent parallel circuit.
d. Determine the Q of the entire circuit at resonance.
e. Solve for the voltage across the capacitor at resonance.
CircuitSim 21-4 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We see that the previous circuit may be further simpliﬁed by combining the
parallel resistances:
Req  R1RP 
2
(2
5
5
k
k



)(1
1
0
0
0
0
k
k


)
  20 k
The simpliﬁed equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 21–36.
Section 21.6 | Parallel Resonance
763
f. Find the bandwidth of the circuit in radians per second.
g. Sketch the voltage response of the circuit showing the voltage at the half-
power frequencies.
Solution
a. Since the ratio LC  1000  100Rcoil, we use the approximation:
qp  

1
LC

 
(1
 m
H

1
)(1
 n
F)
  1 Mrads
b.
Qcoil  
R
q
c
L
oil
 
(1 Mra
1
d
0
s)

(1 mH)
  100
c.
RP 	 Qcoil2Rcoil  (100)2(10 )  100 k
XLP 	 XL  qL  (1 Mrads) (1 mH)  1 k
The circuit of Figure 21–35 shows the circuit with the parallel equivalent
of the inductor.
FIGURE 21–35
20 mA∠0
R1
XL
25 kE
1 kE
1 kE


VC
XC
RP
100 kE
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–36
20 mA∠0
20 kE
1 kE


VC
XC
1 kE
XL
Req
© Cengage Learning 2013
d.
QP  
R
X
e
L
q  
2
1
0
k
k


  20 
e. At resonance,
VC  IReq  (20 mA∠0°) (20 k)  400 V∠0°
f.
BW  
q
Q
P  
1 M
2
r
0
ads
  50 krads
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

764
Chapter 21 | Resonance
g. The voltage response curve is shown in Figure 21–37. Since the circuit
Q  10, the half-power frequencies will occur at the following angular
frequencies:
q1 	 qP  
B
2
W
  1.0 Mrads  
50 k
2
rads
  0.975 Mrads
and
q2 	 qP  
B
2
W
  1.0 Mrads  
50 k
2
rads
  1.025 Mrads
FIGURE 21–37
1.0
VC (V)

(Mrad/s)
400
400  283
2
0.975
1.025
BW  50 krad/s
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 21–8       
Determine the values of R1 and C for the resonant tank circuit of Figure 21–38
so that the given conditions are met.
L  10 mH, Rcoil  30 
fP  58 kHz
BW  1 kHz
Solve for the current, IL, through the inductor.
FIGURE 21–38
10 RA∠0
L  10 mH
R1
C
Rcoil  30 E
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
Solution
QP  
BW
f
(
P
Hz)
  
5
1
8
k
k
H
H
z
z
  58 
Now, because the frequency expressed in radians per second is more useful than
hertz, we convert fP to qP:
qP  2pfP  (2p)(58 kHz)  364.4 krads
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 21.6 | Parallel Resonance
765
The capacitance is determined from Equation 21–43 as
C  
q
1
2
PL
 
 753 pF
Solving for the Q of the coil permits us to easily convert the series RL network
into its equivalent parallel network.
Qcoil 

 
3.6
3
4
0
4

k
  121.5
RP 	 Q2coilRcoil  (121.5)2(30 )  443 k
XLP 	 XL  3644 
The resulting equivalent parallel circuit is shown in Figure 21–39.
(364.4 krads)(10 mH)

30 
qPL
Rcoil
1

(364.4 krads)2(10 mH)
FIGURE 21–39
10 RA∠0
R1
XLP
443 kE
3644 E


V
XC
RP
3644 E
R  211 kE
© Cengage Learning 2013
The quality factor QP is used to determine the total resistance of the circuit as
R  QPXC  (58)(3.644 k
)  211 k
But
R
1
  R
1
1
  R
1
P

R
1
1
  R
1
  R
1
P
  
211
1
k
  
443
1
k
  2.47 	S
And so
R1  405 k
The voltage across the circuit is determined to be
V  IR  (10 	A∠0)(211 k
)  2.11 V∠0
and the current through the inductor is
IL  
Rcoil
V
 jXL

 
30
2.

11
j
V
36
∠
4
0
4
°

  
364
2
4
.1

1
∠
V∠
89
0
.
°
95°
  579 	A∠89.95°
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a. Determine the resonant frequency and express it in radians per second and 
in hertz.
b. Calculate the quality factor of the circuit.
c. Solve for the bandwidth.
d. Determine the voltage V at resonance.
Answers
a. 2.5 Mrads (398 kHz)
b. 75
c. 33.3 krads (5.31 kHz)
d. 7.5 V∠180
766
Chapter 21 | Resonance
Refer to the circuit of Figure 21–40.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
FIGURE 21–40
C
200 RA∠0


V
L
R
150 kE
800 pF
200 RH
5 E
Rcoil
© Cengage Learning 2013
Refer to the parallel resonant circuit of Figure 21–41.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
FIGURE 21–41
220 pF
2 RA∠0


V
L
R
IL
C
fP  800 kHz
BW  25 kHz
© Cengage Learning 2013
Suppose the circuit has a resonant frequency of 800 kHz and a bandwidth of 25 kHz.
a. Determine the value of the inductor, L, in henries.
b. Calculate the value of the resistance, R, in ohms.
c. Find V, IL, and power, P, at resonance.
d. Find the approximate values of the half-power frequencies, f1 and f2.
e. Determine the voltage across the circuit at the lower half-power frequency,
f1, and show that the power dissipated by the resistor at this frequency is half
the power dissipated at the resonant frequency.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 21.7 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
767
PSpice is particularly useful in examining the operation of resonant circuits.
The ability of the software to provide a visual display of the frequency
response is used to evaluate the resonant frequency, maximum current, and
bandwidth of a circuit. The Q of the given circuit is then easily determined.
PSpice
21.7 Circuit Analysis
Using Computers
EXAMPLE 21–9        
Use PSpice to obtain the frequency response for current in the circuit of
Figure 21–12. Use cursors to ﬁnd the resonant frequency and the bandwidth of
the circuit from the observed response. Compare the results to those obtained in
Example 21–2.
Solution
OrCAD Capture CIS is used to input the circuit as shown in Figure 21–42. For
this example, the project is titled Ch21 PSpice1. The voltage source used in this
example is VAC and the properties are changed to AC  10V and DEG  0Deg.
In order to obtain a plot of the circuit current, place a Current Pin tool as shown.
FIGURE 21–42
© Cengage Learning 2013
Next, we change the simulation settings by clicking on the New Simulation
Proﬁle tool. Give the simulation a name such as Example 21–9 and click on
Create. Once you are in the simulation settings box, click on the Analysis tab and
select AC Sweep
Noise as the analysis type. The frequency can be swept either
linearly or logarithmically (decade or octave). In this example we select a loga-
rithmic sweep through a decade. In the box titled AC Sweep Type, click on 
Logarithmic and select Decade. Enter the following values as the settings. Start
Frequency: 1kHz, End Frequency: 10kHz, and PointsDecade: 10001. Click OK.
Click on the Run tool. If there are no errors, the PROBE postprocessor
will run automatically and display I(C1) as a function of frequency. You will
notice that the selectivity curve is largely contained within a narrow range of
frequencies. We may zoom into this region as follows: Select the Plot menu, and
click on Axis Settings menu item. Click on the X Axis tab and select User
Deﬁned Data Range. Change the values to 1kHz to 3kHz. Click OK. The result-
ing display is shown in Figure 21–43.
PSPICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

768
Chapter 21 | Resonance
Finally, we may use cursors to provide us with the actual resonant
frequency, the maximum current, and the half-power frequencies. Cursors are
obtained as follows: Click on Trace, Cursor, and Display. The positions of the
cursors are adjusted by using either the mouse or the arrow and <Shift> keys.
The current at the maximum point of the curve is obtained by clicking on Trace,
Cursor, and Max. The dialog box provides the values of both the frequency and
the value of current. The bandwidth is determined by determining the frequen-
cies at the half-power points (when the current is 0.707 of the maximum value).
We obtain the following results using the cursors:
Imax  1.00 A, fS  1.591 kHz, f1  1.514 kHz, f2  1.672 kHz, BW  0.159 kHz
These values correspond very closely to those calculated in Example 21–2.
FIGURE 21–43
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 21–10       
Use PSpice to obtain the frequency response for the voltage across the parallel
resonant circuit of Figure 21–34. Use the PROBE postprocessor to ﬁnd the res-
onant frequency, the maximum voltage (at resonance), and the bandwidth of the
circuit. Compare the results to those obtained in Example 21–7.
Solution
This example is similar to the previous example, with minor exceptions. The
OrCAD Capture program is used to enter the circuit as shown in Figure 21–44.
Save the project as Ch21 PSpice2. The ac current source is found in the
SOURCE library as IAC. The properties of the ac current source are changed to
AC  20mA and DEG  0Deg. The Voltage Level tool is used to provide the
voltage simulation for the circuit.
Use the New Simulation Proﬁle tool to give the simulation a name such as
Example 21–10, and to set the simulation for a logarithmic ac sweep from
100kHz to 300kHz with a total of 10001 points per decade. After running the
simulation, click on the Plot menu to select the Axis Settings. Change the x-axis
to indicate a User Deﬁned range from 100kHz to 300kHz and change the y-axis
to indicate a User Deﬁned range from 0V to 400V. The resulting display is
shown in Figure 21–45.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 21.7 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
769
As in the previous example, we use cursors to observe that the maximum
circuit voltage, Vmax  400 V, occurs at the resonance frequency as fP 
159.2 kHz (1.00 Mrads). The half-power frequencies are determined when the
output voltage is at 0.707 of the maximum value, namely at f1  155.28 kHz
(0.796 Mrads) and f2  163.22 kHz (1.026 Mrads). These frequencies give a
bandwidth of BW  7.94 kHz (49.9 krads). The preceding results are consis-
tent with those found in Example 21–7.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–44
FIGURE 21–45
© Cengage Learning 2013
Use PSpice to obtain the frequency response of voltage, V versus f, for the cir-
cuit of Figure 21–40. Use cursors to determine the approximate values of the
half-power frequencies and the bandwidth of the circuit. Compare the results
to those obtained in Practice Problems 5.
Answers
Vmax  7.50 V, fP  398 kHz, f1  395.3 kHz, f2  400.7 kHz, BW  5.31 kHz
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

770
Chapter 21 | Resonance
Y
ou are the transmitter specialist at an AM commercial radio station, which
transmits at a frequency of 990 kHz and an average power of 10 kW. As is
the case for all commercial AM stations, the bandwidth for your station is
10 kHz. Your transmitter will radiate the power using a 50-
 antenna. The
accompanying ﬁgure shows a simpliﬁed block diagram of the output stage of
the transmitter. The antenna behaves exactly like a 50-
 resistor connected
between the output of the ampliﬁer and ground.
Putting It into Practice
L
C
50-Ω
antenna
Amp
© Cengage Learning 2013
You have been asked to determine the values of L and C so that the trans-
mitter operates with the given speciﬁcations. As part of the calculations, deter-
mine the peak current that the inductor must handle and solve for the peak
voltage across the capacitor. For your calculations, assume that the transmitted
signal is a sinusoidal wave.
Transmitter stage of a commercial AM radio station.
Problems
21.1
Series Resonance
1. Consider the circuit of Figure 21–46.
a. Determine the resonant frequency of the circuit in both radians per second
and hertz.
b. Calculate the current, I, at resonance.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

c. Solve for the voltages VR, VL, and VC. (Notice that the voltage VL
includes the voltage dropped across the internal resistance of the coil.)
d. Determine the power (in watts) dissipated by the inductor. (Hint: The
power will not be zero.)
2. Refer to the circuit of Figure 21–47.
a. Determine the resonant frequency of the circuit in both radians per second
and hertz.
b. Calculate the phasor current I at resonance.
c. Determine the power dissipated by the circuit at resonance.
d. Calculate the phasor voltages VL and VR.
e. Write the sinusoidal form of the voltages vL and vR.
3. Consider the circuit of Figure 21–48.
a. Determine the values of R and C such that the circuit has a resonant
frequency of 25 kHz and an rms current of 25 mA at resonance.
b. Calculate the power dissipated by the circuit at resonance.
c. Determine the phasor voltages, VC, VL, and VR at resonance.
d. Write the sinusoidal expressions for the voltages vC, vL, and vR.
Problems
771


C
Rcoil  15 E
10 V∠0
50 E
 L x100 mH
0.68 RF
I


VL

 VC


VR
© Cengage Learning 2013


0.20 sin t
180 mH


VL
0.033 RF
I
60 E


VR
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–46
FIGURE 21–47


625 mV∠0
10 mH


VL
I
R


VR
C
L

 VC
© Cengage Learning 2013


C
Rcoil  2.5 E
5 E
 L x220 RH
i


VL
R
0.075 sin t
f  100 kHz
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–48
FIGURE 21–49
4. Refer to the circuit of Figure 21–49.
a. Determine the capacitance required so that the circuit has a resonant 
frequency of 100 kHz.
b. Solve for the phasor quantities I, VL, and VR.
c. Find the sinusoidal expressions for i, vL, and vR.
d. Determine the power dissipated by each element in the circuit.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

21.2
Quality Factor, Q
5. Refer to the circuit of Figure 21–50.
a. Determine the resonant frequency expressed as q(rads) and f (Hz).
b. Calculate the total impedance, ZT, at resonance.
c. Solve for current I at resonance.
d. Solve for VR, VL, and VC at resonance.
e. Calculate the power dissipated by the circuit and evaluate the reactive
powers, QC and QL.
f. Find the quality factor, QS, of the circuit.
772
Chapter 21 | Resonance


C
Rcoil
2 V∠0
400 pF
L x10 mH
I


VL


VR


VC
 Qcoil x50
R
100 E
© Cengage Learning 2013


C
Rcoil  20 E
0.300 sin t
L x250 mH
i
R
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–50
FIGURE 21–51
6. Suppose that the circuit of Figure 21–51 has a resonant frequency of 
fS  2.5 kHz and a quality factor of QS  10.
a. Determine the values of R and C.
b. Solve for the quality factor of inductor Qcoil.
c. Find ZT, I, VC, and VR at resonance.
d. Solve for the sinusoidal expression of current i at resonance.
e. Calculate the sinusoidal expressions vC and vR at resonance.
f. Calculate the power dissipated by the circuit and determine the reactive
powers, QC and QL.
7. Refer to the circuit of Figure 21–52.
a. Design the circuit to have a resonant frequency of q  50 krads and a
quality factor QS  25.
b. Calculate the power dissipated by the circuit at the resonant frequency.
c. Determine the voltage, VL, across the inductor at resonance.
8. Consider the circuit of Figure 21–53.
a. Design the circuit to have a resonant frequency of q  400 krads and a
quality factor QS  10.
b. Calculate the power dissipated by the circuit at the resonant frequency.
c. Determine the voltage, VL, across the inductor at resonance.


R
C
L
Rcoil
2.5 V∠0


VL
3.6 E
5 m4
© Cengage Learning 2013


R
C  0.01 RF
L
Rcoil
250 RV∠0


VL
7.8 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–52
FIGURE 21–53
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

21.3
Impedance of a Series Resonant Circuit
9. Refer to the series resonant circuit of Figure 21–54.
a. Determine the resonant frequency, qS.
b. Solve for the input impedance, ZT  Z∠v, of the circuit at frequencies of
0.1qS, 0.2qS, 0.5qS, qS, 2qS, 5qS, and 10qS.
c. Using the results from (b), sketch a graph of Z (magnitude in ohms)
versus q (in radians per second) and a graph of v (in degrees) versus q (in
radians per second). If possible, use log-log graph paper for the former
and semilog graph paper for the latter.
d. Using your results from (b), determine the magnitude of current at each of
the given frequencies.
e. Use the results from (d) to plot a graph of I (magnitude in amps) versus q
(in radians per second) on log-log graph paper.
Problems
773


20 V∠0
R
L
10 E
C
1.25 RF
12.5 mH
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–54
10. Repeat Problem 9 if the 10-
 resistor is replaced with a 50-
 resistor.
21.4
Power, Bandwidth, and Selectivity 
of a Series Resonant Circuit
11. Refer to the circuit of Figure 21–55.
a. Find qS, Q, and BW (in radians per second).
b. Calculate the maximum power dissipated by the circuit.
c. From the results obtained in (a) solve for the approximate half-power
frequencies, q1 and q2.
d. Calculate the actual half-power frequencies, q1 and q2, using the compo-
nent values and the appropriate equations.
e. Are the results obtained in (c) and (d) comparable? Explain.
f. Solve for the circuit current, I, and power dissipated at the lower half-
power frequency, q1, determined in (d).


120 V∠0
R
L
100 E
C
0.36 RF
200 mH
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–55
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12. Repeat Problem 11 for the circuit of Figure 21–56.
774
Chapter 21 | Resonance


70.7 sin t
R
L
100 E
C
1 RF
40 mH
I
© Cengage Learning 2013


35.4 sin t
R
L
C
10 mH


vout
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–56
FIGURE 21–57
13. Consider the circuit of Figure 21–57.
a. Calculate the values of R and C for the circuit to have a resonant fre-
quency of 200 kHz and a bandwidth of 16 kHz.
b. Use the designed component values to determine the power dissipated by
the circuit at resonance.
c. Solve for vout at resonance.
14. Repeat Problem 13 if the resonant frequency is to be 580 kHz and the band-
width is 10 kHz.
21.5
Series-to-Parallel RL and RC Conversion
15. Refer to the series networks of Figure 21–58.
a. Find the Q of each network at q  1000 rads.
b. Convert each series RL network into an equivalent parallel network,
having RP and XLP in ohms.
c. Repeat (a) and (b) for q  10 krads.
(a)
10 
240 mH
100 
100 mH
(b)
(c)
2 
25 mH
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–58
16. Consider the series networks of Figure 21–59.
a. Find the Q of each coil at q  20 krads.
b. Convert each series RL network into an equivalent parallel network
consisting of RP and XLP in ohms.
c. Repeat (a) and (b) for q  100 krads.
(a)
1.8 
22 mH
100 
10 mH
(b)
(c)
1 
40 H
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–59
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

17. For the series networks of Figure 21–60, ﬁnd the Q and convert each network
into its parallel equivalent.
Problems
775
(a)
300 
20 
ω  9 krad/s
(b)
90 
45 
ω  100 rad/s
(c)
2500 
500 
ω  377 rad/s
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–60
(a)
68 k
17 k
(b)
12 k
4 k
(c)
100 kE
XL
Q  100
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–61
18. Derive Equations 21–34 and 21–35 that enable us to convert a parallel RL
network into its series equivalent. (Hint: Begin by determining the expression
for the input impedance of the parallel network.)
19. Find the Q of each of the networks of Figure 21–61 and determine the series
equivalent of each. Express all component values in ohms.
(a)
3 k
9 k
(b)
10 k
25 k
(c)
XC
10 kE
Q x3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–62
20. Repeat Problem 19 for the networks of Figure 21–62.
600 E
LP
300 E
LS
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–63
21. Determine the values of LS and LP in henries, given that the networks of
Figure 21–63 are equivalent at a frequency of 250 krads.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

776
Chapter 21 | Resonance
CP
10 kE
1 kE
CS
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–64
22. Determine the values of CS and CP in farads, given that the networks of
Figure 21–64 are equivalent at a frequency of 48 krads.
12.5 nF
2 mA∠0


V
L
R
C
200 mH
20 kE
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–65
21.6
Parallel Resonance
23. Consider the circuit of Figure 21–65.
a. Determine the resonant frequency, qP, in radians per second.
b. Solve for the input impedance, ZT  Z∠v, of the circuit at frequencies of
0.1qP, 0.2qP, 0.5qP, qP, 2qP, 5qP, and 10qP.
c. Using the results obtained in (b), sketch graphs of Z (magnitude in ohms)
versus q (in radians per second) and v (in degrees) versus q. If possible,
use log-log graph paper for the former and semilog for the latter.
d. Using the results from (b), determine the voltage V at each of the indi-
cated frequencies.
e. Sketch a graph of magnitude V versus q on log-log graph paper.
24. Repeat Problem 23 if the 20-k
 resistor is replaced with a 40-k
 resistor.
25. Refer to the circuit shown in Figure 21–66.
a. Determine the resonant frequencies, qP(rads) and fP(Hz).
b. Find the Q of the circuit.
c. Calculate V, IR, IL, and IC at resonance.
d. Determine the power dissipated by the circuit at resonance.
e. Solve for the bandwidth of the circuit in both radians per second and hertz.
f. Sketch the voltage response of the circuit, showing the voltage at the half-
power frequencies.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

26. Repeat Problem 25 for the circuit of Figure 21–67.
Problems
777
100 mA∠0
60 kE
25 nF
25 mH
133 E
IL
IC
IR


V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–66
10 RA
100 kE
10 nF
40 mH
200 E
IL
IC
IR


V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–67
1 mA∠0
IL


V
R1
C
L
Rcoil
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–68
27. Determine the values of R1 and C for the resonant tank circuit of Figure 21–68
so that the given conditions are met. Solve for current IL through the inductor.
L  25 mH, Rcoil  100 
fP  50 kHz
BW  10 kHz
28. Determine the values of R1 and C for the resonant circuit of Figure 21–68 so
that the given conditions are met. Solve for the voltage, V, across the circuit.
L  50 mH, Rcoil  50 
qP  100 krads
BW  10 krads
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

29. Refer to the circuit of Figure 21–69.
a. Determine the value of XL for resonance.
b. Solve for the Q of the circuit.
c. If the circuit has a resonant frequency of 2000 rads, what is the band-
width of the circuit?
d. What must be the values of C and L for the circuit to be resonant at
2000 rads?
e. Calculate the voltage VC at resonance.
778
Chapter 21 | Resonance
6000 E
R1
300 E
1000 E
Rcoil
XL
XC


50 mA∠0
VC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–69
30. Repeat Problem 29 for the circuit of Figure 21–70.
R1
Rcoil
100 E
XL
2 kE
XC


20 mA∠0
400 kE
VC
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 21–70
21.7
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
31. Use PSpice to input the circuit of Figure 21–55. Use the Probe postprocessor
to display the response of the inductor voltage as a function of frequency.
From the display, determine the maximum rms voltage, the resonant fre-
quency, the half-power frequencies, and the bandwidth. Use the results to
determine the quality factor of the circuit.
32. Repeat Problem 31 for the circuit of Figure 21–56.
PSPICE
PSPICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

33. Use PSpice to input the circuit of Figure 21–66. Use the Probe postprocessor
to display the response of the capacitor voltage as a function of frequency.
From the display, determine the maximum rms voltage, the resonant fre-
quency, the half-power frequencies, and the bandwidth. Use the results to
determine the quality factor of the circuit.
34. Repeat Problem 33 for the circuit of Figure 21–67.
35. Use the values of C and L determined in Problem 29 to input the circuit of
Figure 21–69. Use the Probe postprocessor to display the response of the
capacitor voltage as a function of frequency. From the display, determine the
maximum rms voltage, the resonant frequency, the half-power frequencies, and
the bandwidth. Use the results to determine the quality factor of the circuit.
36. Use the values of C and L determined in Problem 30 to input the circuit of
Figure 21–70. Repeat the measurements of Problem 35.
Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
779
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
a. L  320 	H
b. R  20.1 
c. I  0.995 mA∠0
VL  1.20 V∠90
P  20.0 	W
d. f1  595 kHz
f2  605 kHz
e. I  0.700 mA∠45.28
P1  9.85 	W
P1P  0.492 	 0.5
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
a. qS  10 krads
P  500 	W
b. Q  10
BW  1 krads
q1  9.5 krads
q2  10.5 krads
d. qS  10 krads
P  1000 	W
Q  20
BW  0.5 krads
q1  9.75 krads
q2  10.25 krads
e. As resistance decreases, selectivity increases.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
a. XL  200 
RP  1600 
 XC  80 
RP  40 
b. XLS  197 
 RS  24.6 
XCS  16 
 RS  32 
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
a. L  180 	H
b. Rp  28.9 k
c. V  57.9 mV∠0
IL  64.0 	A∠90
P  115 nW
d. f1  788 kHz
f2  813 kHz
e. V  41.1 mV∠44.72
P  58 nW
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Ampliﬁer
Attenuator
Bel
Bode Plots
Cutoff Frequency
Decade
Decibels (dB)
Filter Circuit
Notch Filter
Octave
Power Gain
Transfer Functions
Voltage Gain
I OUTLINE
The Decibel
Multistage Systems
Simple RC and RL Transfer
Functions
The Low-Pass Filter
The High-Pass Filter
The Band-Pass Filter
The Band-Reject Filter
Circuit Analysis Using
Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter you will be able to
• evaluate the power gain and voltage gain of
a given system,
• express power gain and voltage gain in
decibels,
• express power levels in dBm and voltage
levels in dBV and use these levels to
determine power gain and voltage gain,
• identify and design simple (ﬁrst-order) RL
and RC low-pass and high-pass ﬁlters and
explain the principles of operation of each
type of ﬁlter,
• write the standard form of a transfer function
for a given ﬁlter. The circuits that are studied
will include band-pass and band-stop as well
as low- and high-pass circuits,
• compute tc and use the time constant to
determine the cutoff frequency(ies) in both
radians per second and hertz for the transfer
function of any ﬁrst-order ﬁlter,
• sketch the Bode plots showing the frequency
response of voltage gain and phase shift of any
ﬁrst-order ﬁlter,
• use PSpice to verify the operation of any
ﬁrst-order ﬁlter circuit.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

22
FILTERS AND THE BODE PLOT
I
n the previous chapter we examined how LRC resonant circuits react to changes in frequency.
In this chapter we will continue to study how changes in frequency affect the behavior of
other simple circuits. We will analyze simple low-pass, high-pass, band-pass, and band-reject
ﬁlter circuits. The analysis will compare the amplitude and phase shift of the output signal with
respect to the input signal.
As their names imply, low-pass and high-pass ﬁlter circuits are able to pass low frequen-
cies and high frequencies while blocking other frequency components. A good understanding
of these ﬁlters provides a basis for understanding why circuits such as ampliﬁers and oscillo-
scopes are not able to pass all signals from their input to their output.
Band-pass ﬁlters are designed to pass a range of frequencies from the input to the output.
In the previous chapter, we saw that L–C circuits could be used to selectively pass a desired
frequency range around a resonant frequency. In this chapter, we will observe that similar
effects are possible by using only R–C or R–L components. Band-reject ﬁlters, on the other
hand, are used to selectively prevent certain frequencies from appearing at the output, while
allowing both higher and lower frequencies to pass relatively unaffected.
The analysis of all ﬁlters may be simpliﬁed by plotting the output/input voltage relationship
on a semilogarithmic graph called a Bode plot. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

782
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
782
Chapter 3 | Resistance
Putting It in Perspective
Alexander Graham Bell
ALEXANDER GRAHAM BELL WAS BORN in Edinburgh, Scotland on
March 3, 1847. As a young man, Bell followed his father and
grandfather into research dealing with deafness, a condition that
affected both his mother and his wife.
In 1873, Bell was appointed professor of vocal physiology 
at Boston University. His research was primarily involved in con-
verting sound waves into electrical ﬂuctuations. With the encour-
agement of Joseph Henry, who had done a great deal of work
with inductors, Bell eventually developed the telephone.
In his now-famous accident in which Bell spilled acid on him-
self, Bell uttered the words “Watson, please come here. I want
you.” Watson, who was on another ﬂoor, ran to Bell’s assistance.
Although others had worked on the principle of the telephone,
Alexander Graham Bell was awarded the patent for the telephone
in 1876. The telephone he constructed was a simple device that
passed a current through carbon powder. The density of the
carbon powder was determined by air ﬂuctuations due to the
sound of a person’s voice. When the carbon was compressed, resistivity would decrease, allow-
ing more current.
Bell’s name has been adopted for the decibel, which is the unit used to describe sound inten-
sities and power gain.
Although the invention of the telephone made Bell wealthy, he continued experimenting in
electronics, air conditioning, and animal breeding. Bell died at the age of 75 in Baddeck, Nova
Scotia, on August 2, 1922. I
In electronics, we often wish to consider the effects of a circuit without exam-
ining the actual operation of the circuit itself. This black-box approach is a
common technique used to simplify transistor circuits and to depict integrated
circuits that may contain hundreds or even thousands of elements. Consider the
system shown in Figure 22–1.
22.1 The Decibel
Library of Congress/Science Faction/Getty Images
FIGURE 22–1
R


Vout
Iout


Vin
Iin
Zin
Input
terminals
Output
terminals
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Although the circuit within the box may contain many elements, any source
connected to the input terminals will effectively see only the input impedance,
Zin. Similarly, any load impedance, RL, connected to the output terminals will
have voltage and current determined by certain parameters in the circuit. These
parameters usually result in an output at the load that is easily predicted for
certain conditions.
We now define several terms that are used to analyze any system having
two input terminals and two output terminals.
The power gain, AP, is defined as the ratio of output signal power to the
input signal power:
AP  
P
P
o
i
u
n
t
(22–1)
We must emphasize that the total output power delivered to any load can
never exceed the total input power to a circuit. When we refer to the power gain
of a system, we are interested in only the power contained in the ac signal, so
we neglect any power due to dc. In many circuits, the ac power will be signif-
icantly less than the dc power. However, ac power gains in the order of tens of
thousands are quite possible.
The voltage gain, Av, is defined as the ratio of output signal voltage to the
input signal voltage:
Av  
V
V
o
i
u
n
t
(22–2)
As mentioned, the power gain of a system may be a very large. For other
applications the output power may be much smaller than the input power,
resulting in a loss, or attenuation. Any circuit in which the output signal power
is greater than the input signal power is referred to as an ampliﬁer. Conversely,
any circuit in which the output signal power is less than the input signal power
is referred to as an attenuator.
The ratios expressing power gain or voltage gain may be either very large
or very small, making it inconvenient to express the power gain as a simple ratio
of two numbers. The bel, which is a logarithmic unit named after Alexander
Graham Bell, was selected to represent a tenfold increase or decrease in power.
Stated mathematically, the power gain in bels is given as
AP(bels)  log10
P
P
o
i
u
n
t
Because the bel is an awkwardly large unit, the decibel (dB), which is one
tenth of a bel, has been adopted as a more acceptable unit for describing the
logarithmic change in power levels. One bel contains 10 decibels and so the
power gain in decibels is given as
AP(dB)  10 log10
P
P
o
i
u
n
t
(22–3)
If the power level in the system increases from the input to the output,
then the gain in dB will be positive. If the power at the output is less than the
power at the input, then the power gain will be negative. Notice that if the
input and output have the same power levels, then the power gain will be 0 dB,
since log 1  0.
Section 22.1 | The Decibel
783
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

784
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
EXAMPLE 22–1       
An ampliﬁer has the indicated input and output power levels. Determine the
power gain both as a ratio and in dB for each of the conditions:
a. Pin  1 mW, Pout  100 W
b. Pin  4 W, Pout  2 W
c. Pin  6 mW, Pout  12 mW
d. Pin  25 mW, Pout  2.5 mW
Solution
a.
AP  
P
P
o
i
u
n
t  
1
1
0
m
0
W
W
  100 000
AP(dB)  10 log10(100 000)  (10)(5)  50 dB
b.
AP  
P
P
o
i
u
n
t  
2
4


W
W
  0.5
AP(dB)  10 log10(0.5)  (10)(0.30)  3.0 dB
c.
AP  
P
P
o
i
u
n
t  
1
6
2
m
m
W
W
  2
AP(dB)  10 log102  (10)(0.30)  3.0 dB
d.
AP  
P
P
o
i
u
n
t  
2
2
.
5
5
m
m
W
W
  0.10
AP(dB)  10 log100.10  (10)(1)  10 dB
The previous example illustrates that if the power is increased or decreased
by a factor of two, the resultant power gain will be either 3 dB or 3 dB,
respectively. You will recall that in the previous chapter a similar reference was
made when the half-power frequencies of a resonant circuit were referred to as
the 3-dB down frequencies.
The voltage gain of a system may also be expressed in dB. In order to
derive the expression for voltage gain, we first assume that the input resistance
and the load resistance are the same value. Then, using the definition of power
gain as given by Equation 22–3, we have the following:
AP(dB)  10 log10
P
P
o
i
u
n
t
 10 log10
V
V
2o
2
i
u
n
t


R
R

 10 log10
V
V
o
i
u
n
t
2
which gives
AP(dB)  20 log10
V
V
o
i
u
n
t
Because the preceding expression represents a decibel equivalent of the
voltage gain, we simply write the voltage gain in dB as follows:
Av(dB)  20 log10
V
V
o
i
u
n
t
(22–4)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 22.1 | The Decibel
785
EXAMPLE 22–2        
The ampliﬁer circuit of Figure 22–2 has the given conditions. Calculate the
voltage gain and power gain in dB.
Zin  10 k	
RL  600 	
Vin  20 mVrms
Vout  500 mVrms
Solution
The voltage gain of the ampliﬁer is
Av  20 log10
V
V
o
i
u
n
t
 20 log10
5
2
0
0
0
m
m
V
V
  20 log1025  28.0 dB
The signal power available at the input of the ampliﬁer is
Pin  
V
Zi
2i
n
n  
(2
1
0
0
m
k
V)2
  0.040 W
The signal at the output of the ampliﬁer has a power of
Pout  
V
R
2o
L
ut  
(50
6
0
00
m

V)2
  416.7 W
The power gain of the ampliﬁer is
AP  10 log10
P
P
o
i
u
n
t
 10 log10
4
0
1
.0
6
4
.7
0


W
W

 10 log10(10 417)  40.2 dB
FIGURE 22–2
RL


Vout


Vin
Zin
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In order to convert a gain from decibels into a simple ratio of power or
voltage, it is necessary to perform the inverse operation of the logarithm;
namely, solve the unknown quantity by using the exponential. Recall that the
following logarithmic and exponential operations are equivalent:
y  logbx
x  by
Using the preceding expressions, Equations 22–3 and 22–4 may be used to
determine expressions for power and voltage gains as follows:

A
1
P(
0
dB)
  log10
P
P
o
i
u
n
t

P
P
o
i
u
n
t  10AP(dB)10
(22–5)

A
2
v(
0
dB)
  log10
V
V
o
i
u
n
t

V
V
o
i
u
n
t  10Av(dB)20
(22–6)
786
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
Calculate the voltage gain and power gain (in dB) for the ampliﬁer of Figure 22–2,
given the following conditions:
Zin  2 k	
RL  5 	
Vin  16 Vrms
Vout  32 Vrms
Answers
66.0 dB, 92.0 dB
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
EXAMPLE 22–3       
Convert the following from decibels to ratios:
a. AP  25 dB
b. AP  6 dB
c. Av  10 dB
d. Av  6 dB
Solution
a.
AP  
P
P
o
i
u
n
t  10AP(dB)10
 102510  316
b.
AP  10AP(dB)10
 10610  0.251
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Applications of Decibels
Decibels were originally intended as a measure of changes in acoustical levels.
The human ear is not a linear instrument; rather, it responds to sounds in a log-
arithmic fashion. Because of this peculiar phenomenon, a tenfold increase in
sound intensity results in a perceived doubling of sound. This means that if we
wish to double the sound heard from a 10-W power amplifier, we must increase
the output power to 100 W.
The minimum sound level which may be detected by the human ear is
called the threshold of hearing and is usually taken to be I0  1 
 1012 Wm2.
Table 22–1 lists approximate sound intensities of several common sounds. The
decibel levels are determined from the expression
b(dB)  10 log10I
I
0

Some electronic circuits operate with very small power levels. These
power levels may be referenced to some arbitrary level and then expressed in
decibels in a manner similar to how sound intensities are represented. For
instance, power levels may be referenced to a standard power of 1 mW. In such
cases, the power level is expressed in dBm and is determined as
PdBm  10 log10
1 m
P
W

(22–7)
If a power level is referenced to a standard of 1 W, then we have
PdBW  10 log10
1
P
W

(22–8)
Section 22.1 | The Decibel
787
c.
Av  
V
V
o
i
u
n
t  10Av(dB)20
 101020  3.16
d.
Av  10Av(dB)20
 10620  0.501
© Cengage Learning 2013
Sound
Intensity Level (dB)
Intensity (Wm2)
threshold of hearing, I0
0
1012
virtual silence
10
1011
quiet room
20
1010
watch ticking at 1 m
30
109
quiet street
40
108
quiet conversation
50
107
quiet motor at 1 m
60
106
busy trafﬁc
70
105
door slamming
80
104
busy ofﬁce room
90
103
jackhammer
100
102
motorcycle
110
101
loud indoor rock concert
120
1
threshold of pain
130
10
TABLE 22–1
Intensity Levels of Common Sounds
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Many voltmeters have a separate scale calibrated in decibels. In such cases,
the voltage expressed in dBV uses 1 Vrms as the reference voltage. In general,
any voltage reading may be expressed in dBV as follows:
VdBV  20 log10
1
Vo
V
ut
(22–9)
788
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
EXAMPLE 22–4       
Express the following powers in dBm and in dBW:
a. P1  0.35 W
b. P2  20 mW
c. P3  1000 W
d. P4  1 pW
Solution
a.
P1(dBm)  10 log10
0.
1
35
m

W
W
  34.6 dBm
P1(dBW)  10 log10
0.3
1
5
W
W
  64.6 dBW
b.
P2(dBm)  10 log10
2
1
0
m
m
W
W
  13.0 dBm
P2(dBW)  10 log10
20
1
m
W
W
  17.0 dBW
c.
P3(dBm)  10 log10
1
1
00
m
0
W
W
  60 dBm
P3(dBW)  10 log10
10
1
00
W
W
  30 dBW
d.
P4(dBm)  10 log10
1
1
m
pW
W
  90 dBm
P4(dBW)  10 log10
1
1
p
W
W
  120 dBW
Consider the resistors of Figure 22–3.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
FIGURE 22–3
50 


10 V
(a)
2 kE


20 mV
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
a. Determine the power levels in dBm and in dBW.
b. Express the voltages in dBV.
Answers
a. 33.0 dBm (3.0 dBW), 37.0 dBm (67.0 dBW)
b. 20.0 dBV, 34.0 dBV
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 22.2 | Multistage Systems
789
Quite often a system consists of several stages. In order to ﬁnd the total volt-
age gain or power gain of the system, we would need to solve for the product
of the individual gains. The use of decibels makes the solution of a multistage
system easy to ﬁnd. If the gain of each stage is given in decibels, then the resul-
tant gain is simply determined as the summation of the individual gains.
Consider the system of Figure 22–4, which represents a three-stage
system.
22.2 Multistage
Systems
FIGURE 22–4
The power at the output of each stage is determined as follows:
P1  AP1 Pin
P2  AP2 P1
Pout  AP3 P2
The total power gain of the system is found as
APT  
P
P
o
i
u
n
t  
AP
P
3
in
P2

 
AP3 (
P
A
i
P
n
2 P1)

 
AP3 AP
P
2
i
(
n
AP1Pin)

 AP1 AP2 AP3
In general, for n stages the total power gain is found as the product:
APT  AP1 AP2 … APn
(22–10)
However, if we use logarithms to solve for the gain in decibels, we have the
following:
APT(dB)  10 log10APT
 10 log10 (AP1 AP2 … APn)
APT(dB)  10 log10AP1  10 log10AP2  …  10 log10APn
The total power gain in decibels for n stages is determined as the summa-
tion of the individual decibel power gains:
AP(dB)  AP1(dB)  AP2(dB)  …  APn(dB)
(22–11)
The advantage of using decibels in solving for power gains and power levels is
illustrated in the following example.
AP3
P1
P2
Pout
Pin
AP1
AP2
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

790
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
EXAMPLE 22–5       
The block diagram of Figure 22–5 represents the ﬁrst three stages of a typical
AM or FM receiver.
Find the following quantities:
a. AP1(dB), AP2(dB), and AP3(dB)
b. APT(dB)
c. P1, P2, and Pout
d. Pin(dBm), P1(dBm), P2(dBm), and Pout(dBm)
Solution
a.
AP1(dB)  10 log10AP1  10 log10100  20 dB
AP2(dB)  log10AP2  10 log100.2  7.0 dB
AP3(dB)  10 log10AP3  10 log10(10 000)  40 dB
b.
APT(dB)  AP1(dB)  AP2(dB)  AP3(dB)
 20 dB  7.0 dB  40 dB
 53.0 dB
c.
P1  AP1Pin  (100) (1 pW)  100 pW
P2  AP2P1  (100 pW)(0.2)  20 pW
Pout  AP3P2  (10 000)(20 pW)  0.20 W
d.
Pin(dBm)  10 log10
1
P
m
in
W
  10 log10 
1
1
m
pW
W
  90 dBm
P1(dBm)  10 log10

1 m
P1
W
  10 log10 
1
1
00
m
p
W
W
  70 dBm
P2(dBm)  10 log10
1 m
P2
W
  10 log10 
2
1
0
m
p
W
W
  77.0 dBm
Pout(dBm)  10 log10
1
P
m
ou
W
t  10 log10 
0.
1
20
m

W
W
  37.0 dBm
Notice that the power level (in dBm) at the output of any stage is easily
determined as the sum of the input power level (in dBm) and the gain of the
stage (in dB). It is for this reason that many communication circuits express
power levels in decibels rather than in watts.
FIGURE 22–5
AP1
AP3
P1
P2
Pout
Pin
10 000
0.200
100
IF amplifier
RF amplifier
Mixer
1 pW
Antenna
AP2
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 22.3 | Simple RC and RL Transfer Functions
791
Calculate the power level at the output of each of the stages in Figure 22–6.
Answers
P1  62 dBm, P2  72 dBm, P3  45 dBm
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
FIGURE 22–6
AP2
P1
P2
P3
Vin 
10xRVrms
0.10
Ap3
500
AP1
25 dB
Zin  50 E
RL
1 kE
AP3
500
© Cengage Learning 2013
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
1. Given that an ampliﬁer has a power gain of 25 dB, calculate the output power
level (in dBm) for the following input characteristics:
a. Vin  10 mVrms, Zin  50 	
b. Vin  10 mVrms, Zin  1 k	
c. Vin  400 Vrms, Zin  200 	
2. Given ampliﬁers with the following output characteristics, determine the
output voltage (in volts rms).
a. Pout  8.0 dBm, RL  50 	
b. Pout  16.0 dBm, RL  2 k	
c. Pout  16.0 dBm, RL  5 k	
Electronic circuits usually operate in a highly predictable fashion. If a certain
signal is applied at the input of a system, the output will be determined by the
physical characteristics of the circuit. The frequency of the incoming signal is
one of the many physical conditions that determine the relationship between a
given input signal and the resulting output. Although outside the scope of this
text, other conditions that may determine the relationship between the input
and output signals of a given circuit are temperature, light, and radiation.
For any system subjected to a sinusoidal input voltage, as shown in
Figure 22–7, we define the transfer function as the ratio of the output voltage
phasor to the input voltage phasor for any frequency q (in radians per second).
TF(q)  
V
V
o
i
u
n
t  Av∠v
(22–12)
Notice that the definition of transfer function is almost the same as voltage
gain. The difference is that the transfer function takes into account both ampli-
tude and phase shift of the voltages, whereas voltage gain is a comparison of
only the amplitudes.
22.3 Simple RC and
RL Transfer
Functions
FIGURE 22–7


Vout


Vin
TF  Vout  Av∠q
Vin
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

From Equation 22–12 we see that the amplitude of the transfer function is in
fact the voltage gain, a scalar quantity. The phase angle, v, represents the phase
shift between the input and output voltage phasors. The angle v will be positive
if the output leads the input and negative if the output lags the input waveform.
If the elements within the block of Figure 22–7 are resistors, then the
output and the input voltages will always be in phase. Also, since resistors have
the same value at all frequencies, the voltage gain will remain constant at all
frequencies. (This text does not take into account resistance variations due to
very high frequencies.) The resulting circuit is called an attenuator since resis-
tance within the block will dissipate some power, thereby reducing (or attenu-
ating) the signal as it passes through the circuit.
If the elements within the block are combinations of resistors, inductors,
and capacitors, then the output voltage and phase will depend on frequency
since the impedances of inductors and capacitors are frequency dependent.
Figure 22–8 illustrates an example of how voltage gain and phase shift of a cir-
cuit may change as a function of frequency.
In order to examine the operation of the circuit over a wide range of fre-
quencies, the abscissa (horizontal axis) is usually shown as a logarithmic scale.
The ordinate (vertical axis) is generally shown as a linear scale in decibels or
degrees. The semilogarithmic graphs showing the frequency response of filters
are referred to as Bode plots and are extremely useful in predicting and under-
standing the operation of filters. Similar graphs are used to predict the opera-
tion of amplifiers and many other electronic components.
By examining the frequency response of a circuit, we are able to deter-
mine at a glance the voltage gain (in dB) and phase shift (in degrees) for any
sinusoidal input at a given frequency. For example, at a frequency of 1000 Hz,
the voltage gain is 20 dB and the phase shift is 45. This means that the
output signal is one-tenth as large as the input signal and the output leads the
input by 45.
From the frequency response of Figure 22–8, we see that the circuit that cor-
responds to this response is able to pass low-frequency signals, while at the same
time partially attenuating high-frequency signals. Any circuit that passes a par-
ticular range of frequencies while blocking others is referred to as a ﬁlter circuit.
Filter circuits are usually named according to their function, although certain fil-
ters are named after their inventors. The filter having the response of Figure 22–8
is referred to as a stepfilter, since the voltage gain occurs between two limits
(steps). Other types of filters that are used regularly in electrical and electronic
circuits include low-pass, high-pass, band-pass, and band-reject filters.
Although the design of filters is a topic in itself, we will examine Bode
plots of a few common types of filters that are used in electronic circuits.
Sketching Bode Plots
In order to understand the operation of a filter (or any other frequency-dependent
system) it is helpful to first sketch the Bode plots. All first-order systems
(namely those consisting of R-C or R-L combinations) have transfer functions
that are constructed from only four possible forms (and perhaps a constant). If
voltage gain is expressed in decibels, we find that the Bode plots of more com-
plex expressions are simply determined as the arithmetic sum of these simple
forms. We begin by examining the four possible forms, and then we will com-
bine these forms to determine the frequency responses of more complicated
transfer functions. In each of the forms, the value of tau (t) is simply a time
constant determined by the components of the circuit.
One important consideration of transfer functions is that the boundary
conditions must always be satisfied. The boundary conditions of a transfer
792
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
FIGURE 22–8
Frequency response of a
circuit.
1000
100
10
10 k 100 k
f (Hz)
0
20
40
Av (dB)
(a) Voltage gain as a function of frequency
1000
100
10
10 k 100 k
90
45
q()
f (Hz)
(b) Phase shift as a function of frequency
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

function or filter circuit are determined by examining the characteristics when
q  0 rads and as q →.
1. TF  jqt  qt∠90
The voltage gain of the preceding transfer function is AV  qt. By examin-
ing the boundary conditions, we see that the voltage gain is Av  0 when 
q  0 and Av   as q →. (Although a transfer function consisting of only
this term cannot occur for real systems, it is an important component when
combined with other terms.) In decibels, the voltage gain becomes [AV]dB 
20 log qt. Notice that the voltage gain of this expression increases as the fre-
quency is increased.
At a frequency of q  1t, the transfer function is evaluated as TF 
j1  1∠90. The voltage gain is AV  1, which is equivalent to [AV]dB 
20 log 1  0 dB.
If the frequency is increased by a factor of 10 (increasing by one
decade) to q  10t, the transfer function becomes TF  j10  10∠90.
The voltage gain of AV  10 is equivalent to [AV]dB  20 log 10  20 dB.
This illustrates that the gain of the transfer function increases at a rate of
20 dBdecade. Had the frequency been doubled (increasing by one octave),
the transfer function would have been TF  j2  2∠90. The voltage gain
AV  2 is equivalent to [AV]dB  20 log 2  6 dB. This illustrates that the
gain of the transfer function increases at a rate of 6 dBoctave. (Hence, a
slope of 20 dBdecade is equivalent to 6 dBoctave.)
For the given transfer function, the phase angle (of the output voltage
relative to the input voltage) is a constant 90. Consequently, a sinusoidal
signal applied at the input will result in an output signal that always leads
the input by 90.
The Bode plots for the transfer function appear as shown in Figure 22–9.
2. TF  1  jqt
Examining the preceding expression, we determine that the magnitude of
this transfer function also increases as q is increased. However, unlike the
previous transfer function form, the magnitude of this transfer function can
never be less than 1. For small values of frequency, q the real term
“swamps” the imaginary term, resulting in TF  1  j0  1∠0. For large
values of frequency the opposite happens; the imaginary term “swamps”
the real term, resulting in TF  jqt  qt∠90.
Now, the question is “What do we mean by a small frequency and large
frequency?” Let’s examine what happens at a frequency of qc  1t.
Section 22.3 | Simple RC and RL Transfer Functions
793
FIGURE 22–9
[Av]dB
ω
rad/s
1 decade
40
20
0
–20
–40
(a) Voltage gain response for transfer
functions of the form TF = jωτ
1/100τ
1/10τ
1/τ
10/τ
100/τ
20 dB/decade
θ
ω
rad/s
90°
45°
0°
(b) Phase shift response for transfer
functions of the form TF = jωτ
1/100τ
1/10τ
1/τ
10/τ
100/τ
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

At this frequency, the transfer function simply becomes TF  1  j1 
2∠45. The voltage gain is equivalent to Av  20 log—
2  3.0 dB. The
frequency qc  1t is often referred to as the cutoff frequency, the criti-
cal frequency, or the break frequency. If we were to decrease the fre-
quency so that it was one-tenth of the cutoff frequency we would have TF
 1  j0.1  1.005∠5.71. Two very important characteristics become
evident for frequencies below the cutoff frequency:
i. The voltage gain is essentially constant at Av  1  0 dB and
ii. The phase shift below 0.1qc is essentially constant at 0.
Next, let’s examine what happens at a frequency q  10qc. At this
higher frequency, the transfer function becomes TF  1  j10 
10.05∠84.29. The voltage gain is equivalent to Av  20 log10.05 
20.04 dB. Further analysis would show that at q  100 qc, the voltage gain
is 40 dB. Two very important characteristics become evident for frequen-
cies above the cutoff frequency:
i. The voltage gain rises at a rate of 20 dBdecade  6 dBoctave and
ii. The phase shift above 10qc is essentially constant at 90.
When sketching the Bode plots for this transfer function, we approx-
imate the voltage gain response as 0 dB for all frequencies less than qc 
1t and rising at a rate of 20 dBdecade for all frequencies above qc  1t.
The phase shift response is a bit more complicated. The phase shift is
approximated as 0 for q  0.1qc and as 90 for q  10qc. In the region
between 0.1qc and 10qc, the phase shift is approximated as 45decade.
Figure 22–10 illustrates both the straight-line approximations and the
actual curves for a transfer function of the form TF  1  jqt.
794
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
FIGURE 22–10
[Av]dB
ω
rad/s
3dB
40
20
0
–20
–40
(a) Voltage gain response for transfer
functions of the form TF = 1 + jωτ
1/100τ
1/10τ
1/τ
10/τ
100/τ
20 dB/decade
θ
ω
rad/s
90°
45°
0°
(b) Phase shift response for transfer
functions of the form TF = 1 + jωτ
1/100τ
1/10τ
1/τ
10/τ
100/τ
© Cengage Learning 2013
3. TF 
A transfer function of this form can also be written as TF 

∠90, which illustrates that the voltage gain is inﬁnitely large when
q  0 and decreases as the frequency increases. Due to the j-operator in
the denominator, it is also apparent that the phase shift is 90 for all fre-
quencies. (Once again, no real system of electronic components will have
1
qt
1
qt∠90
1
jqt
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a transfer function consisting of only this term.) The Bode plots for trans-
fer functions of the type TF 
are shown in Figure 22–11.
1
jqt
Section 22.3 | Simple RC and RL Transfer Functions
795
FIGURE 22–11
[Av]dB
ω
rad/s
40
20
0
–20
–40
(a) Voltage gain response for transfer
1/100τ
1/10τ
1/τ
10/τ
100/τ
–20 dB/decade
jωτ
1
functions of the form TF = 
θ
ω
rad/s
0°
–45°
–90°
(b) Phase shift response for transfer
1/100τ
1/10τ
1/τ
10/τ
100/τ
jωτ
1
functions of the form TF =
© Cengage Learning 2013
4. TF 
The magnitude of this transfer function decreases as q is increased. However,
unlike the previous transfer function form, the voltage gain of this transfer
function can never be greater than 1. For small values of q the real term
“swamps” the imaginary term, resulting in TF  
 
 1∠0.
For large values of frequency the opposite happens; the imaginary term
“swamps” the real term, resulting in TF  


∠90.
Once again, the cutoff frequency occurs at qc  1t. At this frequency,
the transfer function results in a value of TF 


1
2∠45
1
1  j1
1
qt
1
qt∠90
1
jqt
1
1∠0
1
1  j0
1
1  jqt
0.7071∠45. At the cutoff frequency, the voltage gain (in decibels) is
found to be Av  20 log 0.7071  3.0 dB. For a ﬁlter having this trans-
fer function, we see that the output power at the cutoff frequency is 3 dB
down from its maximum value. You will recall that a “gain” of 3 dB
results in an output power that is half of the maximum power.
For a ﬁlter having a transfer function of the form TF 
, two
characteristics are evident for frequencies below the cutoff frequency:
i. The voltage gain is essentially constant at Av  1  0 dB and
ii. The phase shift below 0.1qc is essentially constant at 0.
For frequencies above the cutoff frequency:
i. The voltage gain drops at a rate of 20 dBdecade  6 dBoctave and
ii. The phase shift above 10qc is essentially constant at 90.
When sketching the Bode plots for this transfer function, we approxi-
mate the voltage gain response as 0 dB for all frequencies less than qc 
1t and decreasing at a rate of 20 dBdecade for all frequencies above 
qc  1t. The phase shift is approximated as 0 for q  0.1qc and as 90
1
1  jqt
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

for q  10qc. In the region between 0.1qc and 10qc, the phase shift is
approximated as having a slope of 45decade. Figure 22–12 shows the
straight-line approximations and the actual curves for a transfer function
of the form TF 
.
1
1  jqt
796
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
FIGURE 22–12
[Av]dB
ω
rad/s
40
20
0
–20
–40
(a) Voltage gain response for transfer
1/100τ
1/10τ
10/τ
100/τ
–20 dB/decade
3 dB
1/τ
1 + jωτ
1
 functions of the form TF = 
θ
ω
rad/s
0°
–45°
–90°
(b) Phase shift response for transfer
1/100τ
1/10τ
1/τ
10/τ
100/τ
functions of the form TF =1 + jωτ
1
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 22–6       
Given TF 
a. Determine the boundary conditions.
b. Calculate the cutoff frequency in rads and in Hz.
c. Sketch the straight-line approximation of the voltage gain response.
d. Sketch the straight-line approximation of the phase shift response.
Solution
a. When q  0, the transfer function simpliﬁes to TF  10  10 ∠0. The
voltage gain will be Av  20 log 10  20 dB and the phase shift is 0. As
q →, the magnitude of the transfer function approaches zero and the
phase shift will be 90 (since the real term in the denominator will be
swamped by the imaginary term).
b. The cutoff frequency is determined as
qc 

 1000 rads
( fc  qc2p  159.15 Hz)
c. The voltage gain response is shown in Figure 22–13.
1
0.001
1
t
10
1  j0.001q
Now we are ready to see how these various transfer function forms can be com-
bined to sketch transfer functions of real circuits.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 22.3 | Simple RC and RL Transfer Functions
797
Note: By examining the response curves for the given transfer function, we see
that this represents the characteristics of a low-pass ﬁlter. The notable exception
is that a passive ﬁlter (consisting of only resistors, capacitors, or inductors) cannot
have a voltage gain larger than unity (Av  1). Consequently, we must conclude
that the ﬁlter includes an active component such as a transistor or an operational
ampliﬁer.
FIGURE 22–13
[Av]dB
ω
rad/s
40
20
0
–20
–40
10
100
10k
100k
1000
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 22–14
θ
ω
rad/s
0°
–45°
–90°
10
100
1000
10k
100k
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 22–7        
Given TF 
a. Determine the boundary conditions.
b. Calculate the cutoff frequency in rads and in Hz.
c. Sketch the straight-line approximation of the voltage gain response.
d. Sketch the straight-line approximation of the phase shift response.
Solution
a. When q  0, the numerator of the transfer function is j0 and the
denominator is 1. Therefore the entire transfer function simplies to TF 
j0  0∠90. This indicates that for low frequencies, the voltage gain is
very low, and that there is a 90 phase shift. As q →, the numerator will
be j0.001q, while the denominator simpliﬁes to j0.002q (since the real
term is swamped). The reluctant transfer function will be simpliﬁed as
TF  0.5  0.5∠0. This corresponds to a gain Av  20 log 0.5  6.0 dB
and a phase shift of 0.
j0.001q
1  j0.002q
d. The phase shift response is shown in Figure 22–14.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Another important consideration when sketching Bode plots is to remem-
ber that the boundary conditions of the frequency response curves must satisfy
the calculated boundary conditions for the transfer function. Upon inspection
of Figure 22–15, we see that for high frequencies (those above 500 rads) the
voltage gain is 6 dB. This is precisely the value calculated from the transfer
function. Similarly, we see that the phase response curve of Figure 22–16 sat-
isfies the boundary conditions of 90 for q  0 and 0 as q →, respectively.
798
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
b. The given transfer function has two primary frequencies of interest.
The first is due to the numerator, which results in the straight-line
component having a gain of 0 dB when q  1000 rads. The second
frequency is due to the denominator, resulting in a cutoff frequency of
q  500 rads (f  79.6 Hz).
c. Figure 22–15 shows the straight-line approximations of the voltage gain
due to each term in the transfer function as well as the resultant straight-
line approximation of the combination. (Resultant in red.)
d. Figure 22–16 shows the phase response of the individual terms as well as
the resultant combined effect. (Resultant in red.)
Note: The results of this example illustrate that frequency response plots of
transfer functions are determined by arithmetically combining the results due
to each component of the transfer function. Although the resultant plots may
occasionally be complicated, it is important to realize that simple addition is
used in all cases.
FIGURE 22–15
[Av]dB
ω
rad/s
40
20
0
–20
–6
–40
10
50 100
500
10k
50k 100k
1k
5k
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 22–16
θ
ω
rad/s
90
45
0
–45
–90
10
50 100
500
10k
50k100k
1k
5k
© Cengage Learning 2013
Sketch the straight-line approximation for each of the transfer functions given.
a. TF  1  j0.02q
b. TF  
1 
1
j0
0
.
0
005q

c. TF 
20(
1
1


j
j
0
0
.0
.0
2
0
q
2q)

PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Writing Transfer Functions
The transfer function of any circuit is found by following a few simple steps.
As we have already seen, a properly written transfer function allows us to
easily calculate the cutoff frequencies and quickly sketch the corresponding
Bode plot for the circuit. The steps are as follows:
1. Determine the boundary conditions for the given circuit by solving for the
voltage gain when the frequency is zero (dc) and when the frequency
approaches inﬁnity. The boundary conditions are found by using the follow-
ing approximations:
At q  0,
inductors are short circuits,
capacitors are open circuits.
At q →,
inductors are open circuits,
capacitors are short circuits.
Section 22.3 | Simple RC and RL Transfer Functions
799
Answers
FIGURE 22–17
40
20
0
0.5
5
50
500
5 k
Av (dB)
ω (rad/s)
(a)
90
45
0
0.5
5
50
500
5 k
θ (deg)
ω (rad/s)
© Cengage Learning 2013
0
25
25
40
20
200
2 k
20 k
200 k
Av (dB)
ω (rad/s)
(b)
0
45
90
20
200
2 k
20 k
200 k
θ (deg)
ω (rad/s)
© Cengage Learning 2013
(c)
Av (dB)
0
20
6
26
40
5
50
500
5 k
50 k 500 k
 (rad/s)
90
45
0
0.5
 (rad/s)
5
50
500
5 k
50 k 500 k
q (deg)
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

By using the preceding approximations, all capacitors and inductors
are easily removed from the circuit. The resulting voltage gain is deter-
mined for each boundary condition by simply applying the voltage divider
rule.
2. Use the voltage divider rule to write the general expression for the trans-
fer function in terms of the frequency, q. In order to simplify the algebra,
all capacitive and inductive reactance vectors are written as follows:
ZC  jq
1
C

and
ZL  jqL
3. Simplify the resulting transfer function so that it is in the following format:
TF 
Once the function is in this format, it is good practice to verify the bound-
ary conditions found in Step 1. The boundary conditions are determined
algebraically by ﬁrst letting q  0 and then solving for the resulting dc
voltage gain. Next, we let q →. The various (1  jqt) terms of the
transfer function may now be approximated as simply jqt, since the imag-
inary terms will be much larger (10) than the real components. The
resultant gain will give the high-frequency gain.
4. Determine the break frequency(ies) at q  1t (in radians per second)
where the time constants will be expressed as either t  RC or t  LR.
5. Sketch the straight-line approximation by separately considering the
effects of each term in the transfer function.
6. Sketch the actual response of the circuit from the approximation. The
actual voltage gain response will be a smooth, continuous curve which
follows the asymptotic curve but usually has a 3-dB difference at the cutoff
frequency(ies). This approximation will not apply if two cutoff
frequencies are separated by less than a decade. The actual phase shift
response will have the same value as the straight-line approximation at the
cutoff frequency. At frequencies one decade above and one decade below
the cutoff frequency, the actual phase shift will be 5.71 from the straight-
line approximation.
These steps will now be used in analyzing several important types of filters.
( jqtZ1)(1  jqtZ2) … (1  jqtZn)

( jqtP1)(1  jqtP2) … (1  jqtPm)
800
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
The RC Low-Pass Filter
The circuit of Figure 22–18 is referred to as a low-pass RC filter circuit since
it permits low-frequency signals to pass from the input to the output while
attenuating high-frequency signals.
At low frequencies, the capacitor has a very large reactance.
Consequently, at low frequencies the capacitor is essentially an open circuit
resulting in the voltage across the capacitor, Vout, to be essentially equal to the
applied voltage, Vin.
At high frequencies, the capacitor has a very small reactance, which essen-
tially short-circuits the output terminals. The voltage at the output will there-
fore approach zero as the frequency increases. Although we are able to easily
22.4 The Low-Pass
Filter
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

predict what happens at the two extremes of frequency, called the boundary
conditions, we do not yet know what occurs between the two extremes.
The circuit of Figure 22–18 is easily analyzed by applying the voltage
divider rule. Namely,
Vout  
R 
ZC
ZC
Vin
In order to simplify the algebra, the reactance of a capacitor is expressed as
follows:
ZC  jq
1
C
  jjq
j
C
  jq
1
C

(22–13)
The transfer function for the circuit of Figure 22–18 is now evaluated as follows:
TF(q)  
V
V
o
i
u
n
t 

 
1 
1
jqRC

We define the cutoff frequency, qc, as the frequency at which the output
power is equal to half of the maximum output power (3 dB down from the
maximum). This frequency occurs when the output voltage has an amplitude
which is 0.7071 of the input voltage. For the RC circuit, the cutoff frequency
occurs at
qc  1
t
  R
1
C

(22–14)
Then the transfer function is written as
TF(q) 
(22–15)
The previous transfer function results in the Bode plot shown in
Figure 22–19.
Notice that the abscissas (horizontal axes) of the graphs in Figure 22–19
are shown as a ratio of qqc. Such a graph is called a normalized plot, and it
eliminates the need to determine the actual cutoff frequency, qc. The normal-
ized plot will have the same values for all low-pass RC filters. The actual fre-
quency response of the RC low-pass filter can be approximated from the
straight-line approximation by using the following guidelines:
1. At low frequencies (qqc  0.1) the voltage gain is approximately 0 dB
with a phase shift of about 0. This means that the output signal of the ﬁlter
is very nearly equal to the input signal. The phase shift at q  0.1qc will
be 5.71 less than the straight-line approximation.
2. At the cutoff frequency, qc  1RC ( fc  12pRC), the gain of the ﬁlter
is 3 dB. This means that at the cutoff frequency, the circuit will deliver
half the power that it would deliver at very low frequencies. At the cutoff
frequency, the output voltage will lag the input voltage by 45.
1

1  jq
q
c
jq
1
C



1 
jq
j
C
qRC

jq
1
C


R  jq
1
C

Section 22.4 | The Low-Pass Filter
801
FIGURE 22–18
RC low-pass ﬁlter.


Vout


Vin
C
R
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3. As the frequency increases beyond the cutoff frequency, the amplitude
of the output signal decreases by a factor of approximately 10 for each
tenfold increase in frequency; namely the voltage gain is 20 dB per
decade. The phase shift at q  10qc will be 5.71 greater than the
straight-line approximation, namely at v  84.29. For high frequen-
cies (qqc  10), the phase shift between the input and output voltage
approaches 90.
The RL Low-Pass Filter
A low-pass filter circuit may be made up of a resistor and an inductor as illus-
trated in Figure 22–20.
In a manner similar to that used for the RC low-pass filter, we may write
the transfer function for the circuit of Figure 22–20 as follows:
TF  V
V
o
i
u
n
t
 
R 
R
ZL
  
R 
R
jqL

802
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
FIGURE 22–19
Normalized frequency response for an RC low-pass filter.
Av(dB)
ω
ωc
Cutoff frequency
(ω  ωc)
0.01
−20
0
−40
0.1
1
10
100
3 dB
Asymptotic
response
20 dB/decade
Actual
response
ω
ωc
Cutoff frequency
(ω  ωc)
θ()
0.01
−60
−30
−45
0
−90
0.1
1
10
100
Straight-line
response
Actual
response
45° dB/decade
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 22–20
RL low-pass filter.


Vout


Vin
L
R
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now, dividing the numerator and the denominator by R, we have the transfer
function expressed as
TF 
Since the cutoff frequency is found as qc  1t, we have
qc  1
t
 
 R
L

and so
TF 
(22–16)
Notice that the transfer function for the RL low-pass circuit in Equation 22–16
is identical to the transfer function of an RC circuit in Equation 22–15. In each
case, the cutoff frequency is determined as the reciprocal of the time constant.
1

1  jq
q
c
1
R
L

1

1  jq R
L

Section 22.4 | The Low-Pass Filter
803
EXAMPLE 22–8        
Sketch the Bode plot showing both the straight-line approximation and the actual
response curves for the circuit of Figure 22–21. Show frequencies in hertz.
Solution
The cutoff frequency (in radians per second) for the circuit occurs at
qc  1
t
  R
1
C

 
(10 k
1
)(2 nF)
  50 krads
which gives
fc  2
q
p
c  
50 k
2
r
p
ads
  7.96 kHz
In order to sketch the Bode plot, we begin with the asymptotes for the volt-
age gain response. The circuit will have a ﬂat response until fc  7.96 kHz. Then
the gain will drop at a rate of 20 dB for each decade increase in frequency.
Therefore, the voltage gain at 79.6 kHz will be 20 dB, and at 796 kHz the
voltage gain will be 40 dB. At the cutoff frequency for the ﬁlter, the actual
voltage gain response will pass through a point which is 3 dB down from the
intersection of the two asymptotes. The frequency response of the voltage gain
is shown in Figure 22–22(a).
Next, we sketch the approximate phase shift response. The phase shift at
7.96 kHz will be 45. At a frequency one decade below the cutoff fre-
quency (at 796 Hz) the phase shift will be approximately equal to zero, while
at a frequency one decade above the cutoff frequency (at 79.6 kHz) the phase
shift will be near the maximum of 90. The actual phase shift response will
be a curve which varies slightly from the asymptotic response, as shown in
Figure 22–22(b).
FIGURE 22–21


Vout


Vin
C
R
2 nF
10 kE
© Cengage Learning 2013
CircuitSim 22-1 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

804
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
FIGURE 22–22
Av (dB)
fc  7.96 kHz
100
200
500
−20
0
−40
1k
2k
5k
10k
20k
50k
100k
200k
500k
1M
3 dB
Asymptotic
response
Actual
response
Frequency (Hz)
(a)
(b)
fc  796 Hz
fc  7.96 kHz
10fc  79.6 kHz
q()
−60
−30
−45
0
−90
Asymptotic
response
Actual
response
f (Hz)
10
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 22–9       
Consider the low-pass circuit of Figure 22–23.
a. Write the transfer function for the circuit.
b. Sketch the frequency response.
Solution
a. The transfer function of the circuit is found as
TF  
V
V
o
i
u
n
t  
R2  R
R
1
2
 jqL

which becomes
TF  
R1
R

2
R2
 

1

1  jq
R1 
L
R2

FIGURE 22–23


Vout


Vin
L
R2
1 kE
2 mH
9 kE
R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
CircuitSim 22-2 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 22.4 | The Low-Pass Filter
805
b. From the transfer function of part (a), we see that the dc gain will no longer
be 1 (0 dB) but rather is found as
Av(dc)  20 log
R1
R

2
R2

 20 log1
1
0

 20 dB
The cutoff frequency occurs at
qc  1
t
 
qc  
R1 
L
R2
  
1
2
0
m
k
H


 5.0 Mrads
The resulting Bode plot is shown in Figure 22–24. Notice that the frequency
response of the phase shift is precisely the same as for other low-pass ﬁlters.
However, the response of the voltage gain now starts at 20 dB and then drops
at a rate of 20 dBdecade above the cutoff frequency, qc  5 Mrads.
1


R1 
L
R2

ω (rad/s)
ωc = 5 Mrad/s
10 k
100 k
500 k
1 M
5 M
10 M
50 M
100 M
Av(dB)
−20
0
−40
FIGURE 22–24
 (rad/s)
c = 5 Mrad/s
10 k
−60
−30
−45
0
−90
100 k
500 k
1 M
5 M
10 M
50 M
100 M
q()
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

806
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
Refer to the low-pass circuit of Figure 22–25.
a. Write the transfer function for the circuit.
b. Sketch the frequency response.
Answers
a. TF(q)  
1  j
0
q
.2
0
5
.0015

b.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
FIGURE 22–25


Vout


Vin
C
R1
1 RF
R2
2 kE
6 kE
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 22–26
−20
−12
−40
0
−60
−100
0.1
1
10
100
10 k 100 k
1000
Av(dB)
(Hz)
f
−80
−45°
0°
−90°
0.1
1
10
100
10 k 100 k
1000
θ
(Hz)
f
fC  = 106Hz
© Cengage Learning 2013
a. Design a low-pass RC ﬁlter to have a cutoff frequency of 30 krads. Use a
0.01-F capacitor.
b. Design a low-pass RL filter to have a cutoff frequency of 20 kHz and a dc
gain of 6 dB. Use a 10-mH inductor. (Assume that the inductor has no 
internal resistance.)
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
The RC High-Pass Filter
As the name implies, the high-pass filter is a circuit that allows high-
frequency signals to pass from the input to the output of the circuit while atten-
uating low-frequency signals. A simple RC high-pass filter circuit is illustrated
in Figure 22–27.
At low frequencies, the reactance of the capacitor will be very large,
effectively preventing any input signal from passing through to the output. At
high frequencies, the capacitive reactance will approach a short-circuit condi-
tion, providing a very low impedance path for the signal from the input to the
output.
22.5 The High-Pass
Filter
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The transfer function of the low-pass filter is determined as follows:
TF  
V
V
o
i
u
n
t  
R 
R
ZC



 
1 
jqR
jq
C
RC

Now, if we let qc  1t  1RC, we have
TF 
(22–17)
Notice that the expression of Equation 22–17 is very similar to the expres-
sion for a low-pass filter, with the exception that there is an additional term in
the numerator. Since the transfer function is a complex number which is depen-
dent upon frequency, we may once again find the general expressions for volt-
age gain and phase shift as functions of frequency, q.
The voltage gain is found as
Av 
which, when expressed in decibels, becomes
Av(dB)  20 logq
q
c  10 log1 q
q
c
2
(22–18)
The phase shift of the numerator will be a constant 90, since the term has
only an imaginary component. The overall phase shift of the transfer function
is then found as follows:
v  90°  arctanq
q
c
(22–19)
In order to sketch the asymptotic response of the voltage gain we need to
examine the effect of Equation 22–18 on frequencies around the cutoff fre-
quency, qc.
For frequencies q  0.1qc, the second term of the expression will be
essentially equal to zero, and so the voltage gain at low frequencies is approx-
imated as
Av(dB) 	 20 log q
q
c
If we substitute some arbitrary values of q into the preceding approxima-
tion, we arrive at a general statement. For example, by letting q  0.01qc, we
have the voltage gain as
Av  20 log(0.01)  40 dB
and by letting q  0.1qc, we have
Av  20 log(0.1)  20 dB
q
q
c



1 q
qc

2

jq
q
c

1  jq
q
c
R


jqR
j
C
qC
 1

R

R  jq
1
C

Section 22.5 | The High-Pass Filter
807
FIGURE 22–27
RC high-pass ﬁlter.


Vout


Vin
C
R
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In general, we see that the expression Av  20 log (qqc) may be repre-
sented as a straight line on a semilogarithmic graph. The straight line will
intersect the 0-dB axis at the cutoff frequency, qc, and have a slope of
20 dBdecade.
For frequencies q  qc, Equation 22–18 may be expressed as
Av(dB) 	 20 logq
q
c
  10 logq
q
c
2
 20 logq
q
c
  20 logq
q
c
 0 dB
For the particular case when q  qc, we have
Av(dB)  20 log 1  10 log 2  3.0 dB
which is exactly the same result that we would expect, since the actual response
will be 3 dB down from the asymptotic response.
Examining Equation 22–19 for frequencies q  0.1qc, we see that the
phase shift for the transfer function will be essentially constant at 90, while for
frequencies q  10qc the phase shift will be approximately constant at 0. At
q  qc we have v  90  45  45.
Figure 22–28 shows the normalized Bode plot of the high-pass circuit of
Figure 22–27.
808
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
FIGURE 22–28
Normalized frequency response for an RC high-pass ﬁlter.
20 dB/decade
0.05
0.1
0.2
−20
0
−40
3 dB
Actual
response
ω/ωc
Cutoff frequency
ω  ωc    1
0.01
0.02
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
50
100
RC
Av (dB)
Asymptotic
response
0.01
0.02
0.05
+30
+60
+45
+90
0
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
50
100
Actual
response
ω/ωc
Cutoff frequency
ω  ωc    1
θ()
RC
Straight-line
response
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The RL High-Pass Filter
A typical RL high-pass filter circuit is shown in Figure 22–29.
At low frequencies, the inductor is effectively a short circuit, which means
that the output of the circuit is essentially zero at low frequencies. Inversely, at
high frequencies, the reactance of the inductor approaches infinity and greatly
exceeds the resistance, effectively preventing current. The voltage across the
inductor is therefore very nearly equal to the applied input voltage signal. The
transfer function for the high-pass RL circuit is derived as follows:
TF  
R 
ZL
XL

 
R 
jqL
jqL
 
Now, letting qc  1t  RL, we simplify the expression as
TF  
1 
jqt
jqt

The preceding expression is identical to the transfer function for a high-pass
RC filter, with the exception that in this case we have t  LR.
jq R
L


1  jq R
L

Section 22.5 | The High-Pass Filter
809
FIGURE 22–29
RL high-pass ﬁlter.


Vout


Vin
L
R
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 22–10        
Design the RL high-pass ﬁlter circuit of Figure 22–30 to have a cutoff frequency
of 40 kHz. (Assume that the inductor has no internal resistance.) Sketch the fre-
quency response of the circuit expressing the frequencies in kilohertz.
Solution
The cutoff frequency, qc, in radians per second is
qc  2pfc  2p(40 kHz)  251.33 krads
Now, since qc  RL, we have
R  qcL  (251.33 krads)(100 mH)  25.133 k	
The resulting Bode plot is shown in Figure 22–31.
FIGURE 22–30


Vout


Vin
L
R
100 mH
© Cengage Learning 2013
−20
0
−40
Actual
response
f (kHz) 
fc  40 kHz
1
2
5
10
20
50
100
200
500
1 k
2 k
5 k
10 k
Av (dB)
Asymptotic
response
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 22–31
(Continued)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

810
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
FIGURE 22–31
(Continued)
θ()
+30
+60
+45
+90
0
Actual
response
f (kHz) 
fc  40 kHz
1
2
5
10
20
50
100
200
500
1 k
2 k
5 k
10 k
Straight-line
response
© Cengage Learning 2013
Consider the high-pass circuit of Figure 22–32.
a. Write the transfer function of the ﬁlter.
b. Sketch the frequency response of the ﬁlter. Show the frequency in radians
per second. (Hint: The frequency response of the ﬁlter is a step response.)
Answers
a. TF(q) 
R1
R

2
R2


f1  31.8 kHz (200 krads), f2  127 kHz (800 krads)
b.
1  jqR
L
2


1  jq
R1 
L
R2

PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
FIGURE 22–32


Vout


Vin
L
R1
100 mH
R2
60 kE
20 kE
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 22–33
(Hz)
f
(Hz)
f
Av (dB)
0
12
1 k
10 k
31.8
127
100 k
1 m
1 k
10 k
100 k
1 m
10 m
45°
0
θ
3.18 k
318 k
12.7 k
12.7 k
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 22.6 | The Band-Pass Filter
811
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
1. Use a 0.05-F capacitor to design a high-pass ﬁlter having a cutoff frequency
of 25 kHz. Sketch the frequency response of the ﬁlter.
2. Use a 25-mH inductor to design a high-pass ﬁlter circuit having a cutoff
frequency of 80 krads and a high-frequency gain of 12 dB. Sketch the
frequency response of the ﬁlter.
A band-pass ﬁlter will permit frequencies within a certain range to pass from
the input of a circuit to the output. All frequencies which fall outside the
desired range will be attenuated and so will not appear with appreciable power
at the output. Such a ﬁlter circuit is easily constructed by using a low-pass ﬁlter
cascaded with a high-pass circuit as illustrated in Figure 22–34.
Although the low-pass and high-pass blocks may consist of various com-
binations of elements, one possibility is to construct the entire filter network
from resistors and capacitors as shown in Figure 22–35.
The bandwidth of the resulting band-pass filter will be approximately
equal to the difference between the two cutoff frequencies, namely,
BW 	 q2  q1 (rads)
(22–20)
The preceding approximation will be most valid if the cutoff frequencies
of the individual stages are separated by at least one decade.
22.6 The Band-Pass
Filter
FIGURE 22–34
Block diagram of a band-
pass ﬁlter.


Vout


Vin

h
High-
pass
filter
Low-
pass
filter
h

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 22–35
C2
R2
C1
R1
High-pass
filter
ω1 =
0 dB
R1C1
1
Low-pass
filter
ω2 = R2C2
1
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 22–11        
Write the transfer function for the circuit of Figure 22–36. Sketch the resulting
Bode plot and determine the expected bandwidth for the band-pass ﬁlter.
Solution
While the transfer function for the circuit may be written by using
circuit theory, it is easier to recognize that the circuit consists of two stages: one
a low-pass stage and the other a high-pass stage. If the cutoff frequencies of
each stage are separated by more than one decade, then we may assume that the
impedance of one stage will not adversely affect the operation of the other
FIGURE 22–36


Vout


Vin
C2
R2
C1
R1
1xRF
2 kE
0.1xRF
500 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

812
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
FIGURE 22–37
ω (rad/s)
ω2 = 20 krad/s
ω1 = 500 rad/s
10
20
50
100
200
500
1 k
2 k
5 k
10 k
20 k
50 k
100 k
Av(dB)
−20
−34
0
−40
1 + jωτ2
1
(−20 dB/decade)
1 + jωτ1
1
(−20 dB/decade)
 jωτ1
(+20 dB/decade)
+90
0
−90
q()
10
20
50
100
200
500
1 k
2 k
5 k
10 k
20 k
50 k
100 k
200 k
 (rad/s)
2 = 20 krad/s
1 = 500 rad/s
1 + j{1
1
1 + j{2
1
© Cengage Learning 2013
stage. (If this is not the case, the analysis is complicated and is outside the scope
of this textbook.) Based on the previous assumption, the transfer function of the
ﬁrst stage is determined as
TF1  
V
V
i
1
n
  
1 
jqR
jq
1C
R1
1
C1

and for the second stage as
TF2  
V
V
o
1
ut  
1  j
1
qR2C2

Combining the preceding results, we have
TF  
V
V
o
i
u
n
t 
 TF1TF2
which, when simpliﬁed, becomes
TF  
V
V
o
i
u
n
t 
(22–21)
where t1  R1C1  2.0 ms and t2  R2C2  50 s. The corresponding cutoff
frequencies are q1  500 rads and q2  20 krads. The transfer function of
Equation 22–21 has three separate terms which, when taken separately, result in
the approximate responses illustrated in Figure 22–37.
jqt1

(1  jqt1)(1  jqt2)
(TF2)(V1)


T
V
F
1
1

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 22.6 | The Band-Pass Filter
813
The resulting frequency response is determined by the summation of the indi-
vidual responses as shown in Figure 22–38.
FIGURE 22–38
ω (rad/s)
ω2 = 20 krad/s
ω1 = 500 rad/s
10
20
50
100
200
500
1 k
2 k
5 k
10 k
20 k
50 k
100 k
Av(dB)
−20
−34
0
−40
+90
0
−90
θ()
10
20
50
100
200
500
1 k
2 k
5 k
10 k
20 k
50 k
100 k
200 k
ω (rad/s)
ω2 = 20 krad/s
ω1 = 500 rad/s
© Cengage Learning 2013
From the Bode plot, we determine that the bandwidth of the resulting ﬁlter is
BW(rads)  q2  q1  20 krads  0.5 krads  19.5 krads
Refer to the band-pass ﬁlter of Figure 22–39.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 7
FIGURE 22–39
R2
L2
R1
L1


Vout


Vin
100 E
100 mH
200 E
20 mH
© Cengage Learning 2013
CircuitSim 22-3 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

814
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
a. Calculate the cutoff frequencies in rads and the approximate bandwidth.
b. Sketch the frequency response of the ﬁlter.
Answers
a. q1  1.00 krads, q2  10.0 krads, BW  9.00 krads
b.
FIGURE 22–40
Av (dB)
−40
−20
0
10
100
1 k
10 k
100 k
ω
(rad/s)
ω1
ω2
0
45°
90°
−45°
−90°
10
100
1 k
10 k
100 k
(rad/s)
θ
© Cengage Learning 2013
Given a 0.1-F capacitor and a 0.04-F capacitor, design a band-pass ﬁlter
having a bandwidth of 30 krads and a lower cutoff frequency of 5 krads. Sketch
the frequency response of the voltage gain and the phase shift.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
The band-reject ﬁlter has a response that is opposite to that of the band-pass
ﬁlter. This ﬁlter passes all frequencies with the exception of a narrow band
which is greatly attenuated. A band-reject ﬁlter constructed of a resistor, induc-
tor, and capacitor is shown in Figure 22–41.
22.7 The Band-Reject
Filter
FIGURE 22–41
Notch filter.
R
L


Vout


Vin
C
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Notice that the circuit uses a resonant tank circuit as part of the overall
design. As we saw in the previous chapter, the combination of the inductor and
the capacitor results in a very high tank impedance at the resonant frequency.
Therefore, for any signals occurring at the resonant frequency, the output volt-
age is effectively zero. Because the filter circuit effectively removes any signal
occurring at the resonant frequency, the circuit is often referred to as a notch
ﬁlter. The voltage gain response of the notch filter is shown in Figure 22–42.
For low-frequency signals, the inductor provides a low-impedance path
from the input to the output, allowing these signals to pass from the input and
appear across the resistor with minimal attenuation. Conversely, at high fre-
quencies the capacitor provides a low-impedance path from the input to the
output. Although the complete analysis of the notch filter is outside the scope
of this textbook, the transfer function of the filter is determined by employing
the same techniques as those previously developed.
TF  
R 
R
ZLZC


R
R 


R 
R(
q
1
2

RL
q
C
2L

C
j
)
qL

TF 
(22–22)
Notice that the transfer function for the notch filter is significantly more
complicated than for the previous filter circuits. Due to the presence of the
complex quadratic in the denominator of the transfer function, this type of filter
circuit is called a second-order filter. The design of such filters is a separate
field in electronics engineering.
Actual filter design often involves using operational amplifiers to provide
significant voltage gain in the passband of the filter. In addition, such active fil-
ters have the advantage of providing very high input impedance to prevent
loading effects. Many excellent textbooks are available for assistance in filter
design.
1  q2LC

1  q2LC  jq R
L

R

R  
1 
jq
q
L
2LC

(jqL)jq
1
C


jqL  
jq
1
C

Section 22.8 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
815
FIGURE 22–42
Voltage gain response for
a notch ﬁlter.
Av(dB)
fr
f (Hz)
© Cengage Learning 2013
Despite the complexity of designing a ﬁlter for a particular application, the
analysis of the ﬁlter is a relatively simple process when done by computer. We
have already seen the ease with which PSpice may be used to examine the fre-
quency response of resonant circuits. In this chapter we will again use the
Probe postprocessor of PSpice to plot the frequency characteristics of a partic-
ular circuit. We ﬁnd that with some minor adjustments, the program is able to
simultaneously plot both the voltage gain (in decibels) and the phase shift (in
degrees) of any ﬁlter circuit.
22.8 Circuit Analysis
Using Computers
PSPICE
MultiSim
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Multisim provides displays that are similar to those obtained in PSpice.
The method, though, is somewhat different. Since Multisim simulates actual
lab measurements, an instrument called a Bode plotter is used by the software.
As one might expect, the Bode plotter provides a graph of the frequency
response (showing both the gain and phase shift) of a circuit even though no
such instrument is found in a real electronics lab.
PSpice
816
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
EXAMPLE 22–12       
Use the PROBE postprocessor of PSpice to view the frequency response from
1 Hz to 100 kHz for the circuit of Figure 22–36. Determine the cutoff frequen-
cies and the bandwidth of the circuit. Compare the results to those obtained in
Example 22–11.
FIGURE 22–43
© Cengage Learning 2013
Solution
The OrCAD Capture CIS program is used to enter the circuit as
shown in Figure 22–43. You will need to set the properties of the signal genera-
tor for a magnitude of 1 V and a phase shift of 0°. Once the circuit has been
entered as shown, set the analysis to perform an ac sweep from 1 Hz to 100 kHz
using 1001 points per decade.
In this example, we show both the voltage gain and the phase shift on the
same display. Once the PROBE screen is activated, two simultaneous displays
are obtained by clicking on Plot/Add Plot to Window. We will use the top dis-
play to show voltage gain and the bottom to show the phase shift.
PSpice does not actually calculate the voltage gain in decibels, but rather
determines the output voltage level in dBV, referenced to 1 Vrms. (It is for this
reason that we used a supply voltage of 1 V.) The voltage at point a of the circuit
is obtained by clicking on Trace/Add Trace and then selecting DB(V(C2:1)) as
the Trace Expression. Cursors are obtained by clicking on the Toggle Cursor tool.
The cursor indicates that the maximum gain for the circuit is 1.02 dB. We ﬁnd
the bandwidth of the circuit (at the 3 dB frequencies) by moving the cursors
(arrow keys and <Ctrl> arrow keys) to the frequencies at which the output of the
circuit is at 4.02 dB. We determine f1  0.069 kHz, f2  3.64 kHz, and BW 
3.57 kHz. These results are consistent with those found in Example 22–11.
Finally, we obtain a trace of the phase shift for the circuit as follows. Click
anywhere on the bottom plot. Click on Trace/Add Trace and then select
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 22.8 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
817
P(V(C2:1)) as the Trace Expression. The range of the ordinate (vertical axis) is
changed by clicking on the axis, selecting the Y Axis tab, and setting the User
deﬁned range for a value of 90d to 90d. The resulting display is shown in
Figure 22–44.
FIGURE 22–44
© Cengage Learning 2013
a. Use PSpice to input the circuit of Figure 22–39.
b. Use the Probe postprocessor to observe the frequency response from 1 Hz
to 100 kHz.
c. From the display, determine the cutoff frequencies and use the cursors to
determine the bandwidth.
d. Compare the results to those obtained in Practice Problems 7.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 8
EXAMPLE 22–13        
Use Multisim to obtain the frequency response for the circuit of Figure 22–36.
Compare the results to those obtained in Example 22–12.
Solution
In order to perform the required measurements, we need to use the
function generator and the Bode plotter, both located in the Instruments parts
bin. The circuit is constructed as shown in Figure 22–45.
The Bode plotter is adjusted to provide the desired frequency response by
ﬁrst double-clicking on the instrument. Next, we click on the Magnitude button.
The Vertical scale is set to log with values between 40 dB and 0 dB. The
Horizontal scale is set to log with values between 1 Hz and 100 kHz. Similarly,
the Phase is set to have a Vertical range of 90 to 90. After clicking the Run
button, the Bode plotter provides a display of either the voltage gain response or
the phase response. However, both displays are shown simultaneously by click-
ing on Grapher in the View menu. By using the cursor feature, we obtain the
same results as those found in Example 22–12. Figure 22–46 shows the fre-
quency response as viewed using the Grapher window.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

818
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
FIGURE 22–45
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 22–46
© Cengage Learning 2013
Use Multisim to obtain the frequency response for the circuit of Figure 22–25.
Compare the results to those obtained in Practice Problems 5.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 9
A
s a designer for a sound studio, you have been asked to design band-pass
ﬁlters for a color organ that will be used to provide lighting for a rock con-
cert. The color organ will provide stage lighting that will correspond to the
sound level and frequency of the music. You remember from your physics
class that the human ear can perceive sounds from 20 Hz to 20 kHz.
Putting It into Practice
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
819
The speciﬁcations say that the audio frequency spectrum is to be
divided into three ranges. Passive RC ﬁlters will be used to isolate signals
for each range. These signals will then be ampliﬁed and used to control
lights of a particular color. The low-frequency components (20 to 200 Hz)
will control blue lights, the mid-frequency components (200 Hz to 2 kHz) will
control green lights, and the high-frequency components (2 kHz to 20 kHz)
will control red lights.
Although the speciﬁcations call for three band-pass ﬁlters, you realize
that you can simplify the design by using a low-pass ﬁlter with a break fre-
quency of 200 Hz for the low frequencies and a high-pass ﬁlter with a break
frequency of 2 kHz for the high frequencies. To simplify your work, you
decide to use only 0.5-F capacitors for all ﬁlters.
Show the design for each of the ﬁlters.
Problems
22.1
The Decibel
1. Refer to the ampliﬁer shown in Figure 22–47. Determine the power gain both
as a ratio and in decibels for the following power values:
a. Pin  1.2 mW,
Pout  2.4 W
b. Pin  3.5 W,
Pout  700 mW
c. Pin  6.0 pW,
Pout  12 W
d. Pin  2.5 mW,
Pout  1.0 W
FIGURE 22–47
2. If the ampliﬁer of Figure 22–47 has Zin  600 	 and RL  2 k	, ﬁnd Pin,
Pout, and AP(dB) for the following voltage levels:
a. Vin  20 mV,
Vout  100 mV
b. Vin  100 V,
Vout  400 V
c. Vin  320 mV,
Vout  600 mV
d. Vin  2 V,
Vout  8 V
RL


Vout


Vin
Zin
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3. The ampliﬁer of Figure 22–47 has Zin  2 k	 and RL  10 	. Find the volt-
age gain and power gain both as a ratio and in dB for the following conditions:
a. Vin  2 mV,
Pout  100 mW
b. Pin  16 W,
Vout  40 mV
c. Vin  3 mV,
Pout  60 mW
d. Pin  2 pW,
Vout  80 mV
4. The ampliﬁer of Figure 22–47 has an input voltage of Vin  2 mV and an
output power of Pout  200 mW. Find the voltage gain and power gain both
as a ratio and in dB for the following conditions:
a. Zin  5 k	,
RL  2 k	
b. Zin  2 k	,
RL  10 k	
c. Zin  300 k	,
RL  1 k	
d. Zin  1 k	
RL  1 k	
5. The ampliﬁer of Figure 22–47 has an input impedance of 5 k	 and a load
resistance of 250 	. If the power gain of the ampliﬁer is 35 dB, and the input
voltage is 250 mV, ﬁnd Pin, Pout, Vout, Av, and Av(dB).
6. Repeat Problem 5 if the input impedance is increased to 10 k	. (All other
quantities remain unchanged.)
7. Express the following powers in dBm and in dBW:
a. P  50 mW
b. P  1 W
c. P  400 nW
d. P  250 pW
8. Express the following powers in dBm and in dBW:
a. P  250 W
b. P  250 kW
c. P  540 nW
d. P  27 mW
9. Convert the following power levels into watts:
a. P  23.5 dBm
b. P  45.2 dBW
c. P  83 dBm
d. P  33 dBW
10. Convert the following power levels into watts:
a. P  16 dBm
b. P  43 dBW
c. P  47.3 dBm
d. P  29 dBW
11. Express the following rms voltages as voltage levels (in dBV):
a. 2.00 V
b. 34.0 mV
c. 24.0 V
d. 58.2 V
12. Express the following rms voltages as voltage levels (in dBV):
a. 25 V
b. 90 V
c. 72.5 mV
d. 0.84 V
820
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13. Convert the following voltage levels from dBV to rms voltages:
a. 2.5 dBV
b. 6.0 dBV
c. 22.4 dBV
d. 10.0 dBV
14. Convert the following voltage levels from dBV to rms voltages:
a. 20.0 dBV
b. 42.0 dBV
c. 6.0 dBV
d. 3.0 dBV
15. A sinusoidal waveform is measured as 30.0 Vp-p with an oscilloscope. If this
waveform were applied to a voltmeter calibrated to express readings in dBV,
what would the voltmeter indicate?
16. A voltmeter shows a reading of 9.20 dBV. What peak-to-peak voltage would
be observed on an oscilloscope?
22.2
Multistage Systems
17. Calculate the power levels (in dBm) at the output of each of the stages of the
system shown in Figure 22–48. Solve for the output power (in watts).
FIGURE 22–48
18. Calculate the power levels (in dBm) at the indicated locations of the system
shown in Figure 22–49. Solve for the input and output powers (in watts).
FIGURE 22–49
19. Given that power P2  140 mW as shown in Figure 22–50. Calculate the
power levels (in dBm) at each of the indicated locations. Solve for the volt-
age across the load resistor, RL.
FIGURE 22–50
AP1
P1
P2
Pin
6 dB
4 dB
10 000
140 mW
AP2(dB)
AP3(dB)
RL
5 kE
© Cengage Learning 2013
AP1(dB)
AP2
AP3
P1
P2
Pout
Pin
0.25
25
17 dB
15 dBm
© Cengage Learning 2013
AP1
AP2(dB)
AP3
P1
P2
Pout
Pin
16
3 dB
200
16 RW
© Cengage Learning 2013
Problems
821
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20. Suppose that the system of Figure 22–51 has an output voltage of 2 V.
a. Determine the power (in watts) at each of the indicated locations.
b. Solve for the voltage, Vin, if the input impedance of the ﬁrst stage is 1.5 k	.
c. Convert Vin and VL into voltage levels (in dBV).
d. Solve for the voltage gain, Av (in dB).
FIGURE 22–51
21. A power ampliﬁer (P.A.) with a power gain of 250 has an input impedance of
2.0 k	 and is used to drive a stereo speaker (output impedance of 8.0 	). If
the output power is 100 W, determine the following:
a. Output power level (dBm), input power level (dBm)
b. Output voltage (rms), input voltage (rms)
c. Output voltage level (dBV), input voltage level (dBV)
d. Voltage gain in dB
22. Repeat Problem 21 if the ampliﬁer has a power gain of 400 and Zin  1.0 k	.
The power delivered to the 8.0-	 speaker is 200 W.
22.3
Simple RC and RL Transfer Functions
23. Given the transfer function
TF  
1 
2
j0
0
.
0
001q

a. Determine the cutoff frequency in radians per second and in hertz.
b. Sketch the frequency response of the voltage gain and the phase shift
responses. Label the abscissa in radians per second.
24. Repeat Problem 23 for the transfer function
TF  
1 
2
j0
0
.
0
001q

25. Repeat Problem 23 for the transfer function
TF  
1
1


j
j
0
0
.0
.0
0
2
1
q
q

26. Repeat Problem 23 for the transfer function
TF 
27. Repeat Problem 23 for the transfer function
TF(q)  
1 
j0.
j
0
0
2
.0
q
2q

28. Repeat Problem 23 for the transfer function
TF(q)  
1 
j0
j
.
0
0
.
1
0
q
05q

1  j0.04q

(1  j0.004q)(1  j0.001q)


AP1(dB)
P1
Pin
10.8 dB
30 dB
AP2(dB)
RL
3.6 kE
Vin
2 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
822
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

22.4
The Low-Pass Filter
29. Use a 4.0-F capacitor to design a low-pass ﬁlter circuit having a cutoff
frequency of 5 krads. Draw a schematic of your design and sketch the
frequency response of the voltage gain and the phase shift.
30. Use a 1.0-F capacitor to design a low-pass ﬁlter with a cutoff frequency of
2500 Hz. Draw a schematic of your design and sketch the frequency
response of the voltage gain and the phase shift.
31. Use a 25-mH inductor to design a low-pass ﬁlter with a cutoff frequency
of 50 krads. Draw a schematic of your design and sketch the frequency
response of the voltage gain and the phase shift.
32. Use a 100-mH inductor (assume Rcoil  0 	) to design a low-pass ﬁlter cir-
cuit having a cutoff frequency of 15 kHz. Draw a schematic of your design
and sketch the frequency response of the voltage gain and the phase shift.
33. Use a 36-mH inductor to design a low-pass ﬁlter having a cutoff frequency
of 36 kHz. Draw a schematic of your design and sketch the frequency
response of the voltage gain and the phase shift.
34. Use a 5-F capacitor to design a low-pass ﬁlter circuit having a cutoff
frequency of 100 krads. Draw a schematic of your design and sketch the
frequency response of the voltage gain and the phase shift.
35. Refer to the low-pass circuit of Figure 22–52.
a. Write the transfer function for the circuit.
b. Sketch the frequency response of the voltage gain and phase shift.
36. Repeat Problem 35 for the circuit of Figure 22–53.
22.5
The High-Pass Filter
37. Use a 0.05-F capacitor to design a high-pass ﬁlter to have cutoff frequency
of 100 krads. Draw a schematic of your design and sketch the frequency
response of the voltage gain and the phase shift.
38. Use a 2.2-nF capacitor to design a high-pass ﬁlter to have a cutoff frequency
of 5 kHz. Draw a schematic of your design and sketch the frequency
response of the voltage gain and phase shift.
39. Use a 2-mH inductor to design a high-pass ﬁlter to have a cutoff frequency
of 36 krads. Draw a schematic of your design and sketch the frequency
response of the voltage gain and phase shift.
40. Use a 16-mH inductor to design a high-pass ﬁlter circuit having a cutoff
frequency of 250 kHz. Draw a schematic of your design and sketch the
frequency response of the voltage gain and the phase shift.
41. Refer to the high-pass circuit of Figure 22–54.
a. Write the transfer function for the circuit.
b. Sketch the frequency response of the voltage gain and phase shift.
FIGURE 22–54
40 kE
10 kE
R2
R1
0.16 μF
C


Vout


Vin
© Cengage Learning 2013
Problems
823
FIGURE 22–52
FIGURE 22–53


Vout


Vin
C
R1
0.015 RF
R2
2 kE
2 kE
© Cengage Learning 2013


Vout


Vin
L
R2
1 kE
200 mH
3 kE
R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

42. Repeat Problem 41 for the high-pass circuit of Figure 22–55.
FIGURE 22–55
22.6
The Band-Pass Filter
43. Refer to the ﬁlter of Figure 22–56.
a. Determine the approximate cutoff frequencies and bandwidth of the ﬁlter.
(Assume that the two stages of the ﬁlter operate independently.)
b. Sketch the frequency response of the voltage gain and the phase shift.


Vout


Vin
6000 E
20 kE
8 mH
R2
L
R1
© Cengage Learning 2013
824
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
FIGURE 22–56
R2
C2
R1
C1


Vout


Vin
200 E
0.01 RF
200 E
0.2 RF
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 22–57
R1
L1
R2
L2


Vout


Vin
400 E
20 mH
3 kE
60 mH
© Cengage Learning 2013
44. Repeat Problem 43 for the circuit of Figure 22–57.
45. a. Use two 0.01-F capacitors to design a band-pass ﬁlter to have cutoff
frequencies of 2 krads and 20 krads.
b. Draw your schematic and sketch the frequency response of the voltage
gain and the phase shift.
c. Do you expect that the actual cutoff frequencies will occur at the designed
cutoff frequencies? Explain.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

46. a. Use two 10-mH inductors to design a band-pass ﬁlter to have cutoff fre-
quencies of 25 krads and 40 krads.
b. Draw your schematic and sketch the frequency response of the voltage
gain and the phase shift.
c. Do you expect that the actual cutoff frequencies will occur at the designed
cutoff frequencies? Explain.
22.7
The Band-Reject Filter
47. Given the ﬁlter circuit of Figure 22–58:
a. Determine the “notch” frequency.
b. Calculate the Q of the circuit.
c. Solve for the bandwidth and determine the half-power frequencies.
d. Sketch the voltage gain response of the circuit, showing the level (in dB)
at the “notch” frequency.
FIGURE 22–58
48. Repeat Problem 47 for the circuit of Figure 22–59.
FIGURE 22–59
49. Given the circuit of Figure 22–60:
FIGURE 22–60
L
R1
R2


Vout


Vin
10 mH
1 E
1 RF
C
10 E
© Cengage Learning 2013


Vout


Vin
800 E
L
8 E
100 RH
0.01 RF
Rcoil
R1
C
© Cengage Learning 2013


Vout


Vin
240 E
L
10 E
10 mH
1 RF
Rcoil
R1
C
© Cengage Learning 2013
Problems
825
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a. Determine the “notch” frequency in both rads and Hz.
b. Solve for the Q of the circuit.
c. Calculate the voltage gain (in dB) at the notch frequency.
d. Determine the voltage gain at the boundary conditions.
e. Solve for the bandwidth of the notch ﬁlter and determine the frequencies
at which the voltage gain is 3 dB higher than at the notch frequency.
50. Repeat Problem 49 for the circuit of Figure 22–61.
FIGURE 22–61
22.8
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
51. Use PSpice to input the circuit of Figure 22–62. Let the circuit sweep
through frequencies of 100 Hz to 1 MHz. Use the Probe postprocessor to 
display the frequency response of voltage gain (in dBV) and phase shift of
the circuit.
L
R1
R2


Vout


Vin
100 mH
8 E
0.01 RF
C
32 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
826
Chapter 22 | Filters and the Bode Plot
R
L


Vout
15 kE
250 mH


Vin  1 V∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 22–62
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
PSPICE
MultiSim
52. Repeat Problem 51 for the circuit shown in Figure 22–53.
53. Use PSpice to input the circuit of Figure 22–56. Use the Probe postprocessor
to display the frequency response of voltage gain (in dBV) and phase shift 
of the circuit. Select a suitable range for the frequency sweep and use the
cursors to determine the half-power frequencies and the bandwidth of the
circuit.
54. Repeat Problem 53 for the circuit shown in Figure 22–57.
55. Repeat Problem 53 for the circuit shown in Figure 22–58.
56. Repeat Problem 53 for the circuit shown in Figure 22–59.
57. Repeat Problem 53 for the circuit shown in Figure 22–60.
58. Repeat Problem 53 for the circuit shown in Figure 22–61.
59. Use Multisim to obtain the frequency response for the circuit of Figure 22–62.
Let the circuit sweep through frequencies of 100 Hz to 1 MHz.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
827
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. a. 1.99 dBm
b. 15.0 dBm
c. 66.0 dBm
2. a. 0.561 Vrms
b. 0.224 Vrms
c. 0.354 Vrms
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
a. R  3333 	 in series with C  0.01 F (output across C)
b. R1  630 	 in series with L  10 mH and R2  630 	 (output across R2)
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
1. TF 
C  0.05 F is in series with R  127.3  (output across R)
2. TF 
R1  8 k	 is in series with L  25 mHR2  2.67 k	 (output across the
parallel combination)
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 4
FIGURE 22–63
R1
C1
R2
C2
0.04 F
0.1 F
2 kE
714 E
LPF
HPF
5 krad/s
35 krad/s
© Cengage Learning 2013
jq(3.125 
 106)

1  jq(12.5 
 106)
jq(6.36 
 106)

1  jq(6.36 
 106)
MultiSim
MultiSim
MultiSim
MultiSim
MultiSim
60. Repeat Problem 59 for the circuit of Figure 22–53.
61. Use Multisim to obtain the frequency response for the circuit shown in
Figure 22–58. Select a suitable frequency range and use cursors to determine
the “notch” frequency and the bandwidth of the circuit.
62. Repeat Problem 61 for the circuit shown in Figure 22–59.
63. Repeat Problem 61 for the circuit shown in Figure 22–60.
64. Repeat Problem 61 for the circuit shown in Figure 22–61.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Autotransformer
Coefﬁcient of Coupling
Copper Loss
Core Loss
Corresponding Terminals
Coupled Circuit
Coupled Impedance
Current Ratio
Dot Convention
Ideal Transformer
Impedance Matching
Leakage Flux
Loosely Coupled
Mutual Inductance
Mutually Induced Voltage
Open-Circuit Test
Primary
Reﬂected Impedance
Secondary
Self-Induced Voltage
Short-Circuit Test
Step-Up/Step-Down
Tightly Coupled
Transformer
Turns Ratio
Voltage Ratio
I OUTLINE
Introduction
Iron-Core Transformers:
The Ideal Model
Reﬂected Impedance
Power Transformer
Ratings
Transformer Applications
Practical Iron-Core
Transformers
Transformer Tests
Voltage and Frequency
Effects
Loosely Coupled Circuits
Magnetically Coupled
Circuits with 
Sinusoidal Excitation
Coupled Impedance
Circuit Analysis Using
Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter you will be able to
• describe how a transformer couples energy
from its primary to its secondary via a
changing magnetic ﬁeld,
• describe basic transformer construction,
• use the dot convention to determine 
transformer phasing,
• determine voltage and current ratios from
the turns ratio for iron-core transformers,
• compute voltage and currents in circuits
containing iron-core and air-core 
transformers,
• use transformers to impedance match loads,
• describe some basic transformer applications,
• determine transformer equivalent circuits,
• compute iron-core transformer efﬁciency,
• use Multisim and PSpice to solve circuits
with transformers and coupled circuits,
• use a calculator to solve coupled-circuit
problems.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23
TRANSFORMERS AND COUPLED CIRCUITS
I
n our study of induced voltage in Chapter 13 we found that the changing magnetic ﬁeld 
produced by current in one coil induced a voltage in a second coil wound on the same core.
A device built to utilize this effect is the transformer.
Transformers have many applications. They are used in electrical power systems to step up
voltage for long-distance transmission and then to step it down again to a safe level for use in
our homes and ofﬁces. They are used in electronic equipment power supplies to raise or lower
voltages, in audio systems to match speaker loads to ampliﬁers, in telephone, radio, and TV 
systems, and so on.
In this chapter, we look at transformer fundamentals and the analysis of circuits containing
transformers. We discuss transformer action, types of transformers, voltage and current ratios,
and applications. Both iron-core and air-core transformers are covered along with general 
circuit coupling. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

830
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
A transformer is a magnetically coupled circuit, that is, a circuit in which
the magnetic field produced by time-varying current in one circuit induces
voltage in another. To illustrate, a basic iron-core transformer is shown in
Figure 23–1. It consists of two coils wound on a common core. Alternating
Putting It in Perspective
George Westinghouse
ONE OF THE DEVICES that made possible the commercial ac power
system as we know it today is the transformer. Although
Westinghouse did not invent the transformer, his acquisition of
the transformer patent rights and his manufacturing business
helped make him an important player in the battle of dc versus ac
in the emerging electrical power industry (see Chapter 15). In con-
cert with Tesla (see Chapter 24), Westinghouse fought vigorously
for ac against Edison, who favored dc. In 1893, Westinghouse’s
company built the Niagara Falls power system using ac, and the
battle was over with ac being the clear winner. (Ironically, in
recent years dc has been resurrected for use in commercial elec-
trical power systems because at extremely high voltages, it is
able to transmit power over longer distances than ac. However,
this was not possible in Edison’s day, and ac was and still is the
correct choice for the commercial electrical power system.)
George Westinghouse was born in 1846 in Central Bridge, New York. He made his fortune
with the invention of the railway air brake system. He died in 1914 and was elected to the Hall 
of Fame for Great Americans in 1955. I
23.1 Introduction
Omikron/Photo Researchers/Getty Images
Bm


Input current
Source
Primary
winding
Iron
core
Secondary
winding
Output current
Varying
magnetic
field
Load
Copper
wire
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–1
Basic iron-core transformer. Energy is transferred from the source to the load
via the transformer’s magnetic ﬁeld with no electrical connection between the two sides.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

current in one winding establishes a flux that links the other winding and
induces a voltage in it. Power thus flows from one circuit to the other via the
medium of the magnetic field, with no electrical connection between the two
sides. The winding to which we supply power is called the primary, while
the winding from which we take power is called the secondary. Power can
flow in either direction, as either winding can be used as the primary or 
the secondary.
Transformer Construction
Transformers fall into two broad categories, iron core and air core. We begin with
iron-core types. Iron-core transformers are generally used for low-frequency
applications such as audio- and power-frequency applications. Figures 23–2 and
23–3 show a few examples of iron-core transformers.
Section 23.1 | Introduction
831
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–2
Iron-core transformer on the
control board of an electric range. The pri-
mary and secondary windings are wound
on bobbins that are then mounted on the
core center leg. This transformer converts
120 VAC to the lower voltage required by
the stove control circuitry.
Courtesy Carte International Inc.
FIGURE 23–3
Distribution transformer
(cutaway view) of the type used by electric
utilities to distribute power to residential
and commercial users. The tank is ﬁlled
with oil to improve insulation and to remove
heat from the core and windings.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Iron (actually a special steel called transformer steel) is used for cores
because it increases the coupling between coils by providing an easy path for
magnetic ﬂux. Two basic types of iron-core construction are used, the core type
and the shell type (Figure 23–4). In both cases, cores are made from lamina-
tions of sheet steel, insulated from each other by thin coatings of ceramic or
other material to help minimize eddy current losses (Section 23.6).
Iron, however, has considerable power loss due to hysteresis and eddy cur-
rents at high frequencies, and is thus not useful as a core material above about
50 kHz. For high-frequency applications (such as in radio circuits), air-core
and ferrite-core types are used. Ferrite (a magnetic material made from pow-
dered iron oxide) greatly increases coupling between coils (compared with air)
while maintaining lower losses than iron.
Planar Transformers
A relatively recent innovation in transformer design is the planar transformer,
Figure 23–5. As indicated in (a), its windings consist of traces on printed cir-
cuit boards rather than coils of wire. The core consists of two ﬂat pieces of fer-
rite material whose center leg passes through cutouts in the boards. The ferrite
pieces are butted together and pinned or clamped in some fashion to form a
continuous core. The transformer core of (a) uses a round center post, while
that of (b) uses a rectangular center leg (called an E-Core). Both designs are
used in practice.
832
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
© Cengage Learning 2013
Laminated core
Leads
Leads
Laminated 
core
High-voltage
winding
Leads
Leads
Low-voltage
winding
FIGURE 23–4
For the core type (left), windings are on separate legs, while for the shell type both windings are on the same leg.
FIGURE 23–5
Planar transformers have a low profile and are an excellent design for mass production. Most planar transformers use ferrite
cores. After the printed circuit boards are in place, the two halves of the core are mated together and fastened securely.
© Cengage Learning 2013
Photo courtesy of Coilcraft Inc.
(a) This transformer is rated for operation
from 200 kHz to 500 kHz.
(b) An E-core design. In contrast, the transformer
of (a) uses a circular center post.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

While the transformer of (a) is built as a discrete component, some planar
transformers are fabricated directly on the main circuit board itself. In this
design, the primary winding is typically printed on one side of the board and
the secondary on the other side. (Multilayer boards may have additional wind-
ings.) The core passes through cutouts in the circuit board, and the transformer
thus becomes an integral part of the circuit board. 
Planar transformers cost less to produce than traditional wire-wound trans-
formers, have a very low proﬁle, and are an excellent design for mass produc-
tion. One common application is in switch mode power supplies. Planar
transformers have a broad range of applications that range from telecommuni-
cations through industrial to military.
Transformer Symbols
Schematic circuit symbols for transformers are shown in Figure 23–6. 
Section 23.1 | Introduction
833
(a) Iron core
(b) Air core
(c) Ferrite core
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–6
Transformer schematic symbols.
Winding Directions
One of the advantages of a transformer is that it may be used to change the polar-
ity of an ac voltage. This is illustrated in Figure 23–7 for a pair of iron-core trans-
formers. For the transformer of (a) the primary and secondary voltages are in
phase (for reasons to be discussed later), while for (b) they are 180 out of phase.
CircuitSim 23-1 




ep
es
(a) 0 phase shift
a
b
c
d
(b) 180 phase shift




ep
es
a
b
c
d
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–7
The relative direction of the windings determines the phase shift.
Tightly Coupled and Loosely Coupled Circuits
If most of the ﬂux produced by one coil links the other, the coils are said to be
tightly coupled. Thus, iron-core transformers are tightly coupled (since close
to 100% of the ﬂux is conﬁned to the core and thus links both windings). For
air-core transformers, on the other hand, much less than 100% of the ﬂux links
both windings. They are therefore loosely coupled. However, regardless of
whether a transformer is tightly coupled or loosely coupled, its analysis begins
with Faraday’s law.
Faraday’s Law
Faraday’s law (in SI units) states that the voltage induced in a circuit by a chang-
ing magnetic ﬁeld is equal to the rate at which the ﬂux linking the circuit is
changing. When Faraday’s law is applied to iron-core and air-core transformers,
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

however, the results that emerge are quite different: Iron-core transformers
are found to be characterized by their turns ratios, while air-core transform-
ers are characterized by self- and mutual inductances. We begin with iron-
core transformers.
834
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
23.2 Iron-Core
Transformers:
The Ideal Model
At first glance, iron-core transformers appear quite difficult to analyze because
they have several characteristics such as winding resistance, core loss, and
leakage flux that appear difficult to handle. Fortunately, these effects are small
and often can be neglected. The result is the ideal transformer. Once you
know how to analyze an ideal transformer, however, it is relatively easy to go
back and add in the nonideal effects. This is the approach used in practice.
To idealize a transformer, (1) neglect the resistance of its coils, (2) neglect
its core loss, (3) assume all ﬂux is conﬁned to its core, and (4) assume that neg-
ligible current is required to establish its core ﬂux. (Well-designed iron-core
power transformers are very close to this ideal.)
We now apply Faraday’s law to the ideal transformer. Before we do this,
however, we need to determine ﬂux linkages. The ﬂux linking a winding (as
determined in Chapter 13) is the product of the ﬂux that passes through the
winding times the number of turns through which it passes. For ﬂux  pass-
ing through N turns, ﬂux linkage is N. Thus, for the ideal transformer
(Figure 23–8), the primary ﬂux linkage is Npm, while the secondary ﬂux
linkage is Nsm, where the subscript “m” indicates mutual ﬂux, that is, ﬂux
that links both windings.


Flux Bm
Np
Ns
pin
pout
ip
is
eg


es


ep
Load
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–8
Ideal transformer. All ﬂux is conﬁned to the core and links both windings.
This is a “tightly coupled” transformer.
Voltage Ratio
Now apply Faraday’s law. Since the ﬂux linkage equals N and since N is con-
stant, the induced voltage is equal to N times the rate of change of , that is,
e  Nddt. Thus, for the primary of an ideal transformer,
ep  Np
d
d

t
m

(23–1)
while for the secondary
es  Ns
d
d

t
m

(23–2)
Dividing Equation 23–1 by Equation 23–2 and cancelling dmdt yields
e
e
p
s
  N
N
p
s

(23–3)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Equation 23–3 states that the ratio of primary voltage to secondary volt-
age is equal to the ratio of primary turns to secondary turns. This ratio is called
the turns ratio (or transformation ratio) and is given the symbol a. Thus,
a  NpNs
(23–4)
and
epes  a
(23–5)
For example, a transformer with 1000 turns on its primary and 250 turns on its
secondary has a turns ratio of 1000250  4. This is referred to as a 4:1 ratio.
Since the ratio of two instantaneous sinusoidal voltages is the same as the
ratio of their effective values, Equation 23–5 can also be written as
EpEs  a
(23–6)
As noted earlier, ep and es are either in phase or 180 out of phase, depending
on the relative direction of coil windings. We can therefore also express the
voltage ratio in terms of phasors as
EpEs  a
(23–7)
where the relative polarity (in phase or 180 out of phase) is determined by the
direction of the coil windings (Figure 23–7).
Step-Up and Step-Down Transformers
A step-up transformer is one in which the secondary voltage is higher than the
primary voltage, while a step-down transformer is one in which the secondary
voltage is lower. Since a  EpEs, a step-up transformer has a  1, while for a
step-down transformer, a  1. If a  1, the transformer’s turns ratio is unity
and the secondary voltage is equal to the primary voltage.
Section 23.2 | Iron-Core Transformers: The Ideal Model
835
EXAMPLE 23–1        
Suppose the transformer of Figure 23–7(a) has 500 turns on its primary and
1000 turns on its secondary.
a. Determine its turns ratio. Is it step-up or step-down?
b. If its primary voltage is ep  25 sin qt V, what is its secondary voltage?
c. Sketch the waveforms.
Solution
a. The turns ratio is a  NpNs  5001000  0.5. This is a 1:2 step-up 
transformer.
b. From Equation 23–5, es  epa  (25 sin qt)0.5  50 sin qt V.
c. Primary and secondary voltages are in phase as noted earlier. Figure 23–9
shows the waveforms.
25
ep (V)
es (V)
50
t
t
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–9
EXAMPLE 23–2        
If the transformers of Figure 23–7 have 600 turns on their primaries and 
120 turns on their secondaries, and Ep  120 V∠0, what is Es for each case?
Solution
The turns ratio is a  600120  5. For transformer (a), Es is in
phase with Ep. Therefore, Es  Ep5  (120 V∠0°)5  24 V∠0°. For trans-
former (b), Es is 180° out of phase with Ep. Therefore, Es  24 V∠180°.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Current Ratio
Because an ideal transformer has no power loss, its efﬁciency is 100% and thus
power in equals power out. Consider again Figure 23–8. At any instant, pin 
epip and pout  esis. Thus,
epip  esis
(23–8)
This yields a current ratio of 
i
i
p
s
  e
e
p
s
  1
a

(23–9)
since esep  1a. (This means that if voltage is stepped up, current is stepped
down, and vice versa.) In terms of current phasors and current magnitudes,
Equation 23–9 can be written as
I
I
p
s
  I
I
p
s
  1
a

(23–10)
For example, for a transformer with a  4, and Ip  2 A∠	20, Is  aIp 
4(2 A∠	20)  8 A∠	20, Figure 23–10.
Polarity of Induced Voltage: The Dot Convention
As noted earlier, an iron-core transformer’s secondary voltage is either in phase
with its primary voltage or 180 out of phase, depending on the relative direc-
tion of its windings. We will now demonstrate why.
A simple test, called the kick test (sometimes used by electrical workers to
determine transformer polarity), can help establish the idea. The basic circuit
is shown in Figure 23–11. A switch is used to make and break the circuit (since
voltage is induced only while ﬂux is changing).
836
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
Repeat Example 23–1 for the circuit of Figure 23–7(b) if Np  1200 turns and
Ns  200 turns.
Answer
es  4.17 sin(qt 
 180)
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
4:1
2 A ∠20°
8 A ∠20°
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–10
Currents are inverse to the
turns ratio.
CircuitSim 23-2 
DC
Volts
DC
MA
250
100
20
10
2
120
12
0.6
0.06
250
100
20
10
2
 1
 10
 1000
 100000
AC
Volts
Ohms
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
4
8
12
16
20
200
50
20
10
5
4
3
2
1
0
0
20
40
60
80
10
0
12
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
20
10
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
DC
AC
MA
DC
DC
AC
MA
DC
dB
E
E


COM
VEA




es


ep
E
Switch
Transformer
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–11
The “kick” test. For the
winding directions shown, the meter kicks
upscale at the instant the switch is closed.
[This is the transformer of Figure 23–7(a).]
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For the winding directions shown, at the instant the switch is closed, the volt-
meter needle “kicks” upscale, then settles back to zero. To understand why, we
need to consider magnetic ﬁelds. Before we start, however, let us place a dot on
one of the primary terminals; in this case, we arbitrarily choose the top terminal.
Let us also replace the voltmeter with its equivalent resistance (Figure 23–12).
Section 23.2 | Iron-Core Transformers: The Ideal Model
837




E
ip
is

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–12
Determining dot positions.
At the instant the switch is closed, the polarity of the dotted primary ter-
minal is positive with respect to the undotted primary terminal (because the

 end of the source is directly connected to it). As current in the primary
builds, it creates a ﬂux in the upward direction as indicated by the blue arrow
(recall the right-hand rule). According to Lenz’s law, the effect that results must
oppose the cause that produced it. The effect is a voltage induced in the sec-
ondary winding. The resulting current in the secondary produces a ﬂux which,
according to Lenz’s law, must oppose the buildup of the original ﬂux, that is, it
must be in the direction of the red arrow. Applying the right-hand rule, we see
that secondary current must be in the direction indicated by is. Placing a plus
sign at the tail of this arrow shows that the top end of the resistor is positive.
This means that the top end of the secondary winding is also positive. Place a
dot here. Dotted terminals are called corresponding terminals.
As you can see, corresponding terminals are positive (with respect to their
companion undotted terminals) at the instant the switch is closed. If you per-
form a similar analysis at the instant the switch is opened, you will ﬁnd that
both dotted terminals are negative. Thus, dotted terminals have the same
polarity at all instants of time. What we have developed here is known as the
dot convention for coupled circuits—see Notes.
PRACTICAL NOTES...
1. While we developed the dot
convention using a switched dc
source, it is valid for ac as
well. In fact, we will use it
mostly for ac.
2. The resistor of Figure 23–12 is
required only to work through
the physics to establish the sec-
ondary voltage polarity. You can
now remove it without affecting
the resulting dot position.
3. In practice, corresponding termi-
nals may be marked by dots, by
color-coded wires, or by special
letter designations.
4. Much more is said about the
dot convention and its use in
Section 23.9.
EXAMPLE 23–3        
Determine the waveform for es in the circuit of Figure 23–13(a).
(a)






eg
ep
es
eg
(b)
ep
es
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–13
Solution
Dotted terminals have the same polarity (with respect to their undot-
ted terminals) at all instants. During the ﬁrst half-cycle, the dotted end of the pri-
mary coil is positive. Therefore, the dotted end of the secondary is also positive.
During the second half-cycle, both are negative. The polarity marks on es mean
that we are looking at the polarity of the top end of the secondary coil with
respect to its bottom end. Thus, es is positive during the ﬁrst half-cycle and neg-
ative during the second half-cycle. It is therefore in phase with ep as indicated in (b). 
Thus, if ep  Emp sin qt, then es  Ems sin qt.
CircuitSim 23-3 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Analysis of Simple Transformer Circuits
Simple transformer circuits may be analyzed using the relationships described so
far, namely Ep  aEs, Ip  Isa, and Pin  Pout. This is illustrated in Example 23–4.
More complex problems require some additional ideas.
838
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
1. Determine the equation for es in the circuits of Figure 23–14(b), (c), and (d).
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
(a)
ep
t
12 V
(b)






eg
ep
es
1:6
(c)






eg
ep
es
3:1
(d)






eg
ep
es
3:1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–14
Waveform (a) is the applied primary voltage.
2. If Eg  120 V∠30, determine Es for each transformer of Figure 23–14.
3. Where do the dots go on the transformers of Figure 23–7?
Answers
1. es  72 sin(qt 
 180) V; es  4 sin(qt 
 180) V; es  4 sin qt
2. For (b), Es  720 V∠	150; for (c), Es  40 V∠	150; 40 V∠30
3. For (a), place dots at a and c. For (b), place dots at a and d.
CircuitSim 23-4 
EXAMPLE 23–4       
For Figure 23–15(a), Eg  120 V∠0, the turns ratio is 5:1, and ZL  4 ∠30.
The transformer is ideal. Find
a. the load voltage,
b. the load current,
c. the generator current,
d. the power to the load,
e. the power output by the generator.
(a)






Eg
Ep
Es
Ip
ZL  4 E∠30
IL
VL
4 E∠30


5:1
(b)


120 V∠0
Ip  1.2 A∠30
4 E∠30


5:1
120 V∠0
24 V∠0
24 V∠0
IL  6 A∠30
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–15
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 23.2 | Iron-Core Transformers: The Ideal Model
839
Solution
a. Ep  Eg  120 V∠0
VL  Es  Epa  (120 V∠0)5  24 V∠0
b. IL  VLZL  (24 V∠0)(4 ∠30)  6 A∠	30
c. Ig  Ip. But Ip  Isa  ILa. Thus,
Ig  (6 A∠	30)5  1.2 A∠	30
Values are shown on Figure 23–15(b).
d. PL  VLILcos vL  (24)(6)cos 30  124.7 W
e. Pg  EgIgcos vg, where vg is the angle between Eg and Ig. vg  30. Thus,
Pg  (120)(1.2)cos 30  124.7 W, which agrees with (d) as it must since
the transformer is lossless.
1. A transformer has a turns ratio of 1:8. Is it step-up or step-down? If Ep 
25 V, what is Es?
2. For the transformers of Figure 23–7, if a  0.2 and Es  600 V∠	30,
what is Ep for each case?
3. For each of the transformers of Figure 23–16, sketch the secondary voltage,
showing both phase and amplitude.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)


eg
vs1


5:1
vs2


2:5
vs3


6:1
vs4


4:3
eg (V)
t
180
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–16
4. For Figure 23–17, determine the position of the missing dot.
CircuitSim 23-6 
CircuitSim 23-5 




ep
es
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–17
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A transformer makes a load impedance look larger or smaller, depending on its
turns ratio. To illustrate, consider Figure 23–19. When connected directly to the
source, the load looks like impedance ZL, but when connected through a trans-
former, it looks like a2ZL. This can be illustrated as follows: First, note that 
Zp  EgIp. But Eg  Ep, Ep  aEs, and Ip  Isa. Thus,
Zp  E
Ip
p 
 a2E
Is
s  a2V
IL
L
However VLIL  ZL. Thus,
Zp  a2ZL
(23–11)
This means that ZL now looks to the source like the transformer’s turns ratio
squared times the load impedance. The term a2ZL is referred to as the load’s
reﬂected impedance. Note that it retains the load’s characteristics, that is, a
capacitive load still looks capacitive, an inductive load still looks inductive, and
so on. Note also from Figure 23–19(a) that the voltage looking into the trans-
former is Eg. But Eg  aVL. This means that the voltage across the reﬂected
load is aVL as indicated in (b).
aEs

I
a
s

840
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
(a) Voltmeter reads 180 V


120 V
V
1
2
3
4
60 V
Jumper


120 V
Jumper
V
1
2
3
4
60 V
(b) Voltmeter reads 60 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
5. Figure 23–18 shows another way to determine dotted terminals. First, arbi-
trarily mark one of the primary terminals with a dot. Next, connect a jumper
wire and voltmeter as indicated. From the voltmeter readings, you can deter-
mine which of the secondary terminals should be dotted. For the two cases
indicated, where should the secondary dot be? (Hint: Use KVL.)
FIGURE 23–18
Each transformer is rated 120 V60 V.
23.3 Reﬂected
Impedance
(a) Actual circuit






Eg
Ep
Es
Ip
Is
VL
ZL


a:1
IL
Zp
(b) Reflected impedance Zp  a2ZL


Eg
Ip
aVL
a2ZL


Zp
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–19
Concept of reﬂected impedance. From the primary terminals, ZL looks
like an impedance of a2ZL with voltage aVL across it and current ILa through it.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

From Equation 23–11, we see that the load will look larger if a  1 and
smaller if a  1. To illustrate, consider Figure 23–20. If a 1- resistor were
connected directly to the source, it would look like a 1- resistor and the gen-
erator current would be 100A∠0. However, when connected to a 10:1 trans-
former it looks like a (10)2(1 )  100- resistor and the generator current is
only 1 A∠0.
The concept of reﬂected impedance is useful in a number of ways. It per-
mits us to match loads to sources (such as ampliﬁers) and it also provides an
alternate way to solve transformer problems.
Section 23.3 | Reﬂected Impedance
841
(a) Actual circuit


100 V∠0
Ig  1 A∠0


10:1
100 V∠0
10 V∠0
10 V∠0
IL  10 A∠0




RL  1 
(b) Equivalent circuit


100 V∠0
Ig  1 A∠0


100 E
100 V∠0
Zp  100 E
Equivalent
impedance
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–20
The equivalent impedance seen by the source is 100 .
EXAMPLE 23–5        
Use the reﬂected impedance idea to solve for primary and secondary currents
and the load voltage for the circuit of Figure 23–21(a).
(a)


Eg
Ig
IL
VL
4 E∠30


5:1
120 V∠0
(b)


120 V∠0
Ig  1.2 A∠30
100 E∠30
Eg
Zp
Load as it looks 
to the source.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–21
NOTES...
Example 23–5 is the same as
Example 23–4. In Example 23–4, we
analyzed the circuit in its original
form, while here we used the
reﬂected impedance method. As can
be seen, the amount of work
required is about the same for both
solutions, illustrating that there is no
particular advantage of one method
over the other for a circuit as simple
as this. However, for complex prob-
lems, the advantages of the
reﬂected impedance method are
considerable—you will ﬁnd that it
reduces the amount of work involved
and greatly simpliﬁes analysis.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In practice, power transformers are rated in terms of voltage and apparent
power (for reasons discussed in Chapter 17). Rated current can be determined
from these ratings. Thus a transformer rated 2400120 volt, 48 kVA, has a
current rating of 48 000 VA2400 V  20 A on its 2400-V side and 48 000 VA
120 V  400 A on its 120-V side (Figure 23–22). This transformer can handle
a 48-kVA load, regardless of power factor.
842
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
Solution
Zp  a2ZL  (5)2(4 ∠30)  100 ∠30
The equivalent circuit is shown in (b).
Ig  EgZp  (120 V∠0)(100 ∠30)  1.2 A∠	30
IL  aIp  aIg  5(1.2 A∠	30)  6 A∠	30
VL  ILZL  (6 A∠	30)(4 ∠30)  24 V∠0
The answers are the same as in Example 23–4—see Note on page 841.
CircuitSim 23-7 
23.4 Power
Transformer
Ratings
Sin  48 kVA


20 A
120 V
Load


2400 V
400 A
Sout  48 kVA
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–22
Transformers are rated by the amount of apparent power and the voltages
that they are designed to handle.
23.5 Transformer
Applications
Power Supply Transformers
On electronic equipment, power supply transformers are used to convert the
incoming 120 Vac to the voltage levels required for internal circuit operation.
A variety of commercial transformers are made for this purpose. The trans-
former of Figure 23–23, for example, has a multi-tapped secondary winding,
each tap providing a different output voltage. It is intended for laboratory sup-
plies, test equipment, or experimental power supplies.
Figure 23–24 illustrates a typical use of a power supply transformer. First, the
incoming line voltage is stepped down, then a rectiﬁer circuit (a circuit that uses
diodes to convert ac to dc using a process called rectiﬁcation) converts the ac to
pulsating dc, a ﬁlter smooths it, and ﬁnally, a voltage regulator (an electronic device
used to maintain a constant output voltage) regulates it to the required dc value.
(You will study this circuit in much greater detail in a later electronics course.)
Transformers in Power Systems
Transformers are among the key elements that have made commercial ac
power systems possible. Transformers are used at generating stations to raise
120 V
0
0
6.3 V
7.5 V
10 V
12.6 V
20 V
25 V
30 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–23
A multi-tapped power
supply transformer. The secondary is tapped
at various voltages.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

voltage for long-distance transmission. This lowers the transmitted current
and hence the I2R power losses in the transmission line. At the user end, trans-
formers reduce the voltage to a safe level for everyday use. A typical residen-
tial connection is shown in Figure 23–25. (In older neighborhoods, this is the
transformer that you see hanging on power line poles. In newer neighbor-
hoods, you may see them mounted on pads on somebody’s lawn.) The taps on
the primary permit the electric utility company to compensate for line voltage
drops. Transformers located far from substations, for example, have lower
input voltages (by a few percent) than those close to substations due to volt-
age drops on distribution lines. Taps permit the turns ratio to be changed to
compensate. Note also the split secondary. It permits 120-V and 240-V loads
to be supplied from the same transformer.
The transformer of Figure 23–25 is a single-phase unit (since residential
customers require only single phase). By connecting its primary from line to
Section 23.5 | Transformer Applications
843
Vdc


Vac
Vac
Rectifier
output
Rectifier
Fuse
Filter
Regulator
Filter
output
Regulator
output
Vdc
Final dc output
used to power
the internal circuits
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–24
A transformer used in a
power supply application.




Ip
7200 V
Line
To other
Customers
120 V
120 V
Neutral
Ground
IN
I2
Load 1
Load 2
Load 3
I1
Typical residential customer
240 V
Service
panel
Distribution
transformer
Lights
and small
appliances,
wall outlets
Major
appliances
(stove, dryer)
Breaker
Taps
+
−
+
−
+
−
(typical)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–25
Typical distribution 
transformer. This is how power is supplied
to your home.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

neutral (or line to line), the required single-phase input is obtained from a
three-phase line. (Three phase is studied in Chapter 24.)
Isolation Applications
Transformers are sometimes used to isolate equipment for safety or other rea-
sons—see Note. If a piece of equipment has its frame or chassis connected to
the grounded neutral of Figure 23–25, for example, the connection is per-
fectly safe as long as the connection is not compromised (that is, becomes 
corroded) or changed. If, however, connections are inadvertently reversed as
in Figure 23–26(b) (due to faulty installation, for example), a dangerous sit-
uation results. A transformer used as in Figure 23–27 eliminates this danger
by ensuring that the chassis is never directly connected to the “hot” wire. In
some types of medical equipment, isolation transformers are used as an integral
part of their design for this very reason—to isolate the patient from hazardous
electrical shocks by ensuring that there is never a direct electrical connection
between the patient and ground.
844
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
(a) Chassis is safe
(b) Chassis accidentally connected
to the “hot” side is at 120 V with
respect to ground


120 V


Hot
Hot
Neutral
Neutral
Metal chassis
120 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–26
If the connections are
inadvertently reversed as in (b), you will
get a shock if you are grounded and you
touch the chassis.


120 V
Chassis
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–27
Using a transformer for isolation.
Impedance Matching
As you learned earlier, a transformer can be used to raise or lower the apparent
impedance of a load by choice of turns ratio. This is referred to as impedance
matching. Impedance matching is sometimes used to match loads to ampliﬁers
to achieve maximum power transfer. If the load and source are not matched, a
transformer can be inserted between them as illustrated next.
NOTES...
For further information,
go to our Web site and
follow the links to For
Further Investigation and select
Appliance Grounding.
EXAMPLE 23–6       
Figure 23–28 shows the schematic of a multi-tap sound distribution transformer
with various taps to permit matching of speakers to ampliﬁers. Over their design
range, speakers are basically resistive. If the speaker of Figure 23–29(a) has a
resistance of 4 , what transformer ratio should be chosen for max power? What
is the power to the speaker?
Solution
Make the reﬂected resistance of the speaker equal to the internal
(Thévenin) resistance of the ampliﬁer. Thus, Zp  400   a2ZL  a2(4 ).
Solving for a yields
a Z
Z
L
p 
4

0
4
0



  100  10
Now consider power. Since Zp  400 , Figure 23–29(b), half the source volt-
age appears across it. Thus, power to Zp is (40 V)2(400 )  4 W. Since the
transformer is considered lossless, all power is transferred to the speaker. Thus,
Pspeaker  4 W.
Taps
COM.
PRI
SEC
4 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–28
A tapped sound distribu-
tion transformer.
CircuitSim 23-8 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Transformers with Multiple Secondaries
For a transformer with multiple secondaries (Figure 23–30), each secondary
voltage is governed by the appropriate turns ratio, that is, E1E2  N1N2 and
E1E3  N1N3. Loads are reﬂected in parallel. That is, Z2  a22Z2 and Z3 
a32Z3 appear in parallel in the equivalent circuit, Figure 23–30(b).
Section 23.5 | Transformer Applications
845
(a) Circuit


Zp
400 
Thévenin
equivalent of
amplifier
Matching
transformer
4 
Speaker
80 V
400 E
400 E


80 V


40 V
(b) Equivalent
Reflected
Load a2ZL
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–29
Matching the 4- speaker to the ampliﬁer for maximum power transfer. Power to the speaker here is 4 W.
(Compare to Practice Problems 3.)
Determine the power to the speaker of Figure 23–29 if the transformer is not
present (that is, the speaker is directly connected to the ampliﬁer). Compare to
Example 23–6.
Answer
0.157 W (dramatically lower)
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
(a) a2  N1/N2
      a3  N1/N3


Eg
E1
E3
N1
Z3
Zp
N2
E2
Z2
N3
Ig


Eg
Zp
Z′
(b)        a22 Z2
             a32 Z3
2
Z′2
Z′3
Z′3
I2
I3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–30
Loads are reﬂected in parallel.
EXAMPLE 23–7        
For the circuit of Figure 23–31(a),
a. determine the equivalent circuit,
b. determine the generator current,
c. show that apparent power in equals apparent power out.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Autotransformers
An important variation of the transformer is the autotransformer (Figure 23–32).
Autotransformers are unusual in that their primary circuit is not electrically iso-
lated from their secondary. However, they are smaller and cheaper than conven-
tional transformers for the same load kVA since only part of the load power is
transferred inductively. Figure 23–32 shows several variations. The transformer of
(c) is variable by means of a slider, typically, from 0% to 110%.
For analysis, an autotransformer may be viewed as a standard two-winding
transformer reconnected as in Figure 23–33(b). Voltage and current relation-
ships between windings hold as they do for the standard connection. Thus, if
you apply rated voltage to the primary winding, you will obtain rated voltage
across the secondary winding. Finally, since we are assuming an ideal trans-
former, apparent power out equals apparent power in.
846
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
Solution
a. See Figure 23–31(b).
b. Ig  Z
E

g
2
 
 Z
E

g
3
  
100
1
∠
0
0°
 
 
10
	
0
j
∠
10
0°
  10 
 j10  14.14 A∠45°
c. Input: Sin  EgIg  (100 V)(14.14 A)  1414 VA
Output: From Figure 23–31(b), Pout  (100 V)2(10 )  1000 W and
Qout  (100V)2(10 )  1000VAR.Thus, Sout Pout2
 Q
ou
t2  1414 VA
which, as expected, is the same as Sin.
a2  N1/N2  2      a3  N1/N3  2
Eg  100 V∠0
E1
E3
N1
Z3  j 2.5 
Ig
N2
E2
N3


Z2  2.5 
(a)
Ig


 (2)2 (2.5)  10 E
100 V∠0
Eg
10 E
j10 E
 (2)2 (j2.5)  j10 E
(b)
Z′3
Z′2
Z′2
Z′3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–31
CircuitSim 23-9 
N1
N2
(a) Step-up
(c) Variable
N1
N2
(b) Step-down
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 23–8       
A 24060-V, 3-kVA transformer [Figure 23–33(a)] is reconnected as an auto-
transformer to supply 300 volts to a load from a 240-V supply [Figure 23–33(b)].
a. Determine the transformer’s rated primary and secondary currents.
b. Determine the maximum apparent power that can be delivered to the load.
c. Determine the supply current.
FIGURE 23–32
Autotransformers.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 23.5 | Transformer Applications
847
Solution
a. Rated current  rated kVArated voltage. Thus,
Ip  3 kVA240 V  12.5 A
and
Is  3 kVA60 V  50 A
b. Since the 60-V winding is rated at 50 A, the transformer can deliver 50 A
to the load [Figure 23–33(b)]. The load voltage is 300 V. Thus,
SL  VLIL  (300 V)(50 A)  15 kVA
This is ﬁve times the rated kVA of the transformer.
c. Apparent power in  apparent power out:
240I1  15 kVA
Thus, I1  15 kVA240 V  62.5 A. Current directions are as shown.
As a check, KCL at the junction of the two coils yields
I1  Ip 
 IL  12.5 
 50  62.5 A
Current magnitudes can be added here to get total current since the currents are
in phase.
4:1
240 V
60 V
Ip
Is
(a) 3 kVA transformer
(b) Used as an autotransformer




240 V
Ip  12.5 A
240 V
60 V


I1  62.5 A
IL
IL  Is  50 A
VL  300 V


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–33
CircuitSim 23-10 
1. For each of the circuits of Figure 23–34, determine the required answer.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
10:4 ratio
Zp
3 
j4 
Zp  ?
400 
R
R  ?
N1  300 turns        N2  1200 turns
60 E
20 E
a  ?
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–34
2. For Figure 23–35, if a  5 and Ip  5 A∠	60, what is Eg?
3. For Figure 23–35, if Ip  30 mA∠	40 and Eg  240 V∠20, what is a?
4. a. How many amps can a 24-kVA, 7200120-V transformer supply to a 
120-V unity power factor load? To a 0.75 power factor load?
b. How many watts can it supply to each load?


Eg
Ip
1 ∠60
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–35
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In Section 23.2, we idealized the transformer. We now add back the effects that
we ignored.
Leakage Flux
While most ﬂux is conﬁned to the core, a small amount (called leakage ﬂux)
passes outside the core and through air at each winding as in Figure 23–39(a).
The effect of this leakage can be modelled by inductances Lp and Ls as indicated
in (b). The remaining ﬂux, the mutual ﬂux m, links both windings and is
therefore accounted for by the ideal transformer as previously.
848
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
5. For the transformer of Figure 23–36, between position 2 and 0 there are
2000 turns. Between taps 1 and 2 there are 200 turns, and between taps
1 and 3 there are 300 turns. What will the output voltage be when the supply
is connected to tap 1? To tap 2? To tap 3?


2400 V


1
Taps
N2  100 turns
2
3
0
© Cengage Learning 2013


100 E
Speaker
18 V
Rs
a  5
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–36
FIGURE 23–37
600 V


58%
100%
Load
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–38
6. For the circuit of Figure 23–37, what is the power delivered to a 4-ohm
speaker? What is the power delivered if an 8-ohm speaker is used instead?
Why is the power to the 4-ohm speaker larger?
7. The autotransformer of Figure 23–38 has a 58% tap. The apparent power of
the load is 7.2 kVA. Calculate the following:
a. The load voltage and current.
b. The source current.
c. The current in each winding and its direction.
23.6 Practical 
Iron-Core
Transformers
(a) Flux leakage
s (leakage)
p (leakage)
m
Lp
Ls
Primary
reactance
Secondary
reactance
Ideal
transformer
(b) Modelling the leakage
      as small inductances
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–39
Adding the effect of leakage ﬂux to the model.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Winding Resistance
The effect of coil resistance can be approximated by adding resistances Rp and
Rs as shown in Figure 23–40. The effect of these resistances is to cause a slight
power loss and hence a reduction in efﬁciency as well as a small voltage drop.
[The power loss associated with coil resistance is called copper loss (Section 23.7)
and varies as the square of the load current.]
Section 23.6 | Practical Iron-Core Transformers
849
Ideal
transformer
Rp
Rs
Lp
Ls
Secondary
resistance
Primary
resistance
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–40
Adding the winding resistance to the model.
Core Loss
Losses occur in the core because of eddy currents and hysteresis. First, consider
eddy currents. Since iron is a conductor, voltage is induced in the core as ﬂux
varies. This voltage creates currents that circulate as “eddies” within the core
itself. One way to reduce these currents is to break their path of circulation by
constructing the core from thin laminations of steel rather than using a solid
block of iron. Laminations are insulated from each other by a coat of ceramic,
varnish, or similar insulating material. (Although this does not eliminate eddy
currents, it greatly reduces them.) Power and audio transformers are built this
way (Figure 23–4). Another way to reduce eddy currents is to use powdered iron
held together by an insulating binder. Ferrite and other low loss cores are made
like this.
Now consider hysteresis (Chapter 12, Section 12.14). Because the ﬂux
direction constantly cycles, magnetic domains in the core steel constantly
reverse as well. This takes energy. In practice, this energy is minimized by
using special grain-oriented transformer steel.
The sum of hysteresis and eddy current loss is called core loss or iron loss.
In a well-designed transformer, it is small, typically a few percent or less of the
transformer rating. The effect of core loss can be modelled as a resistor, Rc in
Figure 23–41. Core losses vary approximately as the square of applied voltage.
As long as voltage is constant (which it normally is), core losses remain constant.
Ideal
transformer
Rp
Rs
jXp
jXs
Lm
Rc
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–41
Final iron-core transformer equivalent circuit.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Other Effects
We have also neglected magnetizing current. In a real transformer, however,
some current is required to magnetize the core. To account for this, add path Lm
as shown in Figure 23–41. Stray capacitances also exist between various parts of
the transformer. They can be approximated by lumped capacitances as indicated.
The Full Equivalent
Figure 23–41 shows the ﬁnal equivalent with all effects incorporated. How
good is it? Calculations based on this model agree extremely well with mea-
surements made on real transformers—see Note.
Voltage Regulation
Because of its internal impedance, voltage drops occur inside a transformer.
Therefore, its output voltage under load is different than its output voltage
under no load. This change in voltage (expressed as a percentage of full-load
voltage) is termed regulation. For regulation analysis, parallel branches Rc and
Lm and stray capacitance have negligible effect and can be neglected. This
yields the simpliﬁed circuit of Figure 23–42(a). Even greater simpliﬁcation is
achieved by reﬂecting secondary impedances into the primary. This yields the
circuit of (b). The reﬂected load voltage is aVL and the reﬂected load current is
ILa. The simpliﬁed equivalent of Figure 23–42(b) is the circuit that we use in
practice to perform regulation analysis.
850
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
NOTES...
Although Figure 23–41 (which rep-
resents the full equivalent for iron-
core transformers) yields exception-
ally good results, it is complex and
awkward to use. Fortunately, we
can simplify the model, since cer-
tain effects are negligible for spe-
ciﬁc applications. For example, at
power frequencies, the effect of
capacitance is negligible, while for
regulation analysis (considered
next), the core branch (Rc and Lm)
also has negligible effect. Thus, in
practice, they can usually be omit-
ted, leading to the simpliﬁed model
illustrated next (Figure 23–42).
Ideal
transformer
Rp
Rs
jXp
jXs


Ip 
IL
Eg


ZL VL
(a)
ILa
Reﬂected
load
Req
jXeq


IL
a
Eg


a2ZL aVL
(b) Req  Rp  a2 Rs
      Xeq  Xp  a2 Xs
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–42
Simplifying the equivalent.
EXAMPLE 23–9       
A 10:1 transformer has primary and secondary resistance and reactance of 4  
j4  and 0.04  
 j0.04 , respectively, as in Figure 23–43.
Ideal
transformer
j4 E


Ig 
IL  20 A∠30
Eg


10:1
 j0.04 E
120 V∠0
ILa
4xE
0.04xE
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–43
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 23.6 | Practical Iron-Core Transformers
851
a. Determine its equivalent circuit.
b. If VL  120 V∠0 and IL  20 A∠	30, what is the supply voltage, Eg?
c. Determine the regulation.
Solution
a. Req  Rp 
 a2Rs  4  
 (10)2(0.04 )  8 
Xeq  Xp 
 a2Xs  4  
 (10)2(0.04 )  8 
Thus, Zeq  8  
 j8  as shown in Figure 23–44.
(Equivalent impedance)


Eg


aVL
8xExxxxxxxxxj8 E
Ig  2 A∠30
1200 V∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–44
b. aVL  (10)(120 V∠0)  1200 V∠0 and ILa  (20 A∠	30)10 
2 A∠	30. From KVL, Eg  (2 A∠	30) (8  
 j8) 
 1200 V∠0 
1222 V∠0.275.
Thus, there is a phase shift of 0.275 across the transformer’s internal
impedance and a drop of 22 V, requiring that the primary be operated
slightly above its rated voltage. (This is normal.)
c. Now consider the no-load condition (Figure 23–45). Let VNL be the no-load
voltage. As indicated, aVNL  1222 V. Thus, VNL  1222a  122210 
122.2 volts and
regulation  
VNL
V
	
FL
VFL
  100  
122.2
12
	
0
120
  100  1.83%
Note that only magnitudes are used in determining regulation. Note also
that you can use the high-side equivalent voltages to compute regula-
tion—see Practice Problems 4.




aVNL  1222 V
8          j8 
1222 V
0 A
Eg
© Cengage Learning 2013
PRACTICAL NOTES...
1. From Figure 23–45, a  EgVNL.
This means that the turns ratio
is the ratio of input voltage to
output voltage at no load.
2. The voltage rating of a trans-
former (such as 1200120 V) is
referred to as its nominal rating.
The ratio of nominal voltages is
the same as the turns ratio. Thus,
for a nonloaded transformer, if
nominal voltage is applied to the
primary, nominal voltage will
appear at the secondary.
3. Power transformers are normally
operated close to their nominal
voltages. However, depending on
operating conditions, they may
be a few percent above or below
rated voltage at any given time.
FIGURE 23–45
No-load equivalent: aVNL  Eg.
CircuitSim 23-11 
1. A transformer used in an electronic power supply has a nominal rating
of 12012 volts and is connected to a 120-Vac source. Its equivalent
impedance as seen from the primary is 10  
 j10 . What is the 
magnitude of the load voltage if the load is 5 ohms resistive?
Determine the regulation.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Transformer Efﬁciency
Recall from Chapter 4, efﬁciency is the ratio of output power to input power.
h  
P
P
o
i
u
n
t  100%
(23–12)
But Pin  Pout 
 Ploss. For a transformer, losses are due to I2R losses in the
windings (called copper losses) and losses in the core (called core losses).
Thus,
h  
Pout
P

out
Ploss
  100% 
 100%
(23–13)
Large power transformers are exceptionally efﬁcient, on the order of 98% to 
99%. The efﬁciencies of smaller power transformers are around 95% or better.
Pout

Pout 
 Pcopper 
 Pcore
852
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
2. For Example 23–9, conﬁrm that high-side equivalent voltages yield the
same regulation as calculated using the low-side values.
Answers
1 1.8 V;
2.04%
2. regulation  (1222 V – 1200 V)1200 V  100  1.83%
The losses of Equation 23–13 may be determined experimentally using the
short-circuit test and the open-circuit test. (These tests are used mainly with
power transformers.) They provide the data needed to determine a trans-
former’s equivalent circuit and to compute its efficiency.
The Short-Circuit Test
Figure 23–46 shows the test setup. Starting at 0 V, gradually increase Eg
until the ammeter indicates full rated current. (This occurs at a few percent
rated input voltage.) Since core losses are proportional to the square of
voltage, at this low voltage, core losses are negligible. Thus, while the cir-
cuit of Figure 23–46 measures the sum of copper loss and core loss, the
wattmeter reading is essentially only copper loss.
23.7 Transformer
Tests
Eg
Low
voltage
V


I
W
Rated
current
Short
circuit
Transformer
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–46
Short-circuit test. Measure from the HV side.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Open-Circuit Test
The setup for the open-circuit (OC) test is shown in Figure 23–48. Apply the
full rated voltage. Since the load current is zero, only exciting current results.
Since the exciting current is small, power loss in the winding resistance is neg-
ligible, and the wattmeter reading is essentially just core loss.
Section 23.7 | Transformer Tests
853
EXAMPLE 23–10        
Measurements on the high side of a 240120-volt, 4.8-kVA transformer yield 
Eg  11.5 V and W  172 W at the rated current of I  4.8 kVA240  20 A.
Determine Zeq.
Solution
See Figure 23–47. Since ZL  0, the only impedance in the circuit 
is Zeq. Thus, Zeq  EgI  11.5 V20 A  0.575 . Further, Req  WI2 
172 W(20 A)2  0.43 . Therefore,
Xeq  Zeq
2	
 R
eq
2  (0
.5
75)2
 	
 (0.4
3)2
  0.382 
and Zeq  Req 
 jXeq  0.43  
 j0.382  as shown in (b).


P  172 W
Req          jXeq
Eg  11.5 V
Zeq
I  20 A
Transformer
equivalent
Reduced
voltage
a2ZL  0
(a)
0.43 Ex+ j0.382 E
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–47
Determining the equivalent circuit by test.
PRACTICAL NOTES...
Since power loss is the same
regardless of which side of a trans-
former you measure from, we usu-
ally perform the short-circuit (SC) test
from the high voltage side, as cur-
rents are lower here. (For example,
for a 48 kVA, 1200120 V transformer,
rated current on the HV side is 40 A,
but on the LV side, it is 400 A.) Note
that voltage is generally not a prob-
lem here since you need only a few
percent of rated voltage to run the
test. In fact, if you inadvertently
applied rated voltage to a short-
circuited transformer, the currents
would be so high that you would
probably have an explosion on your
hands—thus, you must be very
careful when running this test.
CircuitSim 23-12 
Full
rated
voltage


I
W
Exciting
current
Open
circuit
Transformer
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–48
Open-circuit test. Measure from the LV side.
PRACTICAL NOTES...
The OC test is normally performed
on the low-voltage side since
this permits you to work with a
lower voltage. (For example, for a
1200120-V transformer, you would
need a wattmeter capable of opera-
tion at 1200 V if measurements
were made from the HV side,
whereas, if the test is done from
the LV side, you need only 120-V
capability.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copper loss varies as the square of load current. Thus, at half the rated cur-
rent, the copper loss is (1⁄2)2  1⁄4 of its value at full rated current. Core loss
remains constant, however, since applied voltage remains constant.
854
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
EXAMPLE 23–11       
An open-circuit test on the transformer of Example 23–10 yields a core loss of
106 W. Determine this transformer’s efﬁciency when supplying the full, rated
VA to a load at unity power factor.
Solution
Since the transformer is supplying the rated VA, its current is the full,
rated current. From the short-circuit test, the copper loss at full rated current is
172 W. Thus,
copper loss  172 W (From the SC test)
core loss  106 W (From the OC test)
output  4800 W (Rated)
input  output 
 losses  5078 W
Thus
h  PoutPin  (4800 W5078 W)  100  94.5%
For the transformer of Example 23–11, determine power input and efﬁciency
at half the rated VA output to a unity power factor.
Answer
2549 W; 94.2%
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
Iron-core transformer characteristics vary with frequency and voltage. To
determine why, we start with Faraday’s law, e  Nddt. Specializing this to
the sinusoidal ac case, it can be shown that
Ep  4.44 fNpm
(23–14)
where m is the mutual core ﬂux.
Effect of Voltage
First, assume constant frequency. Since m  Ep4.44fNp, the core ﬂux is pro-
portional to the applied voltage. Thus, if the applied voltage is increased, the
core ﬂux increases. Since magnetizing current is required to produce this ﬂux,
magnetizing current must increase as well. An examination of Figure 23–49
shows that magnetizing current increases dramatically when ﬂux density rises
above the knee of the curve; in fact, the effect is so pronounced that the primary
current at no load may well exceed the full-load rated current of the trans-
former if the input voltage is large. For this reason, power transformers should
be operated only at or near their rated voltage.
23.8 Voltage and
Frequency Effects
Magnetizing current.
(This is a variation of the
B–H curve for the core.)
Core
flux
density
Rated
operating
point
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–49
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Effect of Frequency
Audio transformers must operate over a range of frequencies. Consider again
m  Ep4.44fNp. As this indicates, decreasing the frequency increases the
core ﬂux and hence the magnetizing current. At low frequencies, this larger
current increases internal voltage drops and hence decreases the output voltage
as indicated in Figure 23–50. Now consider increasing the frequency. As fre-
quency increases, leakage inductance and shunt capacitance (recall Figure 23–41)
cause the voltage to fall off. To compensate for this, audio transformers are
sometimes designed so that their internal capacitances resonate with their
inductances to extend the operating range. This is what causes the peaking at
the high-frequency end of the curve.
Section 23.9 | Loosely Coupled Circuits
855
10
1000
10 000
100 000
f (Hz)
Vout/Vin
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–50
Frequency response curve, audio transformer.
A transformer with a nominal rating of 240120 V, 60 Hz, has its load on the 
120-V side. Suppose Rp  0.4 , Lp  1.061 mH, Rs  0.1 , and Ls 
0.2653 mH.
a. Determine its equivalent circuit as per Figure 23–42(b).
b. If Eg  240 V∠0 and ZL  3 
 j4 , what is VL?
c. Compute the regulation.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
We now turn our attention to coupled circuits that do not have iron cores. For
such circuits, only a portion of the ﬂux produced by one coil links another, and
the coils are said to be loosely coupled. Loosely coupled circuits cannot be char-
acterized by turns ratios; rather, as you will see, they are characterized by self-
and mutual inductances. Air-core transformers and general inductive circuit
coupling fall into this category. In this section, we develop the main ideas.
Voltages in Air-Core Coils
To begin, consider the isolated (noncoupled) coil of Figure 23–51. As shown in
Chapter 13, the voltage across this coil is given by vL  Ldidt, where i is the
current through the coil and L is its inductance. Note carefully the polarity of
the voltage; the plus sign goes at the tail of the current arrow. Because the coil’s
voltage is created by its own current, it is called a self-induced voltage.
Now consider a pair of coupled coils (Figure 23–52). When coil 1 alone is
energized as in (a), it looks just like the isolated coil of Figure 23–51; thus its
voltage is
v11  L1di1dt (self-induced in coil 1)
23.9 Loosely Coupled
Circuits
Magnetic field
vL xL


i
di
dt
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–51
Place the plus sign for the
self-induced voltage at the tail of the
current arrow.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

where L1 is the self-inductance of coil 1 and the subscripts indicate that v11 is
the voltage across coil 1 due to its own current. Similarly, when coil 2 alone is
energized as in (b), its self-induced voltage is
v22  L2di2dt (self-induced in coil 2)
For both of these self-voltages, note that the plus sign goes at the tail of their
respective current arrows.
Mutual Voltages
Consider again Figure 23–52(a). When coil 1 is energized, some of the ﬂux that
it produces links coil 2, inducing voltage v21 in coil 2. Since the ﬂux here is due
to i1 alone, v21 is proportional to the rate of change of i1. Let the constant of
proportionality be M. Then,
v21  Mdi1dt (mutually induced in coil 2)
v21 is the mutually induced voltage in coil 2 and M is the mutual inductance
between the coils. It has units of henries. Similarly, when coil 2 alone is ener-
gized as in (b), the voltage induced in coil 1 is
v12  Mdi2dt (mutually induced in coil 1)
When both coils are energized, the voltage of each coil can be found by
superposition; in each coil, the induced voltage is the sum of its self voltage plus
the voltage mutually induced due to the current in the other coil. The sign of the
self term for each coil is straightforward: It is determined by placing a plus sign
at the tail of the current arrow for the coil as shown in Figures 23–52(a) and (b).
The polarity of the mutual term, however, depends on whether the mutual volt-
age is additive or subtractive.
Additive and Subtractive Voltages
Whether self and mutual voltages add or subtract depends on the direction of
currents through the coils relative to their winding directions. This can be
described in terms of the dot convention. Consider Figure 23–53(a).
Comparing the coils here to Figure 23–12, you can see that their top ends cor-
respond and thus can be marked with dots. Now let currents enter both coils at
dotted ends. Using the right-hand rule, you can see that their ﬂuxes add. The
total ﬂux linking coil 1 is therefore the sum of that produced by i1 and i2; there-
fore, the voltage across coil 1 is the sum of that produced by i1 and i2. That is
v1  v11 
 v12. Expanded, this is
v1  L1d
d
i
t
1 
 Md
d
i
t
2
(23–15a)
856
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
(a)
v2


v1


1
2
i1
i2
(b)




v2
v1
()
i1
i2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–53
When both currents enter dotted terminals, use the 
 sign for the mutual
term in Equation 23–15.


i1
i2  0
v21
v11
(a) v11 is the voltage in coil 1 due
to current i1. It is therefore a
“self-induced” voltage. v21 is
the voltage in coil 2 due to
current i1. It is therefore a
“mutually-induced” voltage.
v12


i2
i1  0
v22
© Cengage Learning 2013
(b) v22 is the voltage in coil 2 due
to current i2. It is therefore a
“self-induced” voltage. v12 is
the voltage in coil 1 due to
current i2. It is therefore a
“mutually-induced” voltage.
FIGURE 23–52
Self and mutual voltages.
Voltages shown in (a) are due to current i1
acting alone, while voltages shown in (b)
are due to current i2 acting alone. Note the
order of subscripts on the mutual voltage.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Similarly, for coil 2, v2  v21 
 v22. Thus,
v2  Md
d
i
t
1 
 L2d
d
i
t
2
(23–15b)
Now consider Figure 23–54. Here, the ﬂuxes oppose and the ﬂux linking
each coil is the difference between that produced by its own current and that
produced by the current of the other coil. Thus, the sign in front of the mutual
voltage terms will be negative.
The Dot Rule
As you can see, the signs of the mutual voltage terms in Equations 23–15 are
positive when both currents enter dotted terminals, but negative when one cur-
rent enters a dotted terminal and the other enters an undotted terminal. Stated
another way, the sign of the mutual voltage is the same as the sign of its self
voltage when both currents enter dotted (or undotted) terminals, but is oppo-
site when one current enters a dotted terminal and the other enters an undot-
ted terminal. This observation provides us with a procedure for determining
voltage polarities in coupled circuits.
1. Assign a direction for currents i1 and i2.
2. Place a plus sign at the tail of the current arrow for each coil to denote the
polarity of its self-induced voltage.
3. If both currents enter (or both leave) dotted terminals, make the sign of the
mutually induced voltage the same as the sign of the self-induced voltage
when you write the equation.
4. If one current enters a dotted terminal and the other leaves, make the sign of
the mutually induced voltage opposite to the sign of the self-induced voltage.
Section 23.9 | Loosely Coupled Circuits
857
(a)
v2


v1


1
2
i1
i2
(b) 




v2
v1
()
i1
i2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–54
When one current enters
a dotted terminal and the other enters an
undotted terminal, use the 	 sign for the
mutual term in Equation 23–15.
EXAMPLE 23–12        
Write equations for v1 and v2 of Figure 23–55(a).
(a)




v2
v1
i1
i2
(b)




v2
v1
i1
i2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–55
Solution
Since one current enters an undotted terminal and the other enters a
dotted terminal, place a minus sign in front of M. Thus,
v1  L1d
d
i
t
1 	 Md
d
i
t
2
v2  	Md
d
i
t
1 
 L2d
d
i
t
2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Coefﬁcient of Coupling
For loosely coupled coils, not all of the ﬂux produced by one coil links the
other. To describe the degree of coupling between coils, we introduce a coefﬁ-
cient of coupling, k. Mathematically, k is deﬁned as the ratio of the ﬂux that
links the companion coil to the total ﬂux produced by the energized coil. For
iron-core transformers, almost all the ﬂux is conﬁned to the core and links both
coils; thus, k is very close to 1. At the other extreme (i.e., isolated coils where
no ﬂux linkage occurs), k  0. Thus, 0  k  1. Mutual inductance depends
on k. It can be shown that mutual inductance, self-inductances, and the coefﬁ-
cient of coupling are related by the equation
M  kL1L
2
(23–16)
Thus, the larger the coefﬁcient of coupling, the larger the mutual inductance.
Inductors with Mutual Coupling
If a pair of coils are in close proximity, the ﬁeld of each coil couples the other,
resulting in a change in the apparent inductance of each coil. To illustrate, con-
sider Figure 23–56(a), which shows a pair of inductors with self-inductances L1
and L2. If coupling occurs, the effective coil inductances will no longer be L1 and
L2. To see why, consider the voltage induced in each winding—it is the sum of
the coil’s own self voltage plus the voltage mutually induced from the other coil.
Since current is the same for both coils, v1  L1didt 
 Mdidt  (L1 
 M)didt,
which means that coil 1 has an effective inductance of L1  L1 
 M. Similarly,
v2  (L2 
 M)didt, giving coil 2 an effective inductance of L2  L2 
 M. The
effective inductance of the series combination [Figure 23–56(b)] is then
L
T  L1 
 L2 
 2M
(henries)
(23–17)
If coupling is subtractive as in Figure 23–57, L1  L1 	 M, L2  L2 	 M, and
L	
T  L1 
 L2 	 2M
(henries)
(23–18)
You can determine mutual inductance from Equations 23–17 and 23–18. It is
M 
(L
T 	 L–
T)
(23–19)
1
4
858
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
Write equations for v1 and v2 of Figure 23–55(b).
Answer
Same as Equations 23–15(a) and 23–15(b).
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
(a) L1  L1  M; L2  L2  M




v2
v1
i1
LT
M
LT
LT
(b) LT  L1  L2  2 M
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–56
Coils in series with additive mutual coupling.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The same principles apply when more than two coils are coupled. Thus, for the
circuit of Figure 23–58, L1  L1 	 M12 	 M31, and so on.
For two parallel inductors with mutual coupling, the equivalent induc-
tances are 
L1 
(23–20a)
and 
L2 
(23–20b)
where, if the dots are at the same end, use the 	 sign. The parallel equiva-
lent is
Leq  
L1
L

1L2
L
	
2 
M
2
2
M

(23–20c)
For example, if L1  20 mH, L2  5 mH, and M  2 mH, then Leq  4.57 mH
if the dots are both at the same ends of the coils, and Leq  3.31 mH when the
dots are at opposite ends.
L1L2 - M2
L1  M
L1L2 - M2
L2  M
Section 23.9 | Loosely Coupled Circuits
859
EXAMPLE 23–13        
Three inductors are connected in series (Figure 23–57). Coils 1 and 2 interact,
but coil 3 does not.
a. Determine the effective inductance of each coil.
b. Determine the total inductance of the series connection.
Solution
a. L1  L1 	 M  2 mH 	 0.4 mH  1.6 mH
L2  L2 	 M  3 mH 	 0.4 mH  2.6 mH
L1 and L2 are in series with L3. Thus,
b. LT  1.6 mH 
 2.6 mH 
 2.7 mH  6.9 mH
M  0.4 mH
LT
M
L1  2 mH L2  3 mH
L3  2.7 mH
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–57
CircuitSim 23-13 
For the circuit of Figure 23–58, different “dot” symbols are used to represent
coupling between sets of coils.
a. Determine the effective inductance of each coil.
b. Determine the total inductance of the series connection.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 7
L1
L2
L3
    M12  2 mH (Mutual inductance between coils 1 and 2) (  )
L2  40 mH
L3  20 mH
L1  10 mH
M23  1 mH (Mutual inductance between coils 2 and 3) (  )
M31  0.6 mH (Mutual inductance between coils 3 and 1) (  )
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–58
Answers
a. L1  7.4 mH; L2  39 mH; L3  20.4 mH
b. 66.8 mH
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The effect of unwanted mutual inductance can be minimized by physically
separating coils or by orienting their axes at right angles. The latter technique
is used where space is limited and coils cannot be spaced widely. While it does
not eliminate coupling, it can help minimize its effects.
860
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
23.10 Magnetically
Coupled Circuits
with Sinusoidal
Excitation
When coupling occurs between various parts of a circuit (whether wanted or
not), the foregoing principles apply. However, since it is difficult to continue
the analysis in general, we will change over to steady state ac. This will permit
us to look for the main ideas. We will use the mesh approach. To use the mesh
approach, (1) write mesh equations using KVL, (2) use the dot convention to
determine the signs of the induced voltage components, and (3) solve the
resulting equations in the usual manner.
To specialize to the sinusoidal ac case, convert voltages and currents to
phasor form. To do this, recall from Chapter 16 that inductor voltage in phasor
form is VL  jqLI. (This is the phasor equivalent of vL  Ldidt, Figure 23–51.)
This means that Ldidt becomes jqLI; in a similar fashion, Mdi1dt ⇒jqMI1 and
Mdi2dt ⇒jqMI2. Thus, in phasor form Equations 23–15 become
V1  jqL1I1 
 jqMI2
V2  jqMI1 
 jqL2I2
These equations describe the circuit of Figure 23–59, as you can see if you
write KVL for each loop. (Verify this.)




V2
V1
I1
I2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–59
Coupled coils with sinu-
soidal ac excitation.
EXAMPLE 23–14       
For Figure 23–60, write the mesh equations and solve for I1 and I2. Let q 
1000 rads, L1  0.1 H, L2  0.2 H, M  0.08 H, R1  15 , and R2  20 .




VL1
I1
I2


VL2
E1  100 V∠0
R1


E2  150 V∠30
R2
VR2
VR1



Polarities of
self-voltages
(plus signs go at the tail
of the current arrows)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–60
Air-core transformer example.
Solution
qL1  (1000)(0.1)  100 , qL2  (1000)(0.2)  200 , and qM
 (1000)(0.08)  80 . Since one current enters a dotted terminal and the other
leaves, the sign of the mutual term is opposite to the sign of the self term. (To
help differentiate between self and mutual terms, the self term for each equation
is printed in blue and the mutual term in red.) KVL yields
Loop 1:
E1 	 R1I1 	 jqL1I1 
 jqMI2  0
Loop 2:
E2 	 jqL2I2 
 jqMI1 	 R2I2  0
CircuitSim 23-14 
↓
opposite
↓
opposite
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 23.10 | Magnetically Coupled Circuits with Sinusoidal Excitation
861
Thus,
(15 
 j100)I1 	 j80I2  100∠0°
	j80I1 
 (20 
 j200)I2  150∠30°
These can be solved by computer program, by determinants, or by calculator—
see Appendix B. Answers are I1  2.16∠	61.9 and I2  1.61∠	55.3.
EXAMPLE 23–15        
For the circuit of Figure 23–61, determine I1 and I2.


I1
I2


100 V∠0


C = 100 μF


L1  0.1 H, L2  0.2 H, M  80 mH, ω  1000 rad/s






15 E


20 E
M
10 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–61
Solution
qL1  100 , qL2  200 , qM  80 , and XC  10 .
Loop 1:
100∠0° 	 15I1 	 j100I1 
 j80I2 	 10I1 
 10I2  0
Loop 2:
	10I2 
 10I1 	 j200I2 
 j80I1 	 20I2 	 (	j10)I2  0
Thus,
(25 
 j100)I1 	 (10 
 j80)I2  100∠0°
	(10 
 j80)I1 
 (30 
 j190)I2  0
Solution yields I1  1.43 A∠	71.7° and I2  0.600 A∠	69.9°.
1. Refer to the circuit of Figure 23–62.
a. Determine the mesh equations.
b. Solve for currents I1 and I2.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 8


80 V∠60°
120 V∠0°
10 Ω
L1
L2
40 Ω
0.5 H
0.1 H


I1
I2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–62
M  0.12 H, q  100 rads.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Earlier we found that an impedance ZL on the secondary side of an iron-core
transformer is reﬂected into the primary side as a2ZL. A somewhat similar sit-
uation occurs in loosely coupled circuits. In this case, however, the impedance
that you see reﬂected to the primary side is referred to as coupled impedance.
To get at the idea, consider Figure 23–63. Writing KVL for each loop yields
Loop 1:
Eg 	 Z1I1 	 jqL1I1 	 jqMI2  0
Loop 2:
	jqL2I2 	 jqMI1 	 Z2I2 	 ZLL2  0
which reduces to
Eg  ZpI1 
 jqMI2
(23–21a)
0  jqMI1 
 (Zs 
 ZL)I2
(23–21b)
where Zp  Z1 
 jqL1 and Zs  Z2 
 jqL2. Solving Equation 23–21b for I2
and substituting this into Equation 23–21a yields, after some manipulation,
Eg  ZpI1 
 
Z
(
s
q

M)
Z
2
L
I1
862
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
2. Consider a pair of coupled inductors (with dots at the same ends of the
coils) connected in parallel. Given f  1 kHz, Eg  18 V ∠0, L1  25 mH,
L2  9 mH, and M  6 mH.
a. Determine the equivalent inductances L1 and L2.
b. Using the computed values for L1 and L2, compute the parallel equiva-
lent using the standard parallel inductance formula of Chapter 13.
c. Determine the parallel equivalent inductance using Equation 23–20(c)
and compare to the answer of (b).
d. Determine source current.
e. Determine current through each inductor.
Answers
1. a. (50 
 j10)I1 	 (40 	 j12)I2  120∠0
	(40 	 j12)I1 
 (40 
 j50)I2  	80∠60
b. I1  1.14 A∠	31.9 and I2  1.65 A∠	146
2. a. 63 mH
9.95 mH
b. 8.59 mH
c. 8.59 mH
d. 0.334 A
e. 45.5 mA
288 mA
23.11 Coupled
Impedance


Eg
VL
ZL


I1
I2
L2
L1
Z2
Z1
Zin
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–63
CircuitSim 23-15 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now, divide both sides by I1, and deﬁne Zin  EgI1. Thus,
Zin  Zp 
 
Z
(
s
q

M)
Z
2
L

(23–22)
The term (qM)2(Zs 
 ZL), which reﬂects the secondary impedances into the
primary, is the coupled impedance for the circuit. Note that since secondary
impedances appear in the denominator, they reﬂect into the primary with
reversed reactive parts. Thus, capacitance in the secondary circuit looks induc-
tive to the source and vice versa for inductance.
Section 23.11 | Coupled Impedance
863
EXAMPLE 23–16        
For Figure 23–63, let L1  L2  10 mH, M  9 mH, q  1000 rads, Z1  R1 
5 , Z2  1  	 j5 , ZL  1  
 j20 , and Eg  100 V∠0. Determine Zin
and I1.
Solution
qL1  10 . Thus, Zp  R1 
 jqL1  5  
 j10 .
qL2  10 . Thus, Zs  Z2 
 jqL2  (1  	 j5 ) 
 j10   1  
 j5 .
qM  9  and ZL  1  
 j20 . Thus,
Zin  Zp 
 
Z
(
s
q

M)
Z
2
L
  (5 
 j10) 
 8.58 ∠52.2°
I1  EgZin  (100∠0°)(8.58∠52.2°)  11.7 A∠	52.2°
The equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 23–64.
(9)2

(1 
 j5) 
 (1 
 j20)
Coupled impedance


I1
5xExxxxxxxxj10 E
Zin
100 V∠0
(9)2
(1 xj5)  (1 j20)
11.7 A∠52.2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–64
1. For Example 23–16, let R1  10 , M  8 mH, and ZL  (3 	 j8) .
Determine Zin and I1.
2. Write simultaneous equations for the circuit of Example 23–16 and solve
for I1. Compare it to the answer obtained in the example.
Answers
1. 28.9 ∠41.1; 3.72 A∠	41.1
2. Same
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 9
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Multisim and PSpice may be used to solve coupled circuits—see Notes. 
864
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
23.12 Circuit Analysis
Using Computers
EXAMPLE 23–17       
As a ﬁrst example, consider the iron-core transformer circuit of Figure 23–65.
Solve for generator and load currents and the load voltage. 
Solution
First, manually determine the answers to provide a basis for comparison.
Reﬂecting the load impedance using a2ZL yields the equivalent circuit of
Figure 23–66. From this,
Ig 
 208.4 mA∠33.5°
Thus,
IL  aIg  416.8 mA∠33.5
and
VL  ILZL  34.6 V∠	19.4
100 V∠0°

200  
 (200  	 j265.3 )
Ig
200 E
f  60 Hz
a  2
50 E
40 RF
IL
ZL
Eg




100 V∠0°
VL
© Cengage Learning 2013
NOTES...
1. The current version of Multisim
handles both iron-core and
loosely coupled circuits.
However, Multisim legacy ver-
sions (e.g., Multisim 9) handle
only iron core. Thus, if you are
using legacy software, you will
be able to do Example 23–17 
but not Example 23–18. 
2. Multisim and PSpice require
grounds on both sides of the
transformer.
200 E
200 E
j 265.3 E


100 V∠0°
Reﬂected
load a2ZL
g
g
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–66
Equivalent of the 
circuit of Figure 23–65.
FIGURE 23–65
Iron-core circuit for ﬁrst Multisim and PSpice example.
NOTES...
Be sure that you use the Virtual
Transformer, not the Virtual Audio,
Virtual Misc, or Virtual Power 
transformer.
Multisim
Create the circuit of Figure 23–67 on your screen using the Virtual Transformer
and the Power AC Source. (To access the virtual transformer, right-click View
and ensure that the Basic toolbar is selected—that is, open on your screen—see
Notes. Use your mouse to locate the Place Virtual Transformer icon, click, then
position the transformer on your screen.) Double-click the transformer symbol
and set its turns ratio to 2, its primary and secondary winding resistances to
0.000001, and its leakage inductance to 1H. (The values aren’t critical; they
just have to be small enough to be negligible.) Next, set the magnetizing induc-
tance to 10000 H. (This is Lm of Figure 23–41. Theoretically, for an ideal trans-
former it is inﬁnity. All we need to do is make it very large.) Set all meters to
AC, then click the simulation button to ON. Meter readings agree exactly with
the analytic solution as determined previously.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PSpice Solution
Read “PSpice Notes for Coupled Circuits,” page 866. As indicated, transformer
element XFRM_LINEAR may be used to model iron-core transformers based
solely on their turns ratios. To do this, set coupling k  1, choose an arbitrarily
large value for L1, then make L2  L1a2 where a is the desired turns ratio. (The
actual values for L1 and L2 are not critical; they simply must be very large.) For
example, arbitrarily choose L1  100000 H, then compute L2  100000(22) 
25000 H. This sets a  2. Now proceed as follows: Using source VAC and trans-
former XFMR_LINEAR, create the circuit of Figure 23–68 on your screen.
Double-click the transformer and set L1 to 100000H, L2 to 25000H, and k to 1
as noted previously. Double-click VPRINT1 and set AC, MAG, and PHASE to
yes in its Properties Editor. Repeat for the IPRINT devices. In the simulations
settings dialog box, select AC Sweep and set Start and End frequencies to 60Hz
and Points to 1. Run the simulation, then scroll through the Output File. 
You should ﬁnd Ig  208.3 mA∠33.6, IL  416.7 mA∠33.6, and VL 
34.6 V∠	19.4 as determined in Example 23–17.
Section 23.12 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
865
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–67
For Multisim iron-core transformer problems, use the virtual transformer
TS_VIRTUAL.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–68
Using PSpice to model an iron-core transformer.
EXAMPLE 23–18        
As a ﬁnal example, consider the loosely coupled circuit of Figure 23–60.
Convert frequency to Hz, then determine the coefﬁcient of coupling using
Equation 23–16. When you build the circuit, do not forget to rotate Source 2 as
indicated.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

866
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
Multisim Solution
Build the circuit on your screen (Figure 23–69) using power source VAC and the
ideal transformer—see Notes 1 and 2. Set component values as indicated, then
click the ON/OFF switch to ON. Meter readings should be the same as the cur-
rent magnitudes computed in Example 23–14.
T1
100 Vrms
159.155 Hz
0˚
AC 1e-009Ohm
15 Ω
R1
U1
V1
+
–
–
+
–
+
A
0.000
–
+
A
0.000
150 Vrms
159.155 Hz
30˚
AC 1e-009Ohm
20 Ω
R2
U2
V2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–69
For Multisim air-core transformer problems, use the ideal transformer TS_IDEAL.
PSpice Solution
Using VAC for the sources and XFMR_LINEAR for the transformer, create the
circuit of Figure 23–70 on your screen. Double-click the transformer symbol
and set L1  0.1H, L2  0.2H, and k  0.5657. Select AC Sweep and set
Start and End frequencies to 159.155Hz and Points to 1. Run the simulation.
When you scroll the Output File, you will ﬁnd that the answers match those
computed in Example 23–14.
NOTES...
1. You cannot do this problem with
legacy versions of Multisim.
2. With the current version of
Multisim, you can incorporate
coupling using either the ideal
transformer (TS_IDEAL) or 
general inductor coupling
(INDUCTOR_COUPLING). 
In this example, we will use 
the ideal transformer.
3. To access the ideal transformer,
click Place, Component, Basic,
then select TS_IDEAL.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–70
PSpice solution for Example 23–14.
NOTES...
PSpice Notes for Coupled Circuits
1. The PSpice transformer model XFRM_LINEAR is based on self-inductances
and the coefﬁcient of coupling and is thus able to handle loosely coupled
circuits directly. It is also able to model tightly coupled circuits (such as iron-
core transformers). To see how, note that basic theory shows that for an ideal
iron-core transformer, k  1 and L1 and L2 are inﬁnite, but their ratio is
L1L2  a2. Thus, to represent an iron-core transformer, set L1 to an arbitrary
very large value, then compute L2  L1a2. This ﬁxes a, permitting you to
model iron-core transformers based solely on their turns ratio.
2. The sign of the coefﬁcient of coupling to use with PSpice depends on the
dot locations. If dots are on adjacent coil ends (Figure 23–60), make k posi-
tive; if dots are on opposite ends (Figure 23–63), make k negative.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
867
A
circuit you are building calls for a 3.6-mH inductor. In your parts bin, you find 
a 1.2-mH and a 2.4-mH inductor. You reason that if you connect them in
series, the total inductance will be 3.6 mH. After you build and test the circuit,
you ﬁnd that it is out of spec. After careful reasoning, you become suspicious
that mutual coupling between the coils is upsetting the operation. You therefore
set out to measure this mutual inductance. However, you have a meter that mea-
sures only self-inductance. Then an idea hits you. You de-energize the circuit,
unsolder the end of one of the inductors and measure total inductance. You get
6.32 mH. What is the mutual inductance?
Putting It into Practice
Problems
23.1
Introduction
1. For the transformers of Figure 23–71, sketch the missing waveforms.




ep
es
(a)




ep
es
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–71
23.2
Iron-Core Transformers: The Ideal Model
2. List the four things that you neglect when you idealize an iron-core 
transformer.
3. An ideal transformer has Np  1000 turns and Ns  4000 turns.
a. Is it step-up or step-down voltage?
b. If es  100 sin qt, what is ep when wound as in Figure 23–7(a)?
c. If Es  24 volts, what is Ep?
d. If Ep  24 V∠0, what is Es when wound as in Figure 23–7(a)?
e. If Ep  800 V∠0, what is Es when wound as in Figure 23–7(b)?
4. A 3:1 step-down voltage transformer has a secondary current of 6 A. 
What is its primary current?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5. For Figure 23–72, determine the expressions for v1, v2, and v3.
6. If, for Figure 23–73, Eg  240 V∠0, a  2, and ZL  8  	 j6 , deter-
mine the following:
a. VL
b. IL
c. Ig
7. If, for Figure 23–73, Eg  240 V∠0, a  0.5, and Ig  2 A∠20, determine
the following:
a. IL
b. VL
c. ZL
8. If, for Figure 23–73, a  2, VL  40 V∠0, and Ig  0.5 A∠10, determine ZL.
9. If, for Figure 23–73, a  4, Ig  4 A∠30, and ZL  6  	j8 , determine
the following:
a. VL
b. Eg
10. If, for the circuit of Figure 23–73, a  3, IL  4 A∠25, and 
ZL  10 ∠	5, determine the following:
a. Generator current and voltage.
b. Power to the load.
c. Power output by the generator.
d. Does Pout  Pin?
23.3
Reﬂected Impedance
11. For each circuit of Figure 23–74, determine Zp.
12. For each circuit of Figure 23–74, if Eg  120 V∠40 is applied, determine
the following, using the reﬂected impedance of Problem 11.
a. Ig
b. IL
c. VL
13. For Figure 23–74(a), what turns ratio is required to make Zp  (62.5 	 j125) ?
14. For Figure 23–74(b), what turns ratio is required to make Zp  84.9∠58.0 ?
15. For each circuit of Figure 23–75, determine ZT.
16. For each circuit of Figure 23–75, if a generator with Eg  120 V∠	40 is
applied, determine the following:
a. Ig
b. IL
c. VL
868
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
eg
t
24V


eg


v1


v2


v3
1:1
1:6
3:1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–72


Eg


VL
Ig
IL
ZL
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–73
(a)
Zp
2:1
10 
j20 
IL
(b)
ZL
Zp
4 E
1 E xj8 E
100:200
IL
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–74
(a)
ZT
3:1
2 
RL
VL
IL


4             j6 
(b)
ZT
1:2
6 E
RL
VL
IL


2 E            j3 E
4:1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–75
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23.4
Power Transformer Ratings
17. A transformer has a rated primary voltage of 7.2 kV, a  0.2, and a sec-
ondary rated current of 3 A. What is its kVA rating?
18. Consider a 48 kVA, 1200120-V transformer.
a. What is the maximum kVA load that it can handle at Fp  0.8?
b. What is the maximum power that it can supply to a 0.75 power factor load?
c. If the transformer supplies 45 kW to a load at 0.6 power factor, is it over-
loaded? Justify your answer.
23.5
Transformer Applications
19. The transformer of Figure 23–25 has a 7200-V primary and center-tapped
240-V secondary. If Load 1 consists of twelve 100-W lamps, Load 2 is a
1500-W heater, and Load 3 is a 2400-W stove with Fp  1.0, determine:
a. I1
b. I2
c. IN
d. Ip
20. An ampliﬁer with a Thévenin voltage of 10 V and Thévenin resistance of
128  is connected to an 8- speaker through a 4:1 transformer. Is the load
matched? How much power is delivered to the speaker?
21. An ampliﬁer with a Thévenin equivalent of 10 V and RTh of 25  drives a 
4- speaker through a transformer with a turns ratio of a  5. How much
power is delivered to the speaker? What turns ratio yields 1 W?
22. For Figure 23–76, there are 100 turns between taps 1 and 2 and 120 between
taps 2 and 3. What voltage at tap 1 yields 120 V out? At tap 3?
23. For Figure 23–30(a), a2  2 and a3  5, Z2  20 ∠50, Z3  (12 
 j4) ,
and Eg  120 V∠0. Find each load current and the generator current.
24. We wish to connect a 5-kVA, 120240-V transformer as an autotransformer
to a 120-V source to supply 360 V to a load.
a. Draw the circuit.
b. What is the maximum current that the load can draw?
c. What is the maximum load kVA that can be supplied?
d. How much current is drawn from the source?
23.6
Practical Iron-Core Transformers
25. For Figure 23–77, Eg  1220 V∠0.
a. Draw the equivalent circuit.
b. Determine Ig, IL, and VL.
Problems
869
FIGURE 23–76
Ns  200 turns.
1200 V
120 V


1
Taps
2
3
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
10:1
ZL
VL
IL


4 E  j4 E


Eg
0.02 E  j0.02 E
Ig 
Transformer
4 E j4 E
IL
a
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–77
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

26. For Figure 23–77, if VL  118 V∠0, draw the equivalent circuit and 
determine:
a. IL
b. Ig
c. Eg
d. no-load voltage
e. regulation
27. A transformer delivering Pout  48 kW has a core loss of 280 W and a
copper loss of 450 W. What is its efﬁciency at this load?
23.7
Transformer Tests
28. A short-circuit test (Figure 23–46) at rated current yields a wattmeter 
reading of 96 W, and an open-circuit test (Figure 23–48) yields a core loss
of 24 W.
a. What is the transformer’s efﬁciency when delivering the full, rated output
of 5 kVA at unity Fp?
b. What is its efﬁciency when delivering one-quarter the rated kVA at 
0.8 Fp?
23.9
Loosely Coupled Circuits
29. For Figure 23–78,
v1  L1d
d
i
t
1  Md
d
i
t
2,
v2   Md
d
i
t
1 
 L2d
d
i
t
2
For each circuit, indicate whether the sign to use with M is plus or minus.
30. For a set of coils, L1  250 mH, L2  0.4 H, and k  0.85. What is M?
31. For a set of coupled coils, L1  2 H, M  0.8 H, and the coefﬁcient of cou-
pling is 0.6. Determine L2.
32. For Figure 23–52(a), L1  25 mH, L2  4 mH, and M  0.8 mH. If i1 changes
at a rate of 1200 As, what are the primary and secondary induced voltages?
33. Everything the same as Problem 32 except that i1  10 e	500t A. Find 
the equations for the primary and secondary voltages. Compute them 
at t  1 ms.
34. For each circuit of Figure 23–79, determine LT.
35. For Figure 23–80, determine LT.
36. For the circuit of Figure 23–81, determine I.
870
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
(b)




v2
v1
i1
i2
(a)




v2
v1
i1
i2
(c)




v2
v1
i1
i2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–80
FIGURE 23–81
FIGURE 23–79
FIGURE 23–78
(a)
LT
L1  8 H
M  1 H
L2  0.5 H
(b)
L2  50 mH
L1
M  4 mH
LT
k  0.4
© Cengage Learning 2013
L2  6 H
M14
LT
L1  1 H
M23
L3  1.5 H
L4  4 H
M14  1 H
M23  2 H
© Cengage Learning 2013
400xE


I
L1  1.0 H
100 V∠0
L1
L2
L2  4.0 H
k  0.8
f  60 Hz
© Cengage Learning 2013
37. The inductors of Figure 23–82 are mutually coupled. What is their equivalent
inductance? If f  60 Hz, what is the source current?
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23.10
Magnetically Coupled Circuits 
with Sinusoidal Excitation
38. For Figure 23–60, R1  10 , R2  30 , L1  100 mH, L2  200 mH,
M  25 mH, and f  31.83 Hz. Write the mesh equations.
39. For the circuit of Figure 23–83, write mesh equations.
Problems
871
FIGURE 23–84
FIGURE 23–82
FIGURE 23–83
L2
L1
L1  250 mH
L2  40 mH
k  0.8


120 V∠0°
© Cengage Learning 2013
4xE


L1  40 E
100 V∠0
L1
L2
j10 E
I1
I2
j8 E
L2  20 E
M  5 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
10 Ω
 j40 Ω
_L1 40 Ω
_L2 30 Ω
_M 15 Ω
80 Ω
I2
I1
I3
5 Ω
25 Ω


100 V∠0°


150 V∠30°
© Cengage Learning 2013
40. Write mesh equations for the circuit of Figure 23–84.
I1
I2


120 V∠0


j50 E
L1  0.1 H
10 E
15 E
M
L2  0.5 H
M  0.12 H
  100 rad/s
L2
L1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 23–85
41. Write mesh equations for the circuit of Figure 23–85. (This is a very chal-
lenging problem.)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23.11
Coupled Impedance
42. For the circuit of Figure 23–86:
a. Determine Zin.
b. Determine Ig.
872
Chapter 23 | Transformers and Coupled Circuits
FIGURE 23–86
FIGURE 23–87


100 V∠0
Ig
Eg
R1
R2
15 E
20 E
10 RF
C1
L1  0.1 H; L2  0.2 H; M  0.08 H; f  60 Hz
© Cengage Learning 2013
23.12
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
Note: With PSpice, orient the IPRINT devices so that current enters the positive
terminal. Otherwise the phase angles will be in error by 180. Multisim legacy soft-
ware does not handle loosely coupled circuits.
43. An iron-core transformer with a 4:1 turns ratio has a load consisting of a 
12- resistor in series with a 250-F capacitor. The transformer is driven
from a 120-V∠0, 60-Hz source. Use Multisim or PSpice to determine the
source and load currents. Verify the answers by manual computation.
44. Using Multisim or PSpice, solve for the primary and secondary currents and
the load voltage for Figure 23–87. Verify by manual computation.
PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
MultiSim
20 Ω
10 Ω
0.2 Ω
0.5 mH
f  60 Hz
40 mH
50 mH
1200 V∠0°


Vload
10:1
© Cengage Learning 2013
45. Using Multisim or PSpice, solve for the source current for the coupled parallel
inductors of Figure 23–82. Hint: For Multisim, use TS_IDEAL; for PSpice,
use XFRM_LINEAR to model the inductors. You will need a very low-value
resistor in series with each inductor to avoid creating source-inductor loops.
46. Solve for the currents of Figure 23–61 using Multisim or PSpice. Compare
these to the answers of Example 23–15.
47. Solve for the currents of Figure 23–62 using a frequency of f  1 kHz. Write
and solve mesh equations to verify results.
48. Solve Example 23–16 for current I1 using Multisim or PSpice. Compare
answers. Hint: When values are given as XL and XC, you must convert them
to L and C.
49. Using Multisim or PSpice, solve Practice Problems 8, Question 2, and com-
pare the answers to its analytic solution.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
873
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. Step-up; 200 V
2. a. 120 V∠–30; b. 120 V∠150
3.
4. Secondary, upper terminal.
5. a. Terminal 4; b. Terminal 4
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
1. Zp  18.75  	 j25 ; R  6400 ; a  1.73
2. 125 V∠0
3. 89.4
4. a. 200 A; 200 A; b. 24 kW; 18 kW
5. Tap 1: 109.1 V; Tap 2: 120 V; Tap 3: 126.3 V
6. 0.81 W; 0.72 W; Maximum power is delivered when Rs  a2RL.
7. a. 348 V; 20.7 A; b. 12 A; c. 12 A↓8.69 A↑
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 3
1. a. Zeq  0.8  
 j0.8 
b. 113.6 V ∠0.434
c. 5.63%
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
36 V
vs1
450 V
vs2
30 V
vs3
135 V
vs4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Balanced Systems
Four-Wire System
Line Current
Line or Phase Conductor
Line-to-Line Voltage
Line-to-Neutral Voltage
Line Voltage
Load Phase Impedances
Neutral
Phase Current
Phase Sequence
Phase Voltage
Single-Phase Equivalent
Three-Wire Y-Y System
Two-Wattmeter Method
Unbalanced Systems
Y-Y System
Zero-Impedance
Conductor
I OUTLINE
Three-Phase Voltage
Generation
Basic Three-Phase Circuit
Connections
Basic Three-Phase
Relationships
Examples
Power in a Balanced
System
Measuring Power in
Three-Phase Circuits
Unbalanced Loads
Power System Loads
Circuit Analysis Using
Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• describe three-phase voltage generation,
• represent three-phase voltages and currents
in phasor form,
• describe standard three-phase load
connections,
• analyze balanced three-phase circuits,
• compute active power, reactive power, and
apparent power in a three-phase system,
• measure power using the two-wattmeter
method and the three-wattmeter method,
• analyze simple, unbalanced three-phase
circuits,
• apply Multisim and PSpice to three-phase
problems.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24
THREE-PHASE SYSTEMS
S
o far, we have looked only at single-phase systems. In this chapter, we consider three-phase
systems. (Three-phase systems differ from single-phase systems in that they use a set of
three sinusoidal ac voltages instead of one.) Three-phase systems are used for the generation
and transmission of bulk electrical power. All commercial ac power systems, for example, are
three-phase systems. Not all loads connected to a three-phase system need be three-phase,
however—for example, the electric lights and appliances used in our homes require only single-
phase ac. To get single-phase ac from a three-phase system, we simply tap off one of its phases,
as you will see later in this chapter.
Three-phase systems may be balanced or unbalanced. If a system is balanced, it can be
analyzed by considering just one of its phases. (This is because, once you know the solution for
one phase, you can write down the solutions to the other two phases with no further computa-
tion other than the addition or subtraction of an angle.) This is signiﬁcant because it makes the
analysis of balanced systems only slightly more complex than the analysis of single-phase sys-
tems. Since most systems operate close to balance, many practical problems can be dealt with
by assuming balance. This is the approach used in practice.
Three-phase power systems possess economic and operating advantages over single-phase
power systems. For example, for the same power output, three-phase generators cost less than
single-phase generators, produce uniform power rather than pulsating power, and operate with
less vibration and noise.
We begin the chapter with a look at three-phase voltage generation. I
CHAPTER PREVIEW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

876
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
Three-phase generators have three sets of windings and thus produce three ac
voltages instead of one. To get at the idea, consider ﬁrst the elementary single-
phase generator of Figure 24–1. (This is the same generator that you studied in
Chapter 15, Figure 15–6.) As coil AA rotates, it produces a sinusoidal wave-
form eAA as indicated in (b). This voltage can be represented by phasor EAA as
shown in (c).
24.1 Three-Phase
Voltage
Generation
Putting It in Perspective
Nikola Tesla
AS NOTED IN CHAPTER 15, the advent of the commercial
electrical power age began with a fierce battle between
Thomas A. Edison and George Westinghouse over the use
of dc versus ac for the infant electrical power industry.
Edison vigorously promoted dc while Westinghouse pro-
moted ac. Tesla settled the argument in favor of ac with
his development of the three-phase power system, the
induction motor, and other ac devices. Coupled with the
creation of a practical power transformer (Chapter 23),
these developments made long-distance transmission of
electrical energy possible, and ac became the clear
winner.
Tesla was born in Smiljan, Croatia in 1856 and emigrated to
the United States in 1884. During part of his career, he was
associated with Edison, but the two had a falling out and
became bitter rivals. Tesla made many important contributions
in the ﬁelds of electricity and magnetism (he held over 700
patents), and the SI unit of magnetic ﬂux density (the “tesla”) is named after him. Tesla was also
primarily responsible for the selection of 60 Hz as the standard power system frequency in North
America and much of the world. I
Library of Congress/digital version by Science Faction/Science Faction/
Getty Images
(a) Basic ac generator
A
A
eAA


Load
eAA
ωt

2
0
(b) Voltage waveform
j
EAA
(c) Phasor

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–1
A basic single-phase generator.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If two more windings are added as in Figure 24–2, two additional voltages
are generated. Since these windings are identical with AA (except for their
position on the rotor), they produce identical voltages. However, since coil BB
is placed 120 behind coil AA, voltage eBB lags eAA by 120; similarly, coil
CC, which is placed ahead of coil AA by 120, produces voltage eCC that
leads by 120. Waveforms are shown in (b) and phasors in (c). As indicated, the
generated voltages are equal in magnitude and phase displaced by 120. Thus,
if EAA is at 0, then EBB will be at 120 and ECC will be at 120. Assuming
an rms value of 120 V and a reference position of 0 for phasor EAA for exam-
ple, yields EAA  120 V∠0, EBB  120 V∠120, and ECC  120 V∠120.
Such a set of voltages is said to be balanced. Because of this ﬁxed relationship
between balanced voltages, you can, if you know one voltage, easily determine
the other two.
Section 24.2 | Basic Three-Phase Circuit Connections
877
(a) Basic 3-phase generator
C
A
B
C
A
B
N
S
120
120
120
120
0
240
ωt
eCC
eBB
eAA
V
V
(b) Voltage waveforms
ECC
EBB
EAA
j

(c) Phasors
120
120
120
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–2
Generating three-phase voltages. Three sets of coils are used to produce three balanced voltages.
a. If EAA  277 V∠0, what are EBB and ECC?
b. If EBB  347 V∠120, what are EAA and ECC?
c. If ECC  120 V∠150, what are EAA and EBB?
Sketch the phasors for each set.
Answers
a. EBB  277 V∠120; ECC  277 V∠120
b. EAA  347 V∠0; ECC  347 V∠120
c. EAA  120 V∠30; EBB  120 V∠90
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
The generator of Figure 24–2 has three independent windings: AA, BB, and
CC. As a ﬁrst thought, you might try connecting loads using six wires as in
Figure 24–3(a). This will work, although it is not a scheme that is used in prac-
tice. Nonetheless, some useful insights can be gained from it. To illustrate,
24.2 Basic Three-
Phase Circuit
Connections
CircuitSim 24-1 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

assume a voltage of 120 V for each coil and a 12-ohm resistive load. With EAA
as reference, Ohm’s law applied to each circuit in turn yields
IA  EAAR  120 V∠012   10 A∠0
IB  EBBR  120 V∠12012   10 A∠120
IC  ECCR  120 V∠12012   10 A∠120
These currents form a balanced set, as shown in Figure 24–3(b).
Four-Wire and Three-Wire Systems
Each load in Figure 24–3(a) has its own return wire. What if you replace them
with a single wire as in (c)? By Kirchhoff’s current law (KCL), the current in
this wire (which we call the neutral) is the phasor sum of IA, IB, and IC. For
the balanced 12-ohm load,
IN  IA  IB  IC  10 A∠0  10 A∠120  10 A∠120
 (10 A  j0)  (5 A  j8.66 A)  (5 A  j8.66 A)  0 amps
Thus, the return wire carries no current at all! (This result is always true
regardless of load impedance, provided the load is balanced, i.e., all phase
impedances are the same.) In practice, power systems are normally oper-
ated close to balance. Thus, the return current, while not necessarily zero,
878
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems


R
12 
IA
A
a
A
a
EAA


R
12 
IB
B
b
B
b
EBB


R
12 
IC
C
c
C
c
ECC
(a) First thoughts
IC  10 A∠120
IB  10 A∠120
IA  10 A∠0
(b) Currents form a balanced set
(c) Four-wire system. The return
wire is called the neutral.


IA
A
a
N
EAN


IB
B
b
N
EBN


IC
C
c
N
ECN
IN  IA  IB  IC
N
n
ECN
EAN
EBN
(d) Renamed phasors
© Cengage Learning 2013
NOTES...
A Comment on Generator 
Construction
Except for small generators, most
three-phase generators do not 
actually use the construction of
Figure 24–2. Instead, they use a
ﬁxed set of windings and a rotating
magnetic ﬁeld. However, both
designs produce exactly the same
waveforms. We chose the conﬁgura-
tion of Figure 24–2 here to illustrate
because its operation is easier 
to visualize.
FIGURE 24–3
Evolution of three-phase connections.
CircuitSim 24-2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

will be quite small, and the neutral wire can be made smaller than the other
three conductors. This configuration is called a four-wire system and is one
of the configurations used in practice.
The outgoing lines of Figure 24–3(c) are called line or phase conductors.
They are the conductors that you see suspended by insulators on transmission
line towers.
Symbology
Having joined points A, B, and C in Figure 24–3(c), we now drop the A, B,
and C notation and simply call the common point N. The voltages are then
renamed EAN, EBN, and ECN as shown in Figure 24–3(d). They are known as
line-to-neutral voltages.
Standard Representation
Three-phase circuits are not usually drawn as in Figure 24–3. Rather, they
are usually drawn as in Figure 24–4. [Figure 24–4(a), for example, shows
Figure 24–3(c) redrawn in standard form.] Note that coil symbols are used
to represent generator windings rather than the circle symbol that we use for
single-phase ac.
As Figure 24–4(a) shows, the circuit that we have been looking at is a Y-Y
circuit, it is commonly known as a four-wire Y-Y system. A variation, the
three-wire Y-Y system, is shown in (b). Three-wire Y-Y circuits may be used if
the load can be guaranteed to remain balanced, since under balanced conditions the
neutral conductor carries no current. However, for practical reasons (discussed
in Section 24.7), most Y-Y systems use four wires.
Section 24.2 | Basic Three-Phase Circuit Connections
879
IA
A
a
EAN


Van
Zan


VnN  0


IN  0
N
IB
ECN
EBN




Zcn
B
c
Zbn
n




C
IC
b
Vcn
Vbn
(a) Four-wire Y-Y system. This is Figure 24–3(c)
redrawn in standard form.
IA
A
a
EAN


Van
Zan


VnN  0


N
IB
ECN
EBN




Zcn
B
c
Zbn
n




C
IC
b
Vcn
Vbn
(b) Three-wire Y-Y system
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–4
Standard representation of three-phase circuits.
Delta-Connected Generators
Now consider 	 connection of the generator windings. Theoretically, this is
possible, as indicated in Figure 24–5. However, there are practical difﬁcul-
ties. For example, when generators are loaded, distortions occur in the coil
voltages due to magnetic ﬂuxes produced by load currents. In Y-connected
generators, these distortions cancel, but in 	-connected generators, they do
not. These distortions create a third harmonic current that circulates within
the windings of the 	-connected generator, lowering its efficiency. (You
will learn about third harmonics in Chapter 25.) For this and other reasons,
	-connected generators are seldom used in power systems and will not be
discussed in this book.
A
a
EBC


ECA
EAB




B
c
C
b
Load
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–5
A delta-connected
generator. For practical reasons, delta 
generators are seldom used in power 
systems.
CircuitSim 24-3 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Neutral-Neutral Voltage in a Wye-Wye Circuit
In a balanced Y-Y system, neutral current is zero because line currents sum to zero.
As a consequence, the voltage between neutral points is zero. To see why, consider
again Figure 24–4(a). Assume that the wire joining points n and N has impedance
ZnN. This yields voltage VnN  IN 
 ZnN. But since IN  0, VnN  0, regardless of
the value of ZnN. Even if the neutral conductor is absent as in (b), VnN is still zero.
Thus, in a balanced Y-Y system, the voltage between neutral points is zero.
880
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
CircuitSim 24-4
EXAMPLE 24–1       
Assume the circuits of Figure 24–4(a) and (b) are balanced. If EAN  247 V∠0,
what are Van, Vbn, and Vcn?
Solution
In both cases, the voltage VnN between neutral points is zero. Thus,
by Kirchhoff’s voltage law (KVL), Van  EAN  247 V∠0°. Since the system
is balanced, Vbn  247 V∠–120 and Vcn  247 V∠120°.
Phase Sequence
Phase sequence refers to the order in which three-phase voltages occur. This
can be illustrated in terms of phasors. If you (conceptually) view the rotation
of the phasor set of Figure 24–6, for example, you see phasors rotating by in
the order . . . ABCABC. . . . This sequence is referred to as the ABC phase sequence
or the positive phase sequence. On the other hand, if the direction of rotation
were reversed, the sequence would be ACB. (This is called the negative phase
sequence.) Since power systems generate the ABC sequence (recall Figure 24–2),
it is the only sequence that we will consider in this book.
While voltages are generated in the sequence ABC, the order of voltages
applied to a load depends on how you connect it to the source. For most bal-
anced loads, phase sequence doesn’t matter. However, for three-phase motors,
the order is important, since if you reverse any pair of wires, the direction of
the motor’s rotation will reverse—see Putting It into Practice, Sketch A at the
end of this chapter.
ECN
EAN
EBN
---ABC---
ω
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–6
Illustrating phase sequence.
To keep track of voltages and currents, we use the symbols and notations of
Figure 24–7. Capital letter subscripts are used at the source and lowercase let-
ters at the load. As usual, E is used for source voltage and V for voltage drops.
Note carefully the use of double subscripts, the placement of the voltage refer-
ence polarity signs, and the cyclic order of the subscripts—see Note.
Deﬁnitions
Line (also called line-to-line) voltages are voltages between lines. Thus, EAB,
EBC, and ECA are line-to-line voltages at the generator, while Vab, Vbc, and Vca
are line-to-line voltages at the load.
Phase voltages are voltages across phases. For a Y load, phases are deﬁned
from line to neutral as indicated in Figure 24–7(a); thus, Van, Vbn, and Vcn are
phase voltages for a Y load. For a 	 load, phases are deﬁned from line to line
as shown in Figure 24–7(b); thus, Vab, Vbc, and Vca are phase voltages for a 	.
As you can see, for a 	 load, phase voltages and line voltages are the same
thing. For the generator of (a), EAN, EBN, and ECN are phase voltages.
24.3 Basic Three-Phase
Relationships
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Line currents are the currents in the line conductors. Only a single sub-
script is needed. You can use either Ia, Ib, and Ic as in Figure 24–7 or IA, IB, and
IC as in Figure 24–4. (Some authors use double subscripts such as IAa.)
Phase currents are currents through phases. For the Y load Figure 24–7(a),
Ia, Ib, and Ic pass through phase impedances and are therefore phase cur-
rents. For the 	 load (b), Iab, Ibc, and Ica are phase currents. As you can
see, for a Y load, phase currents and line currents are the same thing.
Load phase impedances for a Y load are the impedances from a-n, b-n,
and c-n [Figure 24–7(a)] and are denoted by the symbols Zan, Zbn, and Zcn.
For a 	 load (b), phase impedances are Zab, Zbc, and Zca. In a balanced
load, impedances for all phases are the same, that is, Zan  Zbn  Zcn,
and so on.
Line and Phase Voltages for a Y Circuit
We now need the relationship between line and phase voltages for a Y circuit.
Consider Figure 24–8. By KVL, Vab  Van  Vbn  0. Thus,
Vab  Van  Vbn
(24–1)
Section 24.3 | Basic Three-Phase Relationships
881
NOTES...
Make sure you adhere scrupulously
to the double subscript notation as
set out in Section 5.8, Chapter 5. As
always, the  sign goes at the ﬁrst
subscript location. Note also the
cyclical order of the subscripts—
speciﬁcally, the voltages deﬁned as
Vab, Vbc, and Vca. As you can see,
the subscript order here is ab, bc,
and ca. A common mistake is to use
ac instead of ca. Don’t do it, since
Vac  Vca. Similarly, Iac  Ica.
Thus, if you use the wrong subscript
order, you introduce a 180 phase
shift error into your notation.
Ia
A
a
EAN


Van
Vab




N
B
c
n
C
Ic
b
Vbn


Vcn


Vca


EBN


ECN


Vbc


EBC

EAB


ECA



Ia
a
Vab



c
Ic
b
Ib
Ica
Ibc
Iab
Vbc


Vca

(a) For a Y, phases are defined from line to neutral
(b) For a Δ, phases are defined from line to line
Ib
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–7
Symbols and notation for three-phase voltages and currents.
b
a
n






Vab
Vbn
Van
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Now, assume a magnitude V for each phase voltage and take Van as reference.
Thus, Van  V∠0 and Vbn  V∠120. Substitute these two into Equation 24–1:
Vab  V∠0  V∠120  V(1  j0)  V(0.5  j0.866)
 V(1.5  j0.866)  1.732 V∠30  –3V∠30
But Van  V∠0. Thus,
Vab  –3Van∠30
(24–2)
Equation 24–2 shows that the magnitude of Vab is –3 times the magnitude
of Van and that Vab leads Van by 30. This can also be shown graphically as in
Figure 24–9(a). Similar relationships hold for the other two phases. This is
shown in (b). Thus, for a balanced Y system, the magnitude of line-to-line volt-
age is –3 times the magnitude of the phase voltage and each line-to-line volt-
age leads its corresponding phase voltage by 30. From this you can see that
the line-to-line voltages also form a balanced set. (Although we developed
these relationships with Van in the 0 reference position, they are true regard-
less of the choice of reference.) They also hold at the source. Thus,
EAB  –3EAN∠30
(24–3)
882
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
(a) Showing graphically why
Vab leads Van by 30°
Vbn
Vbn 
Van 
Vab 
30
(b) Both line voltages and phase voltages
form balanced sets
30
30
30
Vca
Vcn
Van
Vbc
Vbn
Vab xp3 Van∠30
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–9
Voltages for a balanced Y load. If you know one voltage, you can determine
the other ﬁve by inspection.
EXAMPLE 24–2       
Given Van  120 V∠45,
a. Determine Vab using Equation 24–2.
b. Verify Vab by direct substitution of Van and Vbn into Equation 24–1.
Solution
a. Vab  –3Van∠30  –3(120 V∠45)(1∠30)  207.8∠15
b. Van  120 V∠45. Thus, Vbn  120 V∠165.
Vab  Van  Vbn  (120 V∠45)  (120 V∠165)
 207.8 V∠15 as before.
Nominal Voltages
While Example 24–2 yields 207.8 V for line-to-line voltage, we generally
round this to 208 V and refer to the system as a 120208-V system. These are
nominal values. Other sets of nominal voltages used in practice are 277480 V
and 347600 V.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Equations 24–2 and 24–3 permit you to calculate line voltages from phase
voltages. Rearranging them yields Equation 24–4, which permits you to calcu-
late phase voltage from line voltage.
Van  
3
V
∠
ab
30°

EAN  
3
E
∠
AB
30°

(24–4)
For example, if EAB  480 V∠45, then
EAN  
3
E
∠
AB
30°
  
4

80
3
V
∠
∠
3
4
0
5
°
°
  277 V∠15°
A Milestone
You have now reached an important milestone. Given any voltage at a point in a
balanced, three-phase Y system, you can, with the aid of Equation 24–2 or 24–4,
determine the remaining ﬁve voltages by inspection, that is, by simply shifting
their angles and multiplying or dividing magnitude by –3 as appropriate.
Section 24.3 | Basic Three-Phase Relationships
883
EXAMPLE 24–3        
For the circuits of Figure 24–4, suppose EAN  120 V∠0.
a. Determine the phase voltages at the load.
b. Determine the line voltages at the load.
c. Show all voltages on a phasor diagram.
Solution
a. Van  EAN. Thus, Van  120 V∠0. Since the system is balanced, Vbn 
120 V∠120 and Vcn  120 V∠120.
b. Vab  –3Van ∠30  –3 
 120 V∠(0  30)  208 V∠30. Since line
voltages form a balanced set, Vbc  208 V∠90 and Vca  208 V∠150.
c. The phasors are shown in Figure 24–10.
Vab  208 V∠30
120
120
Van  120 V∠0
Vbc  208 V∠90
Vcn  120 V∠120
Vca  208 V∠150
Vbn  120 V∠120
30
30
30
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–10
CircuitSim 24-5 
For a balanced Y generator, EAB  480 V∠20.
a. Determine the other two generator line voltages.
b. Determine the generator phase voltages.
c. Sketch the phasors.
Answers
a. EBC  480 V∠100; ECA  480 V∠140
b. EAN  277 V∠10; EBN  277 V∠130; ECN  277 V∠110
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Currents for a Wye Circuit
As you saw earlier, for a Y load, line currents are the same as phase currents.
Consider Figure 24–11. As indicated in (b),
Ia  VanZan
(24–5)
Similarly for Ib and Ic. Since Van, Vbn, and Vcn form a balanced set, line cur-
rents Ia, Ib, and Ic also form a balanced set. Thus, if you know one, you can
determine the other two by inspection.
884
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
(a)
Ia
a
Van
Zan


Ib
Zcn
c
Zbn
n
Ic
b
(b)
n
Ia
a
Van
Zan


Ia = Van
Zan
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–11
Determining currents for a Y load.
EXAMPLE 24–4       
For Figure 24–12, suppose Van  120 V∠0.
a. Compute Ia, then determine Ib and Ic by inspection.
b. Verify by direct computation.
Solution
a. Ia  
V
Za
a
n
n  
1
1
2
2
0

∠0
j9
°
  
15∠
12

0∠
36
0
.
°
87°
  8.0 A∠36.87°
Ib lags Ia by 120. Thus, Ib  8 A∠83.13.
Ic leads Ia by 120. Thus, Ic  8 A∠156.87.
b. Since Van  120 V∠0, Vbn  120 V∠120, and Vcn  120 V∠120.
Thus,
Ib  
V
Zb
b
n
n  
1
1
5
2
∠
0∠


36
1
.
2
8
0
7
°
°
  8.0 A∠83.13°
Ic  
V
Zc
c
n
n  
15
1
∠
20

∠
3
1
6
2
.
0
8
°
7°
  8.0 A∠156.87°
These conﬁrm the results obtained in (a).
Ia
a
n
Van


Ib
c
Ic
b
Vbn


Vcn


12 
9 
9 
12 
12 
9 
j
j
j
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–12
1. If Vab  600 V∠0 for the circuit of Figure 24–12, what are Ia, Ib, and Ic?
2. If Vbc  600 V∠90 for the circuit of Figure 24–12, what are Ia, Ib, and Ic?
Answers
1. Ia  23.1 A∠6.9; Ib  23.1 A∠113.1; Ic  23.1 A∠126.9
2. Ia  23.1 A∠36.9; Ib  23.1 A∠83.1; Ic  23.1 A∠156.9
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
CircuitSim 24-6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Line and Phase Currents for a Delta Circuit
Consider the delta load of Figure 24–13. Phase current Iab can be found as
in (b).
Iab  VabZab
(24–6)
Similar relationships hold for Ibc and Ica. Since line voltages are balanced,
phase currents are also balanced. Now consider again Figure 23–13(a). KCL at
node a yields
Ia  Iab  Ica
(24–7)
After some manipulation, this reduces to
Ia  –3Iab∠30
(24–8)
Thus, the magnitude of Ia is –3 times the magnitude of Iab, and Ia lags Iab by
30. Similarly, for the other two phases. Thus, in a balanced 	, the magnitude
of the line current is –3 times the magnitude of the phase current, and each
line current lags its corresponding phase current by 30. Since phase currents
are balanced, line currents are also balanced. This is shown in Figure 24–13(c).
To ﬁnd phase currents from line currents, use
Iab  
3∠
I

a
30°

(24–9)
Section 24.3 | Basic Three-Phase Relationships
885
Ia
a
Zbc
Ib
Zca
c
Zab
Ic
b
Ica
Ibc
Iab
(a) Ia  Iab  Ica
(b)
Iab
a
Vab


Iab = Vab
Zab
Zab
b
(c) Both line currents and phase currents
form balanced sets
30
30
30
Ic 
Ica
Iab
Ib
Ibc
Ia x3 Iab∠30
120
120
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–13
Currents for a balanced 	 load. If you know one current, you can determine the other ﬁve by inspection.
NOTES...
Compare Equation 24–8 to Equation
24–2. No one ever forgets the –3
relationship, but students often mix
up which one has the 30 shift and
which one has the 30 shift. One
way to deal with this is to sketch
Figure 24–8, write KVL as Vab 
Van  Vbn, substitute Van  120∠0
and Vbn  120∠120, and use your
calculator to obtain Vab  207.8∠30.
This establishes that voltage has the
positive angle.
EXAMPLE 24–5        
Suppose Vab  240 V∠15 for the circuit of Figure 24–14.
a. Determine the phase currents.
b. Determine the line currents.
c. Sketch the phasor diagram.
Solution
a. Iab  
V
Za
a
b
b  
2
1
4
0
0∠

1
j
5
3
°
  23.0 A∠1.70°
Ia
a
Ib
c
Ic
b
Ica
Ibc
Iab


10 E
10 E
j 3 E
j 3 E
j 3 E
10 E
Vab
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–14
A Second Milestone
You have reached a second milestone. Given any current in a balanced, three-
phase 	 load, you can, with the aid of Equations 24–8 or 24–9, determine all
remaining currents by inspection—see Note.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Single-Phase Equivalent
By now it should be apparent that if you know the solution for one phase of
a balanced system, you effectively know the solution for all three phases. We
will now formalize this viewpoint by developing the single-phase equiva-
lent approach to solving balanced systems. Consider a Y-Y system with line
impedance. The system may be either a three-wire system or a four-wire
system with neutral conductor impedance. In either case, since the voltage
between neutral points is zero, you can join points n and N with a zero-
impedance conductor without disturbing voltages or currents elsewhere
in the circuit. This is illustrated in Figure 24–16(a). Phase a can now be
isolated as in (b). Since VnN  0 as before, the equation describing phase a
in circuit (b) is the same as that describing phase a in the original circuit;
thus, circuit (b) can be used to solve the original problem. If there are 	 loads
present, convert them to Y loads using the 	-Y conversion formula for bal-
anced loads: ZY  Z	3, from Chapter 19. This procedure is valid regardless
of the conﬁguration or complexity of the circuit, as long as it is balanced. We
will look at its use in Section 24.4.
886
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
Thus,
Ibc  23.0 A∠121.7 and Ica  23.0 A∠118.3
b. Ia  3Iab∠30°  39.8 A∠31.7°
Thus,
Ib  39.8 A∠151.7 and Ic  39.8 A∠88.3
c. Phasors are shown in Figure 24–15.
Ib  39.8 A∠151.7
Ica  23 A∠118.3
Ic  39.8 A∠88.3
Ibc  23 A∠121.7
Ia  39.8 A∠31.7
Iab  23 A∠1.7
30
30
30
120
120
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–15
CircuitSim 24-7
1. For the circuit of Figure 24–14, if Ia  17.32 A∠20, determine
a. Iab
b. Vab
2. For the circuit of Figure 24–14, if Ibc  5 A∠140, what is Vab?
Answers
1. a. 10 A∠50; b. 104 V∠66.7
2. 52.2 V∠3.30
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selecting a Reference
Before you solve a three-phase problem, you need to select a reference. For 
Y circuits, we normally choose EAN or Van; for 	 circuits, we normally choose
EAB or Vab. (These are arbitrary but convenient choices.)
Summary of Basic Three-Phase Relationships
Table 24–1 summarizes the relationships developed so far. Note that in balanced
systems (Y or 	), all voltages and all currents are balanced.
Section 24.3 | Basic Three-Phase Relationships
887
(a) Original circuit: EAN  Ia Zline  Van
Ia
A
a
EAN


Van


VnN  0


N
B
c
n
C
b
Zline
Zline
Zline
Zero impedance
Zan
Zcn
Zbn
Ia
A
a
EAN
Van


N
n
Zline
Zero impedance


Zan
(b) Single-phase equivalent: EAN  Ia Zline  Van
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–16
Reducing a circuit to its single-phase equivalent. Since both conﬁgurations are described by the same set 
of equations, they are equivalent.
TABLE 24–1
Summary of Relationships (Balanced System). All Voltages 
and Currents Are Balanced
(a) Y connection
Ia
a
Zan


Zcn
c
Zbn
n
b
Van


Vab
(b) 1xconnection
Ia
a
Zbc
Zca
c
Zab
b
Ica
Ibc
Iab
Vab


Vab  3Van∠30°
Ia  3Iab∠30°
Ia  VanZan
Iab  VabZab
Zan  Zbn  Zcn
Zab  Zbc  Zca
Generator EAB  3EAN∠30°
© Cengage Learning 2013
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
1. For Figure 24–4(a), if EAN  277 V∠20, determine all line and phase
voltages, source, and load.
2. For Figure 24–4(a), if Vbc  208 V∠40, determine all line and phase
voltages, source, and load.
3. For Figure 24–12, if Ia  8.25 A∠35, determine Van and Vab.
4. For Figure 24–14, if Ib  17.32 A∠85, determine all voltages.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

888
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
Generally, there are several ways to solve most problems. We usually try to use
the simplest approach. Thus, sometimes we use the single-phase equivalent
method and sometimes we solve the problem in its three-phase conﬁguration.
Generally, if a circuit has line impedance, we use the single-phase equivalent
method; otherwise, we may solve it directly.
24.4 Examples
EXAMPLE 24–6       
For Figure 24–17, EAN  120 V∠0.
a. Solve for the line currents—see Note.
b. Solve for the phase voltages at the load.
c. Solve for the line voltages at the load.
(a) ZY  6 E  j 8 E
(b) Single-phase equivalent. Since the neutral conductor in (a) carries no
current, its impedance has no effect on the solution.
Ia
A
a
EAN
Van


N
n
Zero impedance


0.2 E  j 0.2 E
120 V∠0
6 E
j 8 E
Ia
A
a
EAN


Van


Zneutral  6 Ω  j 9 Ω
N
B
c
n
C
Ic
b
0.2 E  j 0.2 E
0.2 E  j 0.2 E
0.2 E  j 0.2 E
ZY
ZY
ZY
Ib
© Cengage Learning 2013
NOTES...
For a number of the examples of
this section, we use 120/207.8 volts
instead of the nominal values of
120/208 volts and we carry extra
digits so that the analytic solutions
can be compared to the Multisim
solutions.
FIGURE 24–17
A Y-Y problem.
Solution
a. Reduce the circuit to its single-phase equivalent as shown in (b).
Ia  
E
Z
A
T
N 
 11.67 A∠52.91°
Therefore,
Ib  11.67 A∠172.91
and
Ic  11.67 A∠67.09
120∠0°

(0.2  j0.2)  (6  j8)
CircuitSim 24-8
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 24.4 | Examples
889
b. Van  Ia 
 Zan  (11.67∠52.91)(6  j8)  116.7 V∠0.223
Thus,
Vbn  116.7 V∠119.777
and
Vcn  116.7 V∠120.223
c. Vab  –3Van∠30  –3 
 116.7∠(0.223  30)  202.2 V∠30.223
Thus,
Vbc  202.2 V∠89.777
and
Vca  202.2 V∠150.223
Note the phase shift and voltage drop across the line impedance. Note also that
the impedance of the neutral conductor plays no part in the solution, since no
current passes through it because the system is balanced.
For the circuit of Figure 24–18, Van  120 V∠0.
a. Find the line currents.
b. Verify that the neutral current is zero.
c. Determine generator voltages EAN and EAB.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
Ia
A
a
EAN


Van


4   j 27 
N
B
c
n
C
Ic
b
0.2   j 0.2 
0.2   j 0.2 
0.2   j 0.2 
Ib
j 3 
4 
4  4 
Vbn


Vcn


j 3 
j 3 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–18
Answers
a. Ia  24 A∠36.9; Ib  24 A∠83.1; Ic  24 A∠156.9
b. 24 A∠36.9  24 A∠83.1  24 A∠156.9  0
c. EAN  121 V∠3.18; EAB  210 V∠33.18
EXAMPLE 24–7        
For the circuit of Figure 24–19, EAB  208 V∠30.
a. Determine the phase currents.
b. Determine the line currents.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

890
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
Ia
A
a
EAN


Vab


B
c
C
Ic
b
Ib
9 
EAB


j 12 
j 12 
j 12 
9 
9 
Ica
Ibc
Iab
N
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–19
A Y-	 problem.
Solution
a. Since this circuit has no line impedance, the load connects directly to the
source and Vab  EAB  208 V∠30. Current Iab can be found as
Iab  
V
Za
a
b
b  
2
9
08

∠
j
3
1
0
2
°
  208
—–
15∠
∠30°
———
53.13°  13.9 A∠23.13°
Thus,
Ibc  13.9 A∠143.13
and
Ica  13.9 A∠96.87
b. Ia  3Iab∠30°  3(13.9)∠(30°  23.13°)  24 A∠53.13°
Thus,
Ib  24 A∠173.13
and
Ic  24 A∠66.87
EXAMPLE 24–8       
For the circuit of Figure 24–20(a), the magnitude of the line voltage at the
generator is 207.8 volts. Solve for the line voltage Vab at the load.
Ia
A
a
EAN


Vab


B
c
C
Ic
b
9 
j 12 
j 12 
j 12 
9 
9 
Ica
Ibc
Iab
N
0.1   j 0.1 
0.1   j 0.1 
Ib
0.1   j 0.1 
(a) ZY  ZΔ  3   j 4 
3
(b) Single-phase equivalent
Ia
A
a
EAN  120 V∠0
Van


N
n


0.1 E  j 0.1 E
3 E
j 4 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–20
A circuit with line impedances.
CircuitSim 24-9
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 24.4 | Examples
891
Solution
Since points A-a and B-b are not directly joined, Vab  EAB and we
cannot solve the circuit as in Example 24–7. Use the single-phase equivalent.
Phase voltage at the source is 207.83  120 V. Choose EAN as reference:
EAN  120 V∠0.
ZY  Z	3  (9  j12)3  3   j4 .
The single-phase equivalent is shown in (b). Now use the voltage divider
rule to ﬁnd Van:
Van 
3.
3
1


j
j
4
4.1
 
 120∠0°  116.7 V∠0.223°
Thus,
Vab  3Van∠30°  3(116.7 V)∠30.223°  202.2 V∠30.223°
EXAMPLE 24–9        
For the circuit of Figure 24–20(a), the generator phase voltage is 120 volts. Find
the 	 currents.
Solution
Since the source voltage here is the same as in Example 24–8, load
voltage Vab will also be the same. Thus,
Iab  
V
Za
a
b
b 
202.
9
(
2

V∠
j1
3
2
0
)
.

223°
  13.5 A∠22.9°
and,
Ibc  13.5 A∠142.9
and
Ica  13.5 A∠97.1
EXAMPLE 24–10        
A Y load and a 	 load are connected in parallel as in Figure 24–21(a). ZY 
20  ∠0, Z	  90 ∠0, and Zline  0.5  j 0.5 . Line voltage magnitude
at the generator is 207.8 V.
Ia
A
a
Z 
N
B
C
b
c
Ia
a
b
c
ZY 
Source
Load 1
Load 2
Zline
Zline
Zline
IA
n
(a)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–21
Parallel three-phase loads.
(Continued)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

892
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
a. Find the phase voltages at the loads.
b. Find the line voltages at the loads.
Solution
Convert the Δ load to a Y load. Thus, Z′Y  1⁄3ZΔ  30 ∠0° as in
(b). Now join the neutral points N, n, and n′ with a zero-impedance conductor
to get the single-phase equivalent, which is shown in Figure 24–22(a). The par-
allel load resistors can be combined as in (b).
a. Generator phase voltage is 207.8 V3  120 V. Select EAN as reference.
Thus, EAN  120 V∠0. Using the voltage divider rule yields
Van 
12.5
1

2
j0.5
 
 120∠0°  115.1 V∠2.29°
Thus,
Vbn  115.1 V∠122.29
and
Vcn  115.1 V∠117.71
b. Vab  3Van ∠30  3(115.1 V)∠(2.29  30)  199.4 V∠27.71
Thus,
Vbc  199.4 V∠92.29
and
Vca  199.4 V∠147.71
These are the line voltages for both the Y and 	 loads.
(b)  load converted to equivalent Y
Ia
A
a
0.5 E  j 0.5 E
ZY  30 E∠0
B
C
b
c
Ia
n
a
b
c
ZY  20 E∠0
(Equivalent Y load)
n
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–21
(Continued)


20 
A
N
a
EAN
a
30 
n
n
0.5   j 0.5 
(a) Single-phase equivalent of Figure 24-21
(b) Reduced circuit

12 E
Van
A
N
a
n
0.5 E  j 0.5 E
120 E∠0



© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–22
CircuitSim 24-10
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To ﬁnd total power in a balanced system, determine power to one phase, then
multiply by three. Per-phase quantities can be found using the formulas of
Chapter 17. Since only magnitudes are involved in many power formulas and
calculations and since magnitudes are the same for all three phases, we can use
a simpliﬁed notation. We will use Vf for magnitude of phase voltage, If for
magnitude of phase current, VL and IL for magnitude of line voltage and line
current respectively, and Zf for phase impedance magnitude.
Active Power to a Balanced Wye Load
First, consider a Y load (Figure 24–23). The power to any phase as indicated in
(b) is the product of the magnitude of the phase voltage Vf times the magni-
tude of the phase current If times the cosine of the angle vf between them.
Since the angle between phase voltage and current is always the angle of the
load impedance, the power per phase is
Pf  VfIfcos vf
(W)
(24–10)
where vf is the angle of Zf. Total power is
PT  3Pf  3VfIfcos vf
(W)
(24–11)
It is also handy to have a formula for power in terms of line quantities. For
a Y load, If  IL and Vf  VL3, where IL is the magnitude of the line cur-
rent and VL is the magnitude of the line-to-line voltage. Substituting these rela-
tions into Equation 24–11 and noting that 33  3 yields
PT  3 VLIL cos vf
(W)
(24–12)
This is a very important formula and one that is widely used. Note carefully, how-
ever, that vf is the angle of the load impedance and not the angle between VL and IL.
Power per phase can also be expressed as
Pf  If2Rf  VR2Rf
(W)
(24–13)
where Rf is the resistive component of the phase impedance and VR is the volt-
age across it. Total power is thus
PT  3If2Rf  3VR2Rf
(W)
(24–14)
Section 24.5 | Power in a Balanced System
893
1. Repeat Example 24–7 using the single-phase equivalent.
2. Determine 	 phase currents for the circuit of Figure 24–21(a).
Answers
2. Iab  2.22 A∠27.7; Ibc  2.22 A∠92.3; Ica  2.22 A∠147.7
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
24.5 Power in a
Balanced System
(a) PT xPan  Pbn  Pcn  3 P}
(b)
a
Pan
Zan
Zcn
c
Zbn
b
Pbn
Pcn
PT
I}
n
V}
Z}


P} xV} I} cos q}
q} is angle of Z}
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–23
For a balanced Y,
Pf  Pan  Pbn  Pcn.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Reactive Power to a Balanced Wye Load
Equivalent expressions for reactive power are
Qf  VfIfsin vf
(VAR)
(24–15)
 If2Xf  VX2Xf
(VAR)
(24–16)
QT  3VLIL sin vf
(VAR)
(24–17)
where Xf is the reactive component of Zf and VX is the voltage across it.
Apparent Power
Sf  VfIf  If2Zf  
V
Z
f
f
2

(VA)
(24–18)
ST  3VLIL
(VA)
(24–19)
Power Factor
Fp  cos vf  PTST  PfSf
(24–20)
894
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
EXAMPLE 24–11       
For Figure 24–24, the phase voltage is 120 V.
a. Compute active power to each phase and total power using each equation
of this section.
b. Repeat (a) for reactive power.
c. Repeat (a) for apparent power.
d. Find the power factor.
Solution
Since we want to compare answers for the various methods, we will
use 207.8 V for the line voltage rather than the nominal value of 208 V.
Zf  9  j12  15  ∠ 53.13. Thus, vf  53.13.
Vf  120 V and If  VfZf  120 V15   8.0 A.
VR  (8 A)(9 )  72 V
and
VX  (8 A)(12 )  96 V
a. Pf  VfIfcos vf  (120)(8)cos(53.13)  576 W
Pf  If2Rf  (82)(9)  576 W
Pf  VR2Rf  (72)29  576 W
PT  3Pf  3(576)  1728 W
PT  3VLILcos vf  3(207.8)(8)cos(53.13)  1728 W
b. Qf  VfIfsin vf  (120)(8)sin(53.13)  768 VAR
 768 VAR (cap.)
Qf  If2Xf  (8)2(12)  768 VAR (cap.)
Qf  VX2Xf  (96)212  768 VAR (cap.)
QT  3Qf  3(768)  2304 VAR (cap.)
QT  3VLIL sin vf  3(207.8)(8)sin(53.13)  2304 VAR
 2304 VAR (cap.)
a
Vφ  120 V


c
b
Vφ


Vφ


9 
12 
12 
9  9 
12 
j
j
j
Iφ
n
Iφ
Iφ
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–24
CircuitSim 24-11
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Power to a Balanced Delta Load
For a 	 load [Figure 24–25(a)],
Pf  VfIf cos vf
(W)
(24–21)
where vf is the angle of the 	 impedance. Note that this formula is identi-
cal to Equation 24–10 for the Y load. This is also true for reactive power,
apparent power, and power factor. Thus, all power formulas are the same.
Results are tabulated in Table 24–2. Note: In all of these formulas,  is the
angle of the load impedance, that is, the angle of Zan for Y loads and Zab
for 	 loads.
Section 24.5 | Power in a Balanced System
895
c. Sf  VfIf  (120)(8)  960 VA
ST  3Sf  3(960)  2880 VA
ST  3VLIL  3(207.8)(8)  2880 VA
Thus, all approaches yield the same answers.
d. The power factor is Fp  cos vf  cos 53.13  0.6. (Since the load is
balanced, the power factor is the same for all phases, as well as for the total
load.)
(a) PT  Pab  Pbc  Pca  3 Pφ
a
Zbc
Zca
c
Zab
b
Pca
Pab
Pbc
PT
(b)
I}
a
V}


P} = V} I} cos q}
q} is angle of load impedance 
Z}
b
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–25
For a balanced 	, P  Pab  Pbc  Pca.
Active power
Pf  VfIfcos vf  If2Rf  
V
R
R
f
2

PT  3VLILcos vf
Reactive power
Qf  VfIfsin vf  If2Xf  V
X
x
f
2

QT  3VLILsin vf
Apparent power
Sf  VfIf  If2Zf  
V
Z
f
f
2

ST  3VLIL
Power factor
Fp  cos vf  P
ST
T  P
Sf
f
Power triangle
ST  PT  jQT
TABLE 24–2
Summary of Power Formulas for Balanced Wye and Delta Circuits
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

896
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
EXAMPLE 24–12       
Determine per phase and total power (active, reactive, and apparent) for
Figure 24–26. Use Vf  207.8 V in order to compare results.
c
a
b
Iφ
27 
Vφ  207.8 V


Vφ

 j 36 
j 36 
27 
j 36 
27 
Vφ 

Iφ
Iφ
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–26
Solution
Zf  27  j36  45 ∠53.13°, so vf  53.13°
Vf  207.8 V and If  VfZf  207.8 V45   4.62 A
Pf  VfIfcos vf  (207.8)(4.62)cos(53.13°)  576 W
Qf  VfIfsin vf  (207.8)(4.62)sin(53.13°)  768 VAR
 768 VAR (cap.)
Sf  VfIf  (207.8)(4.62)  960 VA
PT  3Pf  3(576)  1728 W
QT  3Qf  3(768)  2304 VAR (cap.)
ST  3Sf  3(960)  2880 VA
Note that the results here are the same as for Example 24–11. This is to be expected
since the load of Figure 24–24 is the Y equivalent of the 	 load of Figure 24–26.
Verify total active, reactive, and apparent power for the circuit of Example 24–12
using the formulas for PT, QT, and ST from Table 24–2.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 7
Power and the Single-Phase Equivalent
You can also use the single-phase equivalent in power calculations. All single-
phase active, reactive, and apparent power formulas that you learned in previ-
ous chapters apply. The equivalent yields power for one phase.
EXAMPLE 24–13       
The total power to the balanced load of Figure 24–27 is 6912 W. The phase volt-
age at the load is 120 V. Compute the generator voltage EAB, magnitude and angle.
Solution
Consider the single-phase equivalent in Figure 24–28. Ia is computed
as follows:
Pan 
 1
3
(6912)  2304 W
Van  120 V
van  cos1(0.8)  36.87°
Pan  VanIacos van
PT
3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 24.6 | Measuring Power in Three-Phase Circuits
897
Therefore,
Ia  
Vanc
P
o
a
s
n
van
  
(12
2
0
3
)
0
(0
4
.8)
  24.0 A
Select Van as reference. Van  120 V∠0°. Thus, Ia  24 A∠36.87° (since
power factor was given as lagging).
EAN  Ia 
 Zline  Van
 (24∠36.87)(0.12  j0.09)  120∠0°  123.6 V∠0°
EAB  3EAN∠30°  214.1 V∠30°
A
EAN


N
B
C
Zline
a
c
b
Y
Load
0.12   j 0.09 
0.12   j 0.09 
0.12   j 0.09 
PT  6912 W
Vφ  120 V
FP  0.8 (lag)
Load
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–27
Ia  24.0 A∠36.87
A
a
EAN
Van  120 V∠0


N
n
Zline  0.12 E  j 0.09 E


P}  2304 W
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–28
The number of wattmeters needed to measure power in a three-phase system
depends on whether it’s a three- or four-wire system—see Notes on page 898.
For a four-wire system, you need three wattmeters, while, for a three-wire
system, you need only two. Consider ﬁrst, a four-wire circuit, Figure 24–29.
Here, power to each phase can be measured using the same technique that you
used for single-phase circuits—you connect each wattmeter so that its current
coil carries the current for the phase of interest, and you connect the voltage coil
of the wattmeter across the corresponding phase. For example, for wattmeter
W1, voltage is Van and current is Ia. Thus, its reading is
P1  VanIacos van
24.6 Measuring
Power in 
Three-Phase
Circuits
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

which is power to phase an. Similarly, W2 indicates power to phase bn and W3
to phase cn. The total power is
PT  P1  P2  P3
(24–22)
This scheme works correctly even if the loads are unbalanced—see Note 2.
The Two-Wattmeter Method
For a three-wire system, only two wattmeters are needed. The connection is
shown in Figure 24–30. Loads may be Y or 	, balanced or unbalanced. The meters
may be connected in any pair of lines with the voltage terminals connected to the
third line. The total power is the algebraic sum of the meter readings. This scheme
is known as the two-wattmeter method.
Determining Wattmeter Readings
Recall from Chapter 17, the reading of a wattmeter is equal to the product of
the magnitude of its voltage, the magnitude of its current, and the cosine of the
angle between them. For each meter, you must carefully determine what this
angle is. This is illustrated next.
898
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
Ia
a
Van


Zan
Ib
c
n
Ic
b
Vbn


Vcn


A
B
C
N
Zcn
Zbn
W1
W2
W3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–29
Three-wattmeter connection for a four-wire load.
NOTES...
1. If you could guarantee absolute
balance at all times, you could
use 1 wattmeter to measure
power to one phase, then multi-
ply by 3. However, balance
cannot be assured, so you need
more meters—as we have
described in this section.
2. Although we have shown three
individual wattmeters in
Figure 24–29, many modern
power meters incorporate this
complete measurement capability
in a single device. Consider for
example, Figure 17–23. The meter
shown is a complete system—it
incorporates power measurement
elements, associated electronic cir-
cuitry, and a digital readout that is
designed to measure power (real,
reactive, and apparent) to individual
phases, as well as total power,
power factor, line voltages, and line
currents. The desired measure-
ment is selected from a menu.
a
c
b Three-phase
Y or 
load
W2
W1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–30
Two-wattmeter connection.
Load may be balanced or unbalanced.
CircuitSim 24-12
EXAMPLE 24–14       
For Figure 24–31, Van  120 V∠0. Compute the readings of each meter,
then sum to determine total power. Compare PT to the PT found in
Example 24–11.
Solution
Van  120 V∠0°. Thus, Vab  207.8 V∠30° and Vbc  207.8 V
∠–90°—see Note. Ia  VanZan  120 V∠0°(9 – j12)   8 A∠53.13°. Thus,
Ic  8 A∠173.13°.
First consider wattmeter 1, Figure 24–32. Note that W1 is connected to ter-
minals a-b; thus it has voltage Vab across it and current Ia through it. Its read-
ing is therefore P1  VabIacos v1, where v1 is the angle between Vab and Ia. Vab
has an angle of 30 and Ia has an angle of 53.13. Thus, v1  53.13  30 
23.13 and P1  (207.8)(8)cos 23.13  1529 W.
NOTES...
We use 207.8 V here instead of the
nominal 208 V so that we can com-
pare answers to CircuitSim 24–13.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If you are using analog wattmeters in Practice Problems 8, the low-reading
meter (W1) will read backward—see Note on page 900. To get an upscale read-
ing, reverse either its voltage or current connection, then subtract. Thus, for cases
like this, if Ph and P are the high-reading and low-reading meters, respectively,
PT  Ph  P
(24–23)
Section 24.6 | Measuring Power in Three-Phase Circuits
899
Now consider wattmeter 2, Figure 24–33. Since W2 is connected to termi-
nals c-b, the voltage across it is Vcb and the current through it is Ic. But Vcb 
Vbc  207.8 V∠90 and Ic  8 A∠173.13. The angle between Vcb and Ic is
thus 173.13  90  83.13. Therefore, P2  VcbIccos v2  (207.8)(8)cos
83.13  199 W and PT  P1  P2  1529  199  1728 W. (This agrees
well with the answer we obtained in Example 24–11.) Note that one of the
wattmeters reads lower than the other. (This is generally the case for the two-
wattmeter method.)
a
c
b


Vab 
Ia 
Ic


Vcb 
9 
9 
9 
 j 12 
j 12 
 j 12 
Angle of Zφ is θφ
where θφ  53.13
W1
W2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–31
a
Vab
Ia
b
W1


(a)
Vab
Ia
53.13°
30°
v1
(b) v1 = 23.13°
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–32
P1  VabIa cos v1
where v1 is the angle between Vab and Ia.
c
Vcb
Ic
b
W2


(a)
(b) v2 = 83.13°
Ic
Vcb
173.13°
v2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–33
P2  VcbIc cos v2 where v2 is the angle between Vcb and Ic.
Change the load impedances of Figure 24–31 to 15 ∠70. Repeat Example 24–14.
(As a check, total power to the load is 985 W. Hint: One of the meters has a
negative reading.)
Answers
P  289 W; P2  1275 W; P1  P2  986 W
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 8
CircuitSim 24-13
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Watts Ratio Curve
The power factor for a balanced load can be obtained from the wattmeter read-
ings using a simple curve called the watts ratio curve, shown in Figure 24–34.
900
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
0 0.13
0.5
1.0
0.5
1
0.5
0.6
1.0
Power
factor
Pl
Ph
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–34
Watts ratio curve. Valid for balanced loads only.
NOTES...
To understand why a wattmeter may indicate a negative value (or read backward
if it is an analog meter), recall that it indicates the product of the magnitude of its
voltage times the magnitude of its current times the cosine of the angle between
them. This angle is not the angle vf of the load impedance; rather, it can be shown
that, for a balanced load, one meter will indicate VLILcos (vf  30) while the
other will indicate VLILcos(vf  30). If the magnitude of (vf  30) or (vf  30)
exceeds 90, its cosine will be negative and the corresponding meter reading will
be negative. If the meter is digital, it will display a minus sign; if it is analog, the
needle will attempt to move downscale. For the analog case, in order to get the
meter to read upscale you need to reverse a lead—as we have noted in the text.
EXAMPLE 24–15       
Consider again Figure 24–31.
a. Determine the power factor from the load impedance.
b. Using the meter readings of Example 24–14, determine the power factor
from the watts ratio curve.
Solution
a. Fp  cos vf  cos 53.13  0.6
b. P  199 W and Ph  1530 W. Therefore, PPh  0.13. From Figure 24–34,
Fp  0.6.
The problem with the watts ratio curve is that values are difﬁcult to deter-
mine accurately from the graph. However, it can be shown that
tan vf  3
P
P
h
h


P
P



(24–24)
From this, you can determine vf and then you can compute the power factor
from Fp  cos vf. Note, however, with many modern metering systems this is
unnecessary as such meters automatically determine and display power factor.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For unbalanced loads, none of the balanced circuit relationships apply. Each
problem must therefore be treated as an individual three-phase problem. We
will look at a few examples that can be handled by fundamental circuit tech-
niques such as Kirchhoff’s laws and mesh analysis. Source voltages are always
balanced (unless they are faulty, which we don’t consider here). In practice,
safety may be an issue—see Note.
Unbalanced Wye Loads
Unbalanced four-wire Y systems without line impedance are easily handled
using Ohm’s law. However, for three-wire systems or four-wire systems with
line and neutral impedance, you generally have to use mesh equations or com-
puter methods.
Section 24.7 | Unbalanced Loads
901
24.7 Unbalanced Loads
NOTES...
Voltage at a neutral point can 
be dangerous. For example, in
Figure 24–35, if the neutral is
grounded at the source, the voltage
at the load neutral is ﬂoating at some
potential relative to ground. Since we
are accustomed to thinking that 
neutrals are at ground potential and
hence safe to touch, there is a poten-
tial safety hazard here—see Practice
Problems 9, Question 1.
EXAMPLE 24–16        
For Figure 24–35, the generator is balanced with line-to-line voltage of 208 V.
Select EAB as reference and determine line currents and load voltages.
Solution
Redraw the circuit as shown in Figure 24–36, then use mesh analysis.
EAB  208 V∠0° and EBC  208 V∠–120°.
Loop 1:
(8  j4)I1  (3  j4)I2  208 V∠0°
Loop 2:
(3  j4)I1  (9  j4)I2  208 V∠120°
Ia
A
a
EAN


Van


N
B
c
n
C
Ic
b
Ib
5 E
Vbn


Vcn


6 Exj 8 E
3 Exxj 4 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–35
I1
3   j 4 
6   j 8 
5 
I2
EAB


EBC


B
A
C
a
c
b
n
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–36
CircuitSim 24-14
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

902
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
These equations can be solved using standard techniques such as determinants
or a calculator. Since most calculators cannot solve simultaneous equations with
complex coefﬁcients, many of you will be faced with solving by determinants—
see Note. Solutions are
I1  29.85 A∠26.21°
and
I2  11.81 A∠51.50°
KCL: Ia  I1  29.85 A∠26.21°
Ib  I2  I1  19.84 A∠168.50°
Ic  I2  11.81 A∠128.50°
Van  IaZan  (29.85 A∠26.21°) (5)  149.3 V∠26.2°
Vbn  IbZbn
and
Vcn  IcZcn
Thus,
Vbn  99.2 V∠138.4°
and
Vcn  118.1 V∠75.4°
NOTES...
You will likely have to write down
some intermediate answers and re-
enter them in your calculator as you
solve this example. You should prob-
ably write down four- or ﬁve-digit
intermediate answers so as not to
introduce round-off and truncation
error in your calculations. Final
answers should really be rounded to
three digits, but in order to permit
you to check your work, we have
shown four.
1. One of the problems with unbalanced three-wire Y systems is that, because you
get different voltages across each phase of the load, you get a voltage between
neutral points. To illustrate, using KVL and the results from Example 24–16,
compute the voltage between neutral points n and N of Figure 24–35.
2. For the circuit of Figure 24–37, EAN  120 V∠0. Compute the currents,
power to each phase, and total power. Hint: This is actually quite a simple
problem—you do not need to use mesh analysis.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 9
Ia
a
N
B
c
n
C
Ic
b
Ib
j 6 E
8 E
5 E∠0
16 E
j 12 E
A
In
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–37
Answers
1. VnN  30.8 V∠168.8
2. Ia  12 A∠36.9; Ib  6 A∠156.9; Ic  24 A∠120; In  26.8 A∠107.2
Pa  1152 W; Pb  576 W; Pc  2880 W; PT  4608 W
Unbalanced Delta Loads
Systems without line impedance are easily handled since the source voltage is
applied directly to the load. However, for systems with line impedance, use
mesh equations.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 24.7 | Unbalanced Loads
903
EXAMPLE 24–17        
For the circuit of Figure 24–38, the line voltage is 240 V. Take Vab as reference
and do the following:
Ia
a
Vab



c
Ic
b
Ib
12  ∠60
25 
Ica
Ibc
Iab
16  ∠30
Vbc


Vca

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–38
a. Determine the phase currents and sketch their phasor diagram.
b. Determine the line currents.
c. Determine the total power to the load.
Solution
a. Iab  VabZab  (240 V∠0)25   9.6 A∠0
Ibc  VbcZbc  (240 V∠120)(12 ∠60)  20 A∠180
Ica  VcaZca  (240 V∠120)(16 ∠30)  15 A∠150
Ica  15 A∠150
Ibc  20 A∠180
Iab  9.6 A∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–39
Phase currents for the circuit of Figure 24–38.
b. Ia  Iab  Ica  9.6 A∠0  15 A∠150  23.8 A∠18.4
Ib  Ibc  Iab  20 A∠180  9.6 A∠0  29.6 A∠180
Ic  Ica  Ibc  15 A∠150  20 A∠180  10.3 A∠46.9
c. Pab  VabIabcos vab  (240)(9.6)cos 0  2304 W
Pbc  VbcIbccos vbc  (240)(20)cos 60  2400 W
Pca  VcaIcacos vca  (240)(15)cos 30  3118 W
PT  Pab  Pbc  Pca  7822 W
EXAMPLE 24–18        
A pair of wattmeters are added to the circuit of Figure 24–38 as illustrated in
Figure 24–40. Determine wattmeter readings and compare them to the total
power calculated in Example 24–17.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

904
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
Solution
P1  VacIacos v1, where v1 is the angle between Vac and Ia. From
Example 24–17, Ia  23.8 A∠–18.4° and Vac  –Vca  240 V∠–60°. Thus,
v1  60° – 18.4°  41.6°. Therefore,
P1  (240)(23.8)cos 41.6  4271 W
Ia
a
c
b
Ib
12  ∠60
25 
16  ∠30
W1
W2

Vac


Vbc

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–40
P2  VbcIbcos v2, where v2 is the angle between Vbc and Ib. Vbc  240 V∠120
and Ib  29.6 A∠180. Thus, v2  60. So
P2  (240)(29.6)cos 60  3552 W
PT  P1  P2  7823 W (compared to our earlier solution of 7822 W).
CircuitSim 24-15
Before we leave this chapter, we look brieﬂy at how both single-phase and
three-phase loads may be connected to a three-phase system. (This is necessary
because residential and business customers require only single-phase power,
while industrial customers sometimes require both single-phase and three-
phase power.) Figure 24–41 shows how this may be done. (Even this is simpli-
ﬁed, as real systems contain transformers. However, the basic principles are
correct.) Two points should be noted here.
1. In order to approximately balance the system, the utility tries to connect
one-third of its single-phase loads to each phase. This yields a nearly bal-
anced system.
2. Real loads are seldom expressed in terms of resistance, capacitance, and
inductance. Instead, they are described in terms of power, power factor,
and so on. This is because most loads consist of electric lights, motors, and
the like, which are never described in terms of impedance. (For example,
you purchase light bulbs as 60-W bulbs, 100-W bulbs, etc., and electric
motors as 1⁄2 horsepower, etc. You never ask for a 240-ohm light!)
24.8 Power System
Loads
a
c
b
Three-
phase
source
Three-
phase
load
A
B
C
N
n
Single-phase
loads
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–41
Single-phase loads are
tapped off the three-phase lines.
PSpice and Multisim may be used to analyze three-phase systems (balanced or
unbalanced, Y or 	 connected). As usual, PSpice yields full phasor solutions,
but Multisim yields magnitudes only. Because neither software package allows
component placement at an angle, Y and 	 circuits must be drawn with com-
ponents placed either horizontally or vertically as in Figures 24–43 through
24–46, rather than in their traditional three-phase form. To begin, consider the
24.9 Circuit Analysis
Using Computers
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

balanced four-wire Y circuit of Figure 24–42. First, manually compute the cur-
rents so that you have a basis for comparison. Note that, at 60 Hz,
XC  53.05 
Thus,
Ia 
(30
1

20
j
V
53
∠
.0
0
5
°
) 
  1.969 A∠60.51°
and
Ib  1.969 A∠59.49°
and
Ic  1.969 A∠179.49°.
Section 24.9 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
905
© Cengage Learning 2013
30 
C = 50 μF
n
f  60 Hz
N
b
a
A
B
C
c






EAN  = 120 V∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–42
Balanced system for computer analysis.
Multisim
Draw the circuit on the screen as in Figure 24–43(a). Make sure the voltage
sources are oriented with their  ends as shown and that their phase angles are
set appropriately—see Note. Double-click the ammeters and set them to AC.
Activate the circuit by clicking the power switch. Compare answers to the
manual solution. Now replace the individual sources with the three-phase source
of (b) and repeat.
PSpice
Draw the circuit on the screen as in Figure 24–44 using source VAC. (Make
sure all source  terminals are oriented to the right as shown.) Double-click
each source in turn and, in its Property Editor, set its magnitude to 120V with
NOTES...
Ensure that the positive phase direc-
tion for sinusoidal waveforms is set
to “shift right” as detailed earlier 
in Chapter 15.
FIGURE 24–43
Solution by Multisim.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

phase angle as indicated. Similarly, double-click each IPRINT device and set
MAG to yes, PHASE to yes, and AC to yes. Via the New Proﬁle icon, select
AC SweepNoise, set the Start and End frequencies to 60Hz and the number of
points to 1. Run the simulation, open the Output File (found under View in the
results window), then scroll down until you ﬁnd the answers. (Figure 24–45
shows the answer for current Ia.) Examining the results, you will see that they
agree exactly with what we calculated earlier.
Since the circuit is balanced, you should be able to remove the neutral
conductor from between N-n. If you do, however, you will get errors. This
is because PSpice requires a dc path from every node back to the reference,
but because capacitors look like open circuits to dc, it sees node n as float-
ing. A simple solution is to put a very high-value resistor (say 100 k) in
the path between N-n. Its value is not critical; it just has to be large enough
to look like an open circuit. Try it and note that you get the same answers as
before.
906
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–44
Solution by PSpice.
NOTES...
1. Multisim and PSpice make no
distinction between balanced 
circuits and unbalanced circuits;
to the computer, they are simply
circuits. Thus, no special consid-
erations are necessary for unbal-
anced conditions.
2. Delta loads may be drawn as 
in Figure 24–46.
3. To annotate the diagram as in
Figure 24–44 (i.e., with points 
A, B, C, N, etc., identiﬁed), click
the Place text icon on the tool
palette, key in the text, and 
place as desired.
FREQ
6.000E+01
IM(V_PRINT1)
IP(V_PRINT1)
1.969E+00
6.051E+01
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–45
Sample computed current: Ia  1.969 A ∠60.51.
Zab
Zbc
Zca
c
b
a
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–46
Representing a 	 load.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 24.9 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
907
Y
ou have been sent to a job site to supervise the installation of a 208-V,
three-phase motor. The motor drives a machine, and it is essential that
the motor rotate in the correct direction (in this case, clockwise), other-
wise the machine may be damaged. You have a drawing that tells you to
connect Line a of the motor to Line A of the three-phase system, Line b to
Line B, and so on. However, you find that the three-phase lines have no
markings, and you don’t know which line is which. Unfortunately, you
cannot simply connect the motor and determine which direction it turns
for fear of damage.
You think about this for a while, then you come up with a plan. You
know that the direction of rotation of a three-phase motor depends on the
phase sequence of the applied voltage, so you make a sketch (sketch A).
As indicated in part (a) of that drawing, the motor rotates in the correct
direction when a is connected to A, b to B, and so on. You reason that the
phase sequence you need is . . . A-B-C-A-B-C . . . (since the direction of
rotation depends only on phase sequence) and that it really doesn’t matter
to which line a is connected as long as the other two are connected such
that you provide sequencing in this order to the motor. To convince your-
self, you make several more sketches (parts b and c). As indicated, in (b)
the sequence is . . . B-C-A-B-C-A . . . (which fits the preceding pattern)
and the motor rotates in the correct direction, but for (c) the motor rotates
in the reverse direction. (Show why.)
You also remember reading about a device called a phase sequence indi-
cator that allows you to determine phase sequence. It uses lights and a capac-
itor as in sketch B. To use the device, connect terminal a to the three-phase
line that you have designated A and connect terminals b and c to the other
two lines. The lamp that lights brightly is the one attached to line B. After a
few calculations, you ask the plant electrician for some standard 120-V 60-W
light bulbs and sockets. From your tool kit, you retrieve a 10-F capacitor
(one that is rated for ac operation). You make a slight modiﬁcation to the
schematic of sketch B, solder the parts together, wrap exposed wires with
electrical tape (for safety), then connect the device and identify the three-
phase lines. You then connect the motor and it rotates in the correct direction.
Prepare an analysis to show why the lamp connected to B is much brighter
than the lamp connected to line C. Assume each lamp resistance is 240 .
(Note: Don’t forget that you made a slight change to the schematic. Hint: If
you use single 60-W lamps in each leg as shown, they will burn out.)
Putting It into Practice
(c)
(b)
a
c
b
a
c
b
a
c
b
(a)
C
B
A
a
C
b
c
© Cengage Learning 2013
Sketch A
Sketch B
CircuitSim 24-16
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

908
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
CircuitSim 24-17
Ia
A
a
EAN


Van


N
B
c
n
C
b
12 
j 9 
12 
12 
j 9 
j 9 
Vcn


Vbn


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–47
Balanced system.
Problems
24.2
Basic Three-Phase Circuit Connections
1. As long as the loads and voltages of Figure 24–3 are balanced (regardless 
of their actual value), currents IA, IB, and IC will sum to zero. To illustrate,
change the load impedance from 12  to 15 ∠30 and for EAA  120
V∠0, do the following:
a. Compute currents IA, IB, and IC.
b. Sum the currents. Does IA  IB  IC  0?
2. For Figure 24–3(c), EAN  277 V∠15.
a. What are EBN and ECN?
b. If each resistance is 5.54 , compute IA, IB, and IC.
c. Sum the currents of part (b) to show that IN  0.
3. Sketch the set of current waveforms iA, iB, and iC for the circuit of
Figure 24–3(c). Assume balanced, purely resistive load resistors. 
24.3
Basic Three-Phase Relationships
4. For the generators of Figure 24–4, EAN  7620 V∠18.
a. What are the phase voltages EBN and ECN?
b. Determine the line-to-line voltages.
c. Sketch their phasor diagram.
5. For the loads of Figure 24–4, Vbc  208 V∠75.
a. Determine the line-to-line voltages Vab and Vca.
b. Determine the phase voltages.
c. Sketch their phasor diagram.
6. Repeat Problem 5 if Vca  208 V∠90.
7. For the load of Figure 24–47, Van  347 V∠15. Determine all line currents.
Sketch their phasor diagram.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12. For the circuit of Figure 24–48, if Ia  41.0 A∠46.7, ﬁnd all the phase
currents.
13. For the circuit of Figure 24–48, if Iab  10 A∠21, determine all the line
voltages.
14. For the circuit of Figure 24–48, if line current Ia  11.0 A∠30, ﬁnd all the
phase voltages.
15. A balanced Y load has phase impedance of 24 ∠33 and line-to-line volt-
age of 600 V. Take Van as reference and determine all line currents.
16. A balanced 	 load has phase impedance of 27 ∠57 and phase voltage of
208 V. Take Vab as reference and determine the following:
a. Phase currents.
b. Line currents.
17. a. For a certain balanced Y load, Vab  208 V∠30, Ia  24 A∠40 and 
f  60 Hz. Determine the load (R and L or C).
b. Repeat (a) if Vbc  208 V∠30 and Ic  12 A∠140.
18. Consider Figure 24–13(a). Show that Ia  –3Iab∠30.
19. At 60 Hz, a balanced 	 load has current Ibc  4.5 A∠85. The line voltage
is 240 volts and Vab is taken as reference.
a. Find the other phase currents.
b. Find the line currents.
c. Find the resistance R and capacitance C of the load.
20. A Y generator with EAN  120 V∠0 drives a balanced 	 load. If Ia 
43.6 A∠37.5, what are the load impedances?
24.4
Examples
21. For Figure 24–49, Van  120 V∠0. Draw the single-phase equivalent and:
a. Find phase voltage EAN, magnitude and angle.
b. Find line voltage EAB, magnitude and angle.
Problems
909
8. For the load of Figure 24–47, if Ia  7.8 A∠10, determine the phase volt-
ages and line voltages. Sketch their phasor diagram.
9. A balanced Y load has impedance Zan  14.7 ∠16. If Vcn  120 V∠160,
determine all line currents.
10. For a balanced delta load, Iab  29.3 A∠43. What is Ia?
11. For the circuit of Figure 24–48, Vab  480 V∠0. Find the phase and line
currents.
A
a
EAN


Vab


B
c
C
b
j 15 
Ica
Ibc
Ia
Iab
N
j 15 
j 15 
20 
20 
20 
Vbc


Vca


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–48
Balanced system.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

910
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems


Vab
a
b
c
40 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–50
22. For Figure 24–49, EAN  120 V∠20. Draw the single-phase equivalent and:
a. Find phase voltage Van, magnitude and angle.
b. Find line voltage Vab, magnitude and angle.
23. For Figure 24–48, EAN  120 V∠10. Find the line currents using the 
single-phase equivalent method.
24. Repeat Problem 23 if EBN  120 V∠100.
25. For Figure 24–48, assume the lines have impedance Zline of 0.15  
j0.25  and EAN  120 V∠0. Convert the 	 load to a Y and use the single-
phase equivalent to ﬁnd the line currents.
26. For Problem 25, ﬁnd the phase currents in the 	 network.
27. For the circuit of Figure 24–49, assume Zline  0.15   j0.25  and 
Vab  600 V∠30. Determine EAB.
28. For Figure 24–21(a), ZY  12   j9 , Z	  27   j36  and Zline 
0.1   j0.1 . At the Y load, Van  120 V∠0.
a. Draw the single-phase equivalent.
b. Find generator voltage EAN.
29. Same as Problem 28 except that the phase voltage at the 	 load is Vab 
480 V∠30. Find generator voltage EAB, magnitude and angle.
30. For Figure 24–21(a), ZY  12   j9 , Z	  36   j27 , and Zline 
0.1   j0.1 . Line current IA is 46.2 A∠36.87. Find the phase currents
for both loads.
31. For Figure 24–21(a), ZY  15   j20 , Z	  9   j12 , Zline  0.1 
 j0.1 , and Iab  40 A∠73.13. Find Y phase voltage Van, magnitude
and angle.
24.5
Power in a Balanced System
32. For the balanced load of Figure 24–50, Vab  600 V. Determine per-phase
and total active, reactive, and apparent power.
33. Repeat Problem 32 for the balanced load of Figure 24–51, given EAN  120 V.
34. For Figure 24–47, EAN  120 volts.
a. Determine per-phase real, reactive, and apparent power.
b. Multiply per-phase quantities by 3 to get total quantities.
A
a
EAN


Van


N
B
c
n
C
b
12 E
j 9 E
12 E
12 E
j 9 E
j 9 E
0.1 E  j 0.3 E
0.1 E  j 0.3 E
Zline
Zneutral
2 E  j 4 E
0.1 E  j 0.3 E
Zline
Zline
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–49
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

35. For Figure 24–47, compute the total real, reactive, and apparent power using
the PT, QT, and ST formulas of Table 24–2. (Use VL  207.8 V rather than the
nominal value of 208 V here.) Compare these to the results of Problem 34.
36. For Figure 24–48, EAB  208 volts.
a. Determine per-phase real, reactive, and apparent power.
b. Multiply per-phase quantities by 3 to get total quantities.
37. For Figure 24–48, EAB  208 V. Compute the total real, reactive, and appar-
ent power using the PT, QT, and ST formulas of Table 24–2. Compare to the
results of Problem 36.
38. For Figure 24–52, if Van  277 V, determine the total active power, total
reactive power, total apparent power, and power factor.
39. For Figure 24–53, if Vab  600 V, determine the total power, total reactive
power, total apparent power, and power factor.
Problems
911
500 
A
B
C
N






EAN
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–51
a
b
c
n
16 E
16 E
16 E
–j3 E
–j3 E
–j3 E
© Cengage Learning 2013
a
c
b
j6 
j6 
12 
12 
12 
j6 
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–52
FIGURE 24–53
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40. For Figure 24–18, if Van  120 V, determine the total power, total reactive
power, and total apparent power,
a. supplied to the load.
b. output by the source.
41. For Figure 24–19, if Vab  480 V, determine the total power, total reactive
power, total apparent power, and power factor.
42. For Figure 24–21(a), let Zline  0 , ZY  20 ∠0, Z	  30 ∠10, and
EAN  120 V.
a. Find the total real power, reactive power, and apparent power to the Y load.
b. Repeat (a) for the 	 load.
c. Determine total watts, VARs, and VA using the results of (a) and (b).
43. Vab  208 V for a balanced Y load, PT  1200 W, and QT  750 VAR (ind.).
Choose Van as reference and determine Ia. (Use power triangle.)
44. A motor whose efﬁciency is 80% delivers 100 hp to a load. A bank of
power factor capacitors is connected as in Figure 24–54. The capacitor
bank (which is balanced) is rated QC  45 kVAR (total). Reduce the prob-
lem to its single-phase equivalent, then compute the resultant power factor
of the system.
45. The capacitors of Figure 24–54 are connected in Y and each has the value
C  120 F. Compute the resultant power factor. Frequency is 60 Hz.
912
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
40 
4 A
30 
n
b
a
c
W
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–55
24.6
Measuring Power in Three-Phase Circuits
46. For Figure 24–55:
a. Determine the wattmeter reading.
b. If the load is balanced, what is PT?
100 hp
η  0.80
Fp  0.85 (lag)
Vline  575 V
Motor
Capacitor
bank
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–54
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

47. For Figure 24–47, the generator phase voltage is 120 volts.
a. Sketch three wattmeters correctly into the circuit.
b. Compute the reading of each wattmeter.
c. Sum the readings and compare this to the result of 2304 W obtained in
Problem 34. 
48. Figures 24–30 and 24–31 show two ways that two wattmeters may be con-
nected to measure power in a three-phase, three-wire circuit. There is one
more way. Sketch it.
49. For the circuit of Figure 24–56, Vab  208 V∠30.
a. Determine the magnitude and angle of the currents.
b. Determine power per phase and total power, PT.
c. Compute the reading of each wattmeter.
d. Sum the meter readings and compare the result to PT of (b).
50. Two wattmeters measure power to a balanced load. Readings are Ph  1000 W
and P  400 W. Determine the power factor of the load from Equation 24–24
and from Figure 24–34. How do they compare?
51. Consider the circuit of Figure 24–56.
a. Compute the power factor from the angle of the phase impedances.
b. In Problem 49, wattmeter readings Ph  1164 W and P  870 W were
determined. Substitute these values into Equation 24–24 and compute the
power factor of the load. Compare the results to (a).
52. For the balanced load of Figure 24–57, Vab  208 V∠0.
a. Compute phase currents and line currents.
b. Determine power per phase and total power PT.
c. Compute the reading of each wattmeter, then sum the wattmeter readings
and compare to PT from (b).
Problems
913
Ia
Ic
Ib
c
a
b
20 
20 
20 
j5 
j5 
j5 
W1
W2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–56
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24.7
Unbalanced Loads
53. For Figure 24–58, Rab  60 , Zbc  80   j60 . Compute the following:
a. Phase and line currents.
b. Power to each phase and total power.
54. Repeat Problem 53 if Pab  2400 W and Zbc  50 ∠40.
55. For Figure 24–59, compute the following:
a. Line currents, magnitudes and angles.
b. The neutral current.
c. Power to each phase.
d. Total power to the load.
914
Chapter 24 | Three-Phase Systems
Ia
A
a
N
B
c
n
C
In
b
Ib
18 E
j 20 E
Ic
40 E
30 E
j 40 E
EAN  120 V∠0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–59
16 E
j 12 E
a
b
c
W1
W2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–57
a
c
b
50 E
Ica
Ibc
Iab
Zbc
Ib
Ia
Rab
j 60 E
A
C
B
Vab  240 V∠0
Vbc  240 V∠120
Vca  240 V∠120
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 24–58
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
MultiSim
PSPICE
MultiSim
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
1. Van  EAN  277 V∠20; Vbn  EBN  277 V∠140;
Vcn  ECN  277 V∠100; Vab  EAB  480 V∠10;
Vbc  EBC  480 V∠110; Vca  ECA  480 V∠130
2. Van  EAN  120 V∠50; Vbn  EBN  120 V∠70;
Vcn  ECN  120 V∠170; Vab  EAB  208 V∠80;
Vbc  EBC  208 V∠40; Vca  ECA  208 V∠160
3. Van  124 V∠1.87; Vab  214 V∠28.13
4. Vab  104 V∠81.7; Vbc  104 V∠38.3;
Vca  104 V∠158.3
56. Remove the neutral conductor from the circuit of Figure 24–59 and compute
the line currents. Hint: Use mesh equations.
57. From Problem 56, Ia  1.94 A∠0.737, Ib  4.0 A∠117.7, and 
Ic  3.57 A∠91.4. Compute the following:
a. Voltages across each phase of the load.
b. Voltage between the neutral of the load and the neutral of the generator.
24.9
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
For each of the following problems, use either Multisim or PSpice. With Multisim,
you get only magnitude; with PSpice, solve for magnitude and angle. Caution: For
PSpice, insert the IPRINT devices so that current enters the positive terminal.
Otherwise, the phase angle will be in error by 180. (See Figure 24–44.)
58. For the balanced system of Figure 24–47, let EAN  347 V∠15, L  8.95 mH,
and f  160 Hz. Solve for line currents.
59. For the balanced system of Figure 24–48, let EAN  277 V∠30, C  50 F,
and f  212 Hz. Solve for phase currents and line currents.
60. Repeat Problem 59 with C replaced with L  11.26 mH.
61. For Figure 24–59, let L  40 mH, C  50 F, and q  1000 rads. Solve for
line and neutral currents.
Answers to In-Process Learning Checks
915
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I KEY TERMS
Fourier Series
Frequency Spectrum
Fundamental Frequency
Harmonic Frequency
Spectrum Analyzer
I OUTLINE
Composite Waveforms
Fourier Series
Fourier Series of Common
Waveforms
Frequency Spectrum
Circuit Response to a
Nonsinusoidal
Waveform
Circuit Analysis Using
Computers
I OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you will be able to
• solve for the coefﬁcients of the Fourier series
of a simple periodic waveform, using
integration,
• use tables to write the Fourier equivalent of
any simple periodic waveform,
• sketch the frequency spectrum of a periodic
waveform, giving the amplitudes of various
harmonics in either volts, watts, or dBm,
• calculate the power dissipated when a
complex waveform is applied to a resistive
load,
• determine the output of a ﬁlter circuit given
the frequency spectrum of the input signal
and the frequency response of the ﬁlter,
• use PSpice to observe the actual response of
a ﬁlter circuit to a nonsinusoidal input signal.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

25
NONSINUSOIDAL WAVEFORMS
I
n our analysis of ac circuits, we have dealt primarily with sinusoidal waveforms. Although the
sinusoidal wave is the most common waveform in electronic circuits, it is by no means the
only type of signal used in electronics. In previous chapters we observed how sinusoidal sig-
nals were affected by the characteristics of components within a circuit. For instance, if a 1-kHz
sinusoid is applied to a low-pass ﬁlter circuit having a cutoff frequency of 3 kHz, we know that
the signal appearing at the output of the ﬁlter will be essentially the same as the signal applied
to the input. This effect is illustrated in Figure 25–1.
CHAPTER PREVIEW
vout
vin
Low-pass
filter


fc  3 kHz
t
f  1 kHz
0
1 V
1 V
vin
t
f  1 kHz
0
1 V
1 V
vout
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

918
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
One would naturally expect that the 1-kHz low-pass ﬁlter would allow any other 1-kHz signal
to pass from input to the output without being distorted. Unfortunately, this is not the case.
In this chapter we will ﬁnd that any periodic waveform is composed of numerous sinu-
soidal waveforms, each of which has a unique amplitude and frequency. As we have already
seen, circuits such as the low-pass ﬁlter and the resonant tank circuit do not allow all sinu-
soidal frequencies to pass from the input to the output in the same manner. As a result, the
output signal may be dramatically different from the signal applied at the input. For example, if
we were to apply a 1-kHz square wave to a low-pass ﬁlter having a 3-kHz cutoff, the output
would appear as shown in Figure 25–2.
vout
vin
Low-pass
filter
fc  3 kHz
t
f  1 kHz
0
1 V
1 V
vin
t
0
1 V
1 V
vout


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–2
Although the frequency of the square wave is less than the 3-kHz cutoff frequency of the
ﬁlter, we will ﬁnd that the square wave has many high-frequency components which are well
above the cutoff frequency. It is these components that are affected in the ﬁlter, and this
results in the distortion of the output waveform.
Once a periodic waveform is reduced to the summation of sinusoidal waveforms, it is a
fairly simple matter to determine how various frequency components of the original signal will
be affected by the circuit. The overall response of the circuit to a particular waveform can then
be found. I
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Any waveform that is made up of two or more separate waveforms is called a
composite waveform. Most signals appearing in electronic circuits are com-
prised of complicated combinations of dc levels and sinusoidal waves. Consider
the circuit and signal shown in Figure 25–3.
Section 25.1 | Composite Waveforms
919
Putting It in Perspective
Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier
FOURIER WAS BORN IN AUXERRE, Yonne, France on March 21,
1768. As a youth, Fourier reluctantly studied for the priest-
hood in the monastery of Saint-Benoit-sur Loire. However,
his interest was in mathematics. In 1798, Fourier accompa-
nied Napoleon to Egypt, where he was made a governor.
After returning to France, Fourier was particularly interested
in the study of heat transfer between two points of different
temperature. He was appointed joint secretary of the
Academy of Sciences in 1822.
In 1807, Fourier announced the discovery of a theorem,
which made him famous. Fourier’s theorem states that any
periodic waveform can be written as the summation of a
series of simple sinusoidal functions.
Using his theorem, Fourier was able to develop important
theories in heat transfer, which were published in 1822 in a
book titled Analytic Theory of Heat.
Although still used to describe heat transfer, Fourier’s theorem is used today to predict 
how filters and various other electronic circuits operate when subjected to a nonsinusoidal 
periodic function.
Fourier died in Paris on May 16, 1830 as the result of a fall down the stairs. I
Hulton Archive/Stringer/Hulton Archive/Getty Images
25.1 Composite
Waveforms
Vdc
Vdc
0
Em
t
R
Vac
vout
vout




© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–3
The voltage appearing across the load is determined by superposition as
the combination of the ac source in series with a dc source. The result is a sine
wave with a dc offset. As one might expect, when a composite wave is applied
to a load resistor, the resulting power is determined by considering the effects
of both signals. The rms voltage of the composite waveform is determined as
Vrms  V2dc
 
 V
2ac

(25–1)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

920
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
EXAMPLE 25–1       
Determine the power delivered to the load if the waveform of Figure 25–4 is
applied to a 500- resistor.
Solution
By examining the waveform, we see that the average value is Vdc 
12 V and the peak value of the sinusoidal is Vm  16 V  12 V  4 V. The rms
value of the sinusoidal waveform is determined to be Vac  (0.707)(4 V) 
2.83 V. Now we ﬁnd the rms value of the composite wave as
Vrms  (1
2 V
)2
 
 (
2.8
3 V
)2

 152 V
2
 12.3 V
and so the power delivered to the load is
Pload  
(1
5
2
0
.
0
3

V)2
  0.304 W
0
8 V
16 V
t
v(t)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–4
Determine the power delivered to the load if the waveform of Figure 25–5 is
applied to a 200- resistor.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 1
Answer
2.25 W
0
30 V
10 V
t
v(t)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–5
where Vac is the rms value of the ac component of waveform and is found as
Vac  

Em
2
. The power delivered to a load will be determined simply as
Pload  
R
V
l
2r
o
m
ad
s

The following example illustrates this principle.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In 1826, Baron Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier developed a branch of mathe-
matics that is used to express any periodic waveform as an inﬁnite series of
sinusoidal waveforms. Although it seems as though we are turning a simple
waveform into a more complicated form, you will ﬁnd that the resulting
expression actually simpliﬁes the analysis of many circuits which respond dif-
ferently to signals of various frequencies. Using Fourier analysis, any periodic
waveform can be written as a summation of sinusoidal waveforms as follows:
f(t)  a0  a1 cos qt  a2 cos 2qt  …  an cos nqt  …
 b1 sin qt  b2 sin 2qt  …  bn sin nqt  …
(25–2)
The coefﬁcients of the individual terms of the Fourier series are found by
integrating the original function over one complete period. The coefﬁcients are
determined as
a0  T
1
 
t1  T
t1
f(t) dt
(25–3)
an  T
2

t1  T
t1
f(t)cos nqt dt
(25–4)
bn  T
2

t1  T
t1
f(t)sin nqt dt
(25–5)
Notice that Equation 25–2 indicates that the Fourier series of a periodic
function may contain both a sine and a cosine component at each frequency.
These individual components can be combined to give a single sinusoidal
expression as follows:
an cos nx  bn sin nx  an sin(nx  90°)  bn sin nx
 cn sin (nx  v)
where
cn  a2n
 b
2n
(25–6)
and
v  tan1a
bn
n
(25–7)
Therefore, the Fourier equivalent of any periodic waveform may be sim-
pliﬁed as follows:
f (t)  a0  c1 sin(qt  1)  c2 sin(2qt  v2)    
The a0 term is a constant that corresponds to the average value of the periodic
waveform, and the cn coefﬁcients give the amplitudes of the various sinusoidal
terms. Notice that the ﬁrst sinusoidal term (n  1) has the same frequency as the
original waveform. This component is referred to as the fundamental frequency
of the given waveform. All other frequencies are integer multiples of the funda-
mental frequency and are called the harmonic frequencies. When n  2, the
resulting term is called the second harmonic; when n  3, we have the third har-
monic, and so on. Using Equation 25–3 to Equation 25–7, it is possible to derive
the Fourier series for any periodic function.
Section 25.2 | Fourier Series
921
NOTES...
For Further Investigation
For additional information,
go to cengagebrain.com
and log in by entering
your user name and password.
Follow the links to For Further
Investigation and select Fourier
Series.
25.2 Fourier Series
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

922
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
EXAMPLE 25–2       
Write the Fourier series for the pulse waveform shown in Figure 25–6.
Solution
The various coefﬁcients are calculated by integrating as follows:
a0  T
1

T
2
0
(1) dt  T
1

T
T
2(0) dt  1
2

an  T
2

T
2
0
(1)cos nqt dt  T
2

T
T
2(0) dt
 T
2
n
1
q
sin nqt
T
2
0
 n
1
p
sin np  0
Notice that all an  0 since sin np  0 for all n.
b1  T
2

T
2
0
(1)sin qt dt  T
2

T
T
2(0) dt
 T
2
q
1
 cos qt
T
2
0
  p
1
cos2
T
pt
T
2
0
  p
1
[(1)  (1)]  p
2

b2  T
2

T
2
0
(1)sin 2qt dt  T
2

T
T
2(0) dt
 T
2
2
1
q
 cos 2qt
T
2
0
 2
1
p
cos4
T
pt
T
2
0
 2
1
p
[(1)  (1)]  0
b3  T
2

T
2
0
(1) sin 3qt dt  T
2

T
T
2(0) dt
 T
2
3
1
q
cos 3qt
T
2
0
 3
1
p
cos6
T
pt
T
2
0
 3
1
p
[(1)  (1)]  3
2
p

For all odd values of n, we have bn  2
np since cos np  1. Even values
of n give bn  0 since cos np  1.
t
0
1
v(t)
ω  2
T  
T
v(t)    
1: 0 < t < 
0:      < t < T
T
2
T
2
T
2
3T
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–6
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

By examining the general expression for the pulse wave of Figure 25–6,
we can observe several important characteristics. The Fourier series conﬁrms
that the wave shown has an average value of a0  0.5. In addition, the pulse
wave has only odd harmonics. In other words, a pulse wave having a frequency
of 1 kHz would have harmonic components occurring at 3 kHz, 5 kHz, and so
on. Although the given wave consists of an inﬁnite number of sinusoidal com-
ponents, the amplitudes of successive terms decrease as n increases.
If we were to consider only the ﬁrst four nonzero frequency components
of the pulse wave, we would have the following expression:
v(t)  0.5  p
2
sin qt  3
2
p
sin 3qt  5
2
p
sin 5qt
 7
2
p
sin 7qt
(25–9)
The graphical representation of the preceding expression is shown in
Figure 25–7.
Section 25.2 | Fourier Series
923
The general expression of the Fourier series for the given pulse wave is
therefore written as
v(t)  1
2
  p
2


1 
sin
n
nqt

n  1, 3, 5, . . . 
(25–8)
t (s)
0
0
v(V)
T
0.09
1.00
1.09
T
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–7
Although this waveform is not identical to the given pulse wave, we see
that the ﬁrst four nonzero harmonics provide a reasonable approximation of the
original waveform.
Derivations of Fourier series for certain waveforms are simpliﬁed due to sym-
metry that occurs in the waveform. We will examine three types of symmetry: even,
odd, and half-wave symmetry. Each type of symmetry results in consistent patterns
in the Fourier series. The waveforms of Figure 25–8 are symmetrical around the
vertical axis and are said to have even symmetry (or cosine symmetry).
Waveforms having even symmetry will always have the form
f (t)  f (t)
(Even symmetry)
(25–10)
When the Fourier series of an even symmetry waveform is written, it will only
contain cosine (an) terms and possibly an a0 term. All sine (bn) terms will be zero.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

If the portion of the waveform to the right of the vertical axis in each
signal of Figure 25–9 is rotated 180, we ﬁnd that it will exactly overlap the
portion of the waveform to the left of the axis. Such waveforms are said to have
odd symmetry.
924
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
t
t
t1
t
f(t)
f(t)
f(t)  cos Vt
Symmetry around
the vertical axis
(a)
(b)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–8
Even symmetry (cosine symmetry).
FIGURE 25–9
Odd symmetry (sine symmetry).
FIGURE 25–10
Half-wave symmetry.
t
t
f(t)
f(t)
f(t)  sin wt
© Cengage Learning 2013
Waveforms having odd symmetry will always have the form
f(t)  f(t)
(Odd symmetry)
(25–11)
When the Fourier series of an odd symmetry waveform is written, it will only
contain sine (bn) terms and possibly an a0 term. All cosine (an) terms will be zero.
If the portion of the waveform below the horizontal axis in Figure 25–10
is the mirror image of the portion above the axis, the waveform is said to have
half-wave symmetry.
t
f(t)
T
T
2
Mirror images
around the horizontal axis
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Waveforms having half-wave symmetry will always have the form
f (t  T)  f (t)
(Half-wave symmetry)
(25–12)
When the Fourier series of a half-wave symmetry waveform is written, it will have
only odd harmonics and possibly an a0 term. All even harmonic terms will be zero.
If we refer back to the waveform of Figure 25–6, we see that it has both odd
symmetry and half-wave symmetry. Using the preceding rules, we would expect
to ﬁnd only sine terms and odd harmonics. Indeed, we see that Equation 25–9
has these conditions.
Section 25.2 | Fourier Series
925
Consider the ramp function shown in Figure 25–11.
a. Does this waveform show symmetry?
b. Use calculus to determine the Fourier expression for v(t).
c. Verify that the a0 term of the Fourier series is equal to the average value
of the waveform.
d. From the Fourier expression, is the ramp function made up of odd har-
monics, even harmonics, or all harmonic components? Brieﬂy justify
your answer.
Answers
a. Odd symmetry
b. v(t)  0.5  p
1
sin(2pt)  2
1
p
sin(4pt)  3
1
p
sin(6pt) …
c. a0  0.5 V
d. All harmonic components are present since the function does not have half-wave
symmetry.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 2
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Without using calculus, determine a method of rewriting the expression of
Equation 25–9 to represent a square wave having an amplitude of 1 V as illus-
trated in Figure 25–12. Hint: Notice that the square wave is similar to the pulse
waveform with the exception that its average value is zero and that the peak-to-
peak value is twice that of the pulse wave.
FIGURE 25–11
t (s)
0
v(t) (V)
1
1
© Cengage Learning 2013
t (s)
0
1
v(t) (V)
0.5
1.0
1.5
1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–12
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

926
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
All periodic waveforms can be converted into their Fourier equivalent series by
using integration as shown in Section 25.2. Integration of common waveforms
is time-consuming and prone to error. A simpler approach is to use tables such
as Table 25–1, which gives the Fourier series of several common waveforms
encountered in electrical circuits.
25.3 Fourier Series 
of Common
Waveforms
TABLE 25–1
Fourier Equivalents of Common Waveforms (  2T)
t
0
v(t)
T
V
V

V(t)     V,       < t < 0 
V, 0 < t <          
T
2
T
2
T
2
T
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
t
0
v(t)
a
a
T
V

V(t)     
  
T
2
T
2
T
2
T
2
T
2
T
2
0,       a/2 < t <       a/2
V,       a/2 < t <       a/2
© Cengage Learning 2013
t
0
v(t)
T
V

T
V(t) 
 2Vt ,      < t < 0
      T
2Vt , 0 < t < 
 T
T
2
T
2
T
2
T
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–13
FIGURE 25–14
FIGURE 25–15
v(t)  4
p
V

1 
sin
n
nqt

n  1, 3, 5, . . .
v(t)  a
T
V  2
p
V

1
(1)n 

n  1, 2, 3, . . .
sin
p
T
na
cos nqt

n
v(t)  V
2
  4
p
V
2

1 
cos
n
n
2
qt

n  1, 3, 5, . . .
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 25.3 | Fourier Series of Common Waveforms
927
TABLE 25–1
Fourier Equivalents of Common Waveforms (  2T) (continued)
t
0
v(t)
T
V
V

V(t)  2 Vt,       < t <
              T
T
2
T
2
T
2
T
2
T
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
t
0
v(t)
T
V
2T
V(t)  Vt , 0 < t < T
            T
T
2T
© Cengage Learning 2013
t
0
v(t)
T
V

V(t)  V sin ωt  ,       < t < 
T
2
T
2
T
2
T
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
t
0
v(t)
T
V

v(t)     0,       < t < 0        
               V sin ωt, 0 < t <      
T
2
T
2
T
2
T
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–16
FIGURE 25–17
FIGURE 25–18
FIGURE 25–19
v(t)  2
p
V

1
(1)n 
sin
n
nqt

n  1, 2, 3, . . .
v(t)  V
2
  V
p


1 
sin
n
nqt

n  1, 2, 3, . . .
v(t)  2
p
V  4
p
V
co
1
s
	
2
3
qt
  
co
3
s
	
4
5
qt
  
co
5
s
	
6
7
qt
  …
v(t)  V
p
  V
2
sin qt  2
p
V
co
1
s
	
2
3
qt
  
co
3
s
	
4
5
qt
  
co
5
s
	
6
7
qt
  …
© Cengage Learning 2013
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The following example illustrates how a given waveform is converted into
its Fourier series equivalent.
928
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
EXAMPLE 25–3       
Use Table 25–1 to determine the Fourier series for the ramp function of
Figure 25–20.
Solution
The amplitude of the waveform is 10 V and the angular frequency of
the fundamental is q  2p
(2 ms)  1000p rad
s. The resulting series is deter-
mined from Table 25–1 as
v(t)  1
2
0  1
p
0sin 1000pt  2
1
p
0sin 2000pt
3
1
p
0sin 3000pt  4
1
p
0sin 4000pt  …
 5  3.18 sin 1000pt  1.59 sin 2000pt
1.06 sin 3000pt  0.80 sin 4000pt  …
If a given waveform is similar to one of the types shown in Table 25–1 but
is shifted along the time axis, it is necessary to include a phase shift with each
of the sinusoidal terms. The phase shift is determined as follows:
1. Determine the period of the given waveform.
2. Compare the given waveform with the ﬁgures appearing in Table 25–1 and
select which of the waveforms in the table best describes the given wave.
3. Determine whether the given waveform leads or lags the selected ﬁgure of
Table 25–1. Calculate the amount of the phase shift, as a fraction, t, of the
total period. Since one complete cycle is equivalent to 360, the phase shift
is determined as
f  T
t
  360°
4. Write the resulting Fourier expression for the given waveform. If the given
waveform leads the selected ﬁgure of Table 25–1, then add the angle f to
each term. If the given waveform lags the selected ﬁgure, then subtract the
angle f from each term.
t
0
v(t)
0
10 V
2 ms
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–20
EXAMPLE 25–4       
Write the Fourier expression for the ﬁrst four nonzero sinusoidal terms of the
waveform shown in Figure 25–21.
Solution
Step 1: The period of the given waveform is T  8.0 ms, which gives a fre-
quency of f  125 Hz or an angular frequency of q  250p rad
s.
Step 2: From Table 25–1, we see that the given waveform is similar to the
square wave of Figure 25–13.
Step 3: The waveform of Figure 25–21 leads the square wave of Figure 25–13
by an amount equivalent to t  2 ms. This corresponds to a phase shift of
f  
2
8
m
m
s
s
  360°  90°
t (ms)
0
4
v (V)
4
0
2
4
6
8
10
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–21
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Answer
v(t)  4
p
8
2sin(250pt  135°)  
3
4
2p
8
2
sin(750pt  135°)
 
5
4
2p
8
2
sin(1250pt  45°)  
7
4
2p
8
2
sin(1750pt  45°)
Section 25.3 | Fourier Series of Common Waveforms
929
Step 4: The Fourier expression for the ﬁrst four terms of the waveform of
Figure 25–21 is now written as follows:
v(t)  
4(
p
4)
sin(250pt  90°)  
4
3
(
p
4)
sin[3(250pt  90°)]
 
4
5
(
p
4)
sin[5(250pt  90°)]  
4
7
(
p
4)
sin[7(250pt  90°)]
The preceding expression may be left as the summation of sine waves. However,
since the cosine wave leads the sine wave by 90, the expression may be simpli-
ﬁed as a summation of cosine waves without any phase shift. This results in the
following:
v(t)  5.09 cos 250pt  1.70 cos 750pt  1.02 cos 1250pt  0.73 cos 1750 pt
Write the Fourier expression for the ﬁrst four nonzero sinusoidal terms of the
waveform shown in Figure 25–22. Express each term as a sine wave rather than
as a cosine wave.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 3
FIGURE 25–22
t (ms)
0
6 V
v
6 V
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
© Cengage Learning 2013
EXAMPLE 25–5        
Write the ﬁrst four nonzero sinusoidal terms of the Fourier series for the wave-
form of Figure 25–23.
The waveforms of Table 25–1 provide most of the commonly observed wave-
forms. Occasionally, however, a particular waveform consists of a combination of
several simple waveforms. In such a case, it is generally easiest if we ﬁrst redraw
the original waveform as the summation of two or more recognizable waveforms.
Then the Fourier series of each of the individual component waves is determined.
Finally, the resultant is expressed as the summation of the two series.
t
0
1 V
v (t)
1 V
2 V
T
2T
T
2
3T
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–23
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Fourier series of each of the waveforms is determined from Table 25–1 as
v1(t)  p
4
sin qt  3
4
p sin 3qt  5
4
p sin 5qt  …
and
v2(t)  1
2
  p
4
2cos qt  
32
4
p2
 cos 3qt  
52
4
p2
 cos 5qt  …
When these series are added algebraically, we get
v(t)  v1(t)  v2(t)
 0.5  1.27 sin qt  0.41 cos qt
 0.42 sin 3qt  0.05 cos 3qt
 0.25 sin 5qt  0.02 cos 5qt
 0.18 sin 7qt  0.01 cos 7qt
	
	
	
The preceding series may be further simpliﬁed by using Equations 25–6 and
25–7 to provide a single coefﬁcient and phase shift for each frequency. The
resultant waveform is written as
v(t)  0.5  1.34 sin (qt  17.7°)  0.43 sin (3qt  6.1°)
 0.26 sin (5qt  3.6°)  0.18 sin (7qt  2.6°)
930
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
Solution
The waveform of Figure 25–23 is made up of a combination of
waves as illustrated in Figure 25–24.
t
0
1 V
v1 (t)
1 V
0
T
(a)
T
2
3T
2
t
0
1 V
v2 (t)
T
(b)
T
2
3T
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–24
A composite waveform is made up of the summation of the waveforms illus-
trated in Figure 25–25.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 4
(a)
t (ms)
6 V
v1 (t)
6 V
0
100
200
300
0
(b)
t (ms)
6 V
v2 (t)
6 V
0
100
200
300
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–25
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 25.4 | Frequency Spectrum
931
a. Sketch the composite waveform showing all voltage levels and time values.
b. Write the Fourier expression for the resultant waveform, v(t).
Answers
a.
t
v(t)
6 V
100
300
200
6 V
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–26
b. v(t)  1
p
2sin(10pt)  2
3
p
6sin(20pt)  3
1
p
2sin(30pt)  …
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
(Answers are at the end of the chapter.)
Consider the composite waveform of Figure 25–27.
a. Separate the given waveform into two recognizable waveforms appearing in
Table 25–1.
b. Use Table 25–1 to write the Fourier series for each of the component wave-
forms of (a).
c. Combine the results to determine the Fourier series for v(t).
t (ms)
0
50 V
v(t)
10
20
30
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–27
Most waveforms that we have observed were generally shown as a function of
time. However, they may also be shown as a function of frequency. In such
cases, the amplitude of each harmonic is indicated at the appropriate fre-
quency. Figure 25–28 shows the display of a 1-kHz sine wave in both the time
domain and the frequency domain, while Figure 25–29 shows the corre-
sponding displays for a pulse waveform.
25.4 Frequency
Spectrum
(a) Time-domain display of a
1-kHz sine wave
t (ms)
10 V
v
10 V
0.5
1.0
0
v(t)  10 sin 2000 t
(b) Frequency-domain display of a
1-kHz sine wave
f (kHz)
10 V
v
1
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–28
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The frequency spectrum of the pulse wave shows the average value (or dc
value) of the wave at a frequency of 0 kHz and illustrates the absence of even
harmonics. Notice that the amplitude of successive harmonic components
decreases fairly quickly.
The rms voltage of the composite waveform of Figure 25–29 is determined by
considering the rms value of each frequency. The resultant rms voltage is found as
Vrms  Vdc
2
 V
12
 
 V
22
 
 V
32
 
 …

where each voltage, V1, V2, and so on, represents the rms value of the corre-
sponding harmonic component. Using the ﬁrst ﬁve nonzero terms, we would
ﬁnd the rms value of the pulse wave of Figure 25–29 to be
Vrms 	(0
.5
0
0
)2
 


0


.6
3
2
7


2

 


0


.2
1
2
2


2

 


0


.1
2
2
7


2

 


0


.0
9
2
1


2

 0.698 V
This value is only slightly smaller than the actual value of Vrms  0.707 V.
If the pulse wave were applied to a resistive element, power would be dis-
sipated as if each frequency component had been applied independently. The
total power can be determined by the summation of the individual contributions
of each frequency. In order to calculate the power dissipated at each sinusoidal
frequency, we need to ﬁrst convert the voltages into rms values. The frequency
spectrum may then be represented in terms of power rather than as voltage.
932
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
(a) Time-domain display of a
1-kHz pulse wave
t  (ms)
1.0 V
v
0.5
1.0
1.5
0
Vdc  Vavg  0.5 V
(b) Frequency-domain display of a
1-kHz pulse wave
f  (kHz)
0.5 V
v
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
0
0.637 Vp
0.212 Vp
0.127 Vp
0.091 Vp
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–29
EXAMPLE 25–6       
Determine the total power dissipated by a 50- resistor if the pulse waveform
of Figure 25–29 is applied to the resistor. Consider the dc component and the
ﬁrst four nonzero harmonics. Indicate the power levels (in watts) on a frequency
distribution curve.
Solution
The power dissipated by the dc component is determined as
P0  
V
RL
2
0  
(0
5
.
0
5

V)2
  5.0 mW
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 25.4 | Frequency Spectrum
933
The power dissipated by any resistor subjected to a sinusoidal frequency is
determined as
P  
V
R
2rm
L
s
 
 
2
V
R
2
P
L

For the pulse wave of Figure 25–29, the power due to each of the ﬁrst four
nonzero sinusoidal components is found as follows:
P1 
 4.05 mW
P3 
 0.45 mW
P5 
 0.16 mW
P7 
 0.08 mW
Figure 25–30 shows the power levels (in milliwatts) as a function of frequency.
2
7p
V
2

(2)(50 )
2
5p
V
2

(2)(50 )
2
3p
V
2

(2)(50 )
2
p
V
2

(2)(50 )


VP
2

2

RL
f (kHz)
5.0
P (mW)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
0
4.05 mW
0.45 mW
0.16 mW
0.08 mW
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–30
Using only the dc component and the ﬁrst four nonzero harmonics, the total
power dissipated by the resistor is PT  9.74 mW. From Chapter 15, the actual
rms voltage of the pulse waveform is found to be
Vrms 	
(1
V

1
)
.
2
0
(

0
m
.

5
s
m

s)

  0.707 V
Therefore, using the rms voltage, the power dissipated by the resistor is found as
P  
(0.
5
7
0
07

V)2
  10.0 mW
Although the pulse waveform has power contained in components with fre-
quencies above the seventh harmonic, we see that more than 97% of the total
power of a pulse waveform is contained in only the ﬁrst seven harmonics.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Power levels and frequencies of the various harmonics of a periodic wave-
form may be measured with an instrument called a spectrum analyzer, shown
in Figure 25–31.
934
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
FIGURE 25–31
Spectrum analyzer.
Courtsy of Tektronix Inc.
Some spectrum analyzers are able to display either voltage levels or power
levels in the frequency domain, while most others display only power levels (in
dBm). When displaying power levels, the spectrum analyzer usually uses a ref-
erence 50- load. Figure 25–32 shows the display of a 1.0-V pulse waveform
as it would appear on a typical spectrum analyzer.
FIGURE 25–32
Spectrum analyzer display of a 1-kHz pulse wave having a peak value of 1 V.
Vertical: 5 dB/division
Horizontal: 1 kHz/division
Reference: 120 dBm
20 dBm
0 Hz
6.99 dBm
6.08 dBm
3.46 dBm
7.90 dBm
10.82 dBm
13.00 dBm
© Cengage Learning 2013
Notice that the spectrum analyzer has a reference of 20 dBm and that
this reference is shown at the top of the display rather than at the bottom.
The vertical scale of the instrument is measured in decibels, where each ver-
tical division corresponds to 5 dB. The horizontal axis for the spectrum ana-
lyzer is scaled in hertz, where each division in Figure 25–32 corresponds 
to 1 kHz.
PRACTICAL NOTES...
Spectrum analyzers are very sensi-
tive instruments. As a result, great
care must be taken to ensure that
the input power never exceeds the
rated maximum. When in doubt, it is
best to insert an extra attenuator to
lower the amount of power entering
the spectrum analyzer.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 25.4 | Frequency Spectrum
935
EXAMPLE 25–7        
A spectrum analyzer with a 50- input is used to display the power levels in dBm
of the Fourier series components of the ramp waveform shown in Figure 25–33.
t (ms)
0
2 V
v(t)
0.5
1.0
1.5
T
f = 1  = 2 kHz
T
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–33
Determine the voltage and power levels of the various components and
sketch the resultant display as it would appear on a spectrum analyzer. Assume
that the spectrum analyzer has the same vertical and horizontal settings as those
shown in Figure 25–32.
Solution
The Fourier series of the given waveform is determined from
Table 25–1 as
v(t)  2
2
  p
2
sin qt  2
2
p
 sin 2qt  3
2
p
 sin 3qt  …
Because the fundamental frequency occurs at f  2 kHz, we see that harmonic
frequencies will occur at 4 kHz, 6 kHz, and so on. However, because the spec-
trum analyzer is able to display only up to 10 kHz, we need go no further.
The dc component will have an average value of v0  1.0 V, as expected.
The rms values of the harmonic sinusoidal waveforms are determined as
Vrms  

Vp
2

which gives the following:
V1(rms)  
p
2
2
  0.450 V
V2(rms)  
2p
2
2
  0.225 V
V3(rms)  
3p
2
2
  0.150 V
V4(rms)  
4p
2
2
  0.113 V
V5(rms)  
5p
2
2
  0.090 V
The preceding rms voltages are used to calculate the powers (and power levels
in dBm) of the various harmonic components.
P0  
(1
5
.
0
0

V)2
  20.0 mW  10 log 
2
1
0
m
m
W
W
  13.0 dBm
P1  
(0.
5
4
0
50

V)2
  4.05 mW  10 log 
4.
1
05
m
m
W
W
  6.08 dBm
P2  
(0.
5
2
0
25

V)2
  1.01 mW  10 log 
1.
1
01
m
m
W
W
  0.04 dBm
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

936
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
P3  
(0.
5
1
0
50

V)2
  0.45 mW  10 log 
0.
1
45
m
m
W
W
  3.5 dBm
P4  
(0.
5
1
0
13

V)2
  0.25 mW  10 log 
0.
1
25
m
m
W
W
  6.0 dBm
P5  
(0.
5
0
0
90

V)2
  0.16 mW  10 log 
0.
1
16
m
m
W
W
  7.9 dBm
A spectrum analyzer would indicate a display similar to that shown in Figure 25–34.
Vertical: 5 dB/division
Horizontal: 1 kHz/division
Reference: 20 dBm
20 dBm
0 Hz
13.0 dBm
6.08 dBm
0.04 dBm
6.0 dBm
3.5 dBm
7.9 dBm
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–34
The sawtooth waveform of Figure 25–35 is applied to a 50- spectrum analyzer.
Sketch the display that would be observed, assuming that the spectrum analyzer
has the same vertical and horizontal settings as those shown in Figure 25–32.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 5
t (ms)
0
2 V
v (V)
0.5
1.5
1.0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–35
Answers
Pdc  13.0 dBm, P1kHz  8.2 dBm, P3kHz  10.9 dBm, P5kHz  19.8 dBm.
(All other components are less than 20 dBm and so will not appear.)
25.5 Circuit 
Response to a
Nonsinusoidal
Waveform
We have determined that all periodic, nonsinusoidal waveforms are com-
prised of numerous sinusoidal components together with a dc component. In
Chapter 22 we observed how various frequencies were affected when they were
applied to a given ﬁlter. We will now examine how the frequency components
of a waveform will be modiﬁed when applied to the input of a given ﬁlter.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 25.5 | Circuit Response to a Nonsinusoidal Waveform 
937
vout
vin
3 kHz
t (ms)
0
vout (t)
0
1 V
vin(t)
 2 
3
  2 
3
0.33
0.5
1.0
t (ms)
0 dB
V
−
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–36
Consider what happens when a pulse waveform is applied to a band-pass
ﬁlter tuned to the third harmonic, as shown in Figure 25–36.
EXAMPLE 25–8        
The circuit of Figure 25–37 has the frequency response shown in Figure 25–38.
0
1 V
vin(t)
0.5
1.0
t (ms)
0
1.5
vout
vin
2 kHz
20 dB/dec
	

© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–37
Since the band-pass ﬁlter is tuned to the third harmonic, only the frequency
component corresponding to this harmonic will be passed from the input of
the ﬁlter to the output. Further, because the ﬁlter has a voltage gain of 0 dB at the
center frequency, the amplitude of the resulting sinusoidal output will be the
same voltage level as the amplitude of the original third harmonic. All other fre-
quencies, including the dc component, will be attenuated by the ﬁlter, and so are
effectively eliminated from the output.
This method is used extensively in electronic circuits to provide frequency
multiplication, since any distorted waveform will be rich in harmonics. The
desired frequency component is easily extracted by using a tuned ﬁlter circuit.
Although any integer multiplication is theoretically possible, most frequency
multiplier circuits are either frequency doublers or frequency triplers since
higher-order harmonics have much lower amplitudes.
In order to determine the resulting waveform after it passes through any
other ﬁlter, it is necessary to determine the amplitude and phase shift of numer-
ous harmonic components.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a. Determine the dc component at the output of the low-pass ﬁlter.
b. Calculate the amplitude and corresponding phase shift of the ﬁrst four
nonzero sinusoidal output components.
Solution
a. From previous examples, we have determined that the given waveform is
expressed by the following Fourier series:
v(t)  0.5  p
2
sin qt  3
2
p
 sin 3qt  5
2
p
 sin 5qt  7
2
p
 sin 7qt
Since the circuit is a low-pass ﬁlter, we know that the dc component will
pass from the input to the output without being attenuated. Therefore,
V0(out)  V0(in)  0.5 Vdc
b. By examining the frequency response of Figure 25–36, we see that all
sinusoidal components will be attenuated and phase-shifted. From the
graphs we have the following:
1 kHz:
AV1  1.0 dB,
v1  26.6°
3 kHz:
AV3  5.1 dB,
v3  56.3°
5 kHz:
AV5  8.6 dB,
v5  68.2°
7 kHz:
AV7  11.2 dB,
v7  74.1°
938
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
50
100
−8.6
−11.2
−1.0
−5.1
−20
Av (dB)
fc  2 kHz
f (kHz)
θ ()
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
50
100
0
−26.6
−30
−56.3
−60
−68.2
−74.1
−90
fc  2 kHz
f (kHz)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–38
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Section 25.5 | Circuit Response to a Nonsinusoidal Waveform 
939
The amplitudes of the various harmonics at the output of the ﬁlter are
determined as follows:
V1(out) p
2
101.0
20  0.567 Vp
V3(out) 3
2
p
105.1
20  0.118 Vp
V5(out) 5
2
p
108.6
20  0.047 Vp
V7(out) 7
2
p
1011.2
20  0.025 Vp
The Fourier series of the output waveform is now approximated as
v(t)  0.5  0.567 sin (qt  26.6°)  0.118 sin (3 qt  56.3°)
 0.047 sin (5 qt  68.2°)  0.025 sin (7 qt  74.1°)
Various computer-aided design (CAD) and mathematical applications programs
are able to generate a time-domain display of a waveform from a mathematical
expression. When the preceding waveform is plotted in the time domain, it
appears as illustrated in Figure 25–39.
t (ms)
0
v(t)
1.0 V
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–39
The voltage waveform of Figure 25–40 is applied to a high-pass ﬁlter circuit
having the frequency response shown in Figure 25–41.
PRACTICE PROBLEMS 6
t (ms)
0
v
1 V
1
2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–40
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

a. Determine the dc component at the output of the high-pass ﬁlter.
b. Calculate the amplitude and corresponding phase shift of the ﬁrst four
nonzero sinusoidal output components.
Answers
a. zero
b. 1 kHz: 0.142 Vp, 116
2 kHz: 0.113 Vp, 135
3 kHz: 0.088 Vp, 147
4 kHz: 0.071 Vp, 154
940
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
50
100
0
−10
−20
Av
(dB)
fc  2 kHz
f (kHz)
(a) Voltage gain response for a high-pass filter
θ ()
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
50
100
+90
+60
+45
0
+30
fc  2 kHz
f (kHz)
(b) Phase-shift response for a high-pass filter
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–41
25.6 Circuit Analysis
Using Computers
PSpice can be used to help visualize the frequency spectrum at the input and
the output of a given circuit. By comparing the input and the output, we are
able to observe how a given circuit distorts the waveform due to attenuation
and phase shift of the various frequency components.
PSPICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In the following example, we use a low-pass ﬁlter that has a cutoff frequency
of 3 kHz. We will observe the effects of the ﬁlter on a 1-V pulse wave. In order to
complete the required analysis, it is necessary to set up PSpice correctly.
Section 25.6 | Circuit Analysis Using Computers
941
EXAMPLE 25–9        
Use PSpice to ﬁnd the Fourier series for both the input and the output wave-
forms for the circuit shown in Figure 25–42. Use the Probe postprocessor to
obtain both a time-domain and a frequency-domain display of the input and output
waveforms.
1 V
0
f  1 kHz
53.05 Ω


Vout
C
R
ES
1 F
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–42
Solution
The circuit is input as shown in Figure 25–43.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–43
The voltage source is a pulse generator and is obtained from the SOURCE
library by calling for VPULSE. The properties for the pulse generator are set as
follows: V1  0V, V2  1V, TD  0, TR  0.01us, TF  0.01us, PW  0.5ms,
PER  1.0ms.
We begin the analysis by ﬁrst setting the simulation settings for Time
Domain (Transient) analysis. Run to time is set for 2.0ms and the Maximum step
size is set for 2us. Now the analysis can be run.
Once in the Probe window, we will simultaneously display both the input
and the output waveforms. Click on Trace and Add Trace. Enter V(V1:),
V(C1:1) in the Trace Expression dialog box. You will see the time-domain
output as shown in Figure 25–44.
In order to obtain the frequency-domain display, simply click on Trace and
Fourier. You will need to adjust the range of the abscissa by clicking on Plot and
Axis Settings. Click on the X Axis tab and change the range from 0Hz to 10kHz.
The display will appear as shown in Figure 25–45.
CircuitSim 25-1 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

942
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–44
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–45
Notice that the output voltage of the third harmonic (3 kHz) is approxi-
mately 0.15 V, while the input voltage of the same harmonic is approximately
0.21 V. As expected, this represents approximately 3 dB of attenuation between
the input and the output at the cutoff frequency.
O
ne method of building a frequency multiplier circuit is to generate a signal
which is “rich” in harmonics. A full-wave rectiﬁer is a circuit that converts a
sine wave (which consists of only one frequency component) into one which
appears as shown in Figure 25–18. As we see, the waveform at the output of the
full-wave rectiﬁer is composed of an inﬁnite number of harmonic components.
By applying this signal to a narrow-band-pass ﬁlter, it is possible to select any
one of the components. The resulting output will be a pure sine wave at the
desired frequency.
If a sine wave with an amplitude of 10 V is applied to a full-wave rectiﬁer,
what will be the amplitude and frequency at the output of a passive ﬁlter tuned
to the third harmonic? Assume that there are no losses in the full-wave recti-
ﬁer or in the ﬁlter circuit.
Putting It into Practice
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Problems
943
25.1
Composite Waveforms
1. a. Determine the rms voltage of the waveform shown in Figure 25–46.
b. If this waveform is applied to a 50- resistor, how much power will be
dissipated by the resistor?
Problems
0
30 V
t
v(t)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–46
2. Repeat Problem 1 if the waveform of Figure 25–47 is applied to a 
250- resistor.
50 V
0
10 V
v(t)
t
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–47
3. Repeat Problem 1 if the waveform of Figure 25–48 is applied to a 
2.5-k resistor.
4. Repeat Problem 1 if the waveform of Figure 25–49 is applied to a 
10-k resistor.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

25.2
Fourier Series
5. Use calculus to derive the Fourier series for the waveform shown in
Figure 25–50.
6.
Repeat Problem 5 for the waveform shown in Figure 25–51.
944
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
30 V
0
10 V
v(t)
t
© Cengage Learning 2013
40 V
0
20 V
v(t)
t
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–48
FIGURE 25–49
t (s)
0
v (V)
2
1
2
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–50
t (s)
v (t)
4
1
2
0
4
1
3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–51
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

25.3
Fourier Series of Common Waveforms
7. Use Table 25–1 to determine the Fourier series for the waveform of 
Figure 25–52.
8. Repeat Problem 7 for the waveform of Figure 25–53.
Problems
945
t
v (t)
16 V
2 ms
0
16 V
0
4 ms
6 ms
© Cengage Learning 2013
t (s)
0
v(t)
250 mV
5
0
10
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–52
FIGURE 25–53
9. Repeat Problem 7 for the waveform of Figure 25–54.
10. Repeat Problem 7 for the waveform of Figure 25–55.
11. Write the expression including the ﬁrst four sinusoidal terms of the Fourier
series for the waveform of Figure 25–56.
t (ms)
0
v(t) = 
10 V
0
10
20
30
10 sin ωt, 0 < t < 10 ms
0, 10 ms < t < 20 ms
v(t)
© Cengage Learning 2013
t (ms)
0
v(t)
10 V
0
10
20
30
v(t) = 10 sin ωt
© Cengage Learning 2013
t (ms)
0
8
v (V)
10
22
34
8
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–54
FIGURE 25–55
FIGURE 25–56
12. Repeat Problem 11 for the waveform of Figure 25–57.
t (s)
0
30
v (V)
1.7
2.2
1.2
0.7
0.2
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–57
13. A composite waveform is made up of the two periodic waves shown in
Figure 25–58.
a. Sketch the resulting waveform.
b. Write the Fourier series of the given waveforms.
c. Determine the Fourier series of the resultant.
(a)
t (ms)
4
v1 (V)
4
0
50
100
150
200
(b)
t (ms)
4
v2 (V)
4
50
100
150
0
200
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–58
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14. Repeat Problem 13 for the periodic waveforms shown in Figure 25–59.
946
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
(a)
t (ms)
20
v1 (V)
20
0
20
40
60
80
0
100
120
(b)
t (ms)
20
v2 (V)
20
0
20
40
60
80
0
100
120
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–59
15. A composite waveform is made up of the two periodic waves shown in 
Figure 25–60.
a. Sketch the resulting waveform.
b. Solve for the dc value of the resultant.
c. Write the Fourier series of the given waveforms.
d. Determine the Fourier series of the resultant.
(a)
t (ms)
10
v (V)
0
50
100
150
(b)
t (ms)
v2 (V)
5 V
0
50 100
150
5 V
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–60
16. Repeat Problem 15 for the waveforms shown in Figure 25–61.
(a)
t (s)
10
v1 (V)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
(b)
t (s)
30
v2 (V)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–61
17. The waveform of Figure 25–62 is made up of two fundamental waveforms
from Table 25–1. Sketch the two waveforms and determine the Fourier series
of the composite wave.
t (s)
0
3 V
v (t)
3 V
5 V
1
5 V
2
3
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–62
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18. The waveform of Figure 25–63 is made up of a dc voltage combined with two
fundamental waveforms from Table 25–1. Determine the dc voltage and sketch
the two waveforms. Determine the Fourier series of the composite wave.
25.4
Frequency Spectrum
19. Determine the total power dissipated by a 50- resistor, if the voltage wave-
form of Figure 25–52 is applied to the resistor. Consider the dc component
and the ﬁrst four nonzero harmonics. Indicate the power levels (in watts) on a
frequency distribution curve.
20. Repeat Problem 19 for the waveform of Figure 25–53.
21. A spectrum analyzer with a 50- input is used to measure the power levels in
dBm of the Fourier series components of the waveform shown in Figure 25–54.
Determine the power levels (in dBm) of the dc component and the ﬁrst four
nonzero harmonic components. Sketch the resultant display as it would appear
on a spectrum analyzer.
22. Repeat Problem 21 if the waveform of Figure 25–55 is applied to the input of
the spectrum analyzer.
25.5
Circuit Response to a Nonsinusoidal Waveform
23. The circuit of Figure 25–64 has the frequency response shown in Figure 25–65.
a. Determine the dc component at the output of the ﬁlter.
b. Calculate the amplitude and corresponding phase shift of the ﬁrst four
nonzero sinusoidal output components.
Problems
947
t (ms)
0
2 V
12 V
40
0
80
120
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–63
10
20
50
100
200
500
1k
2k
5k
10k
20k
50k
100k
0
−10
−20
Av
(dB)
fc  1 kHz
f (kHz)
θ ()
10
20
50
100
200
500
1k
2k
5k
10k
20k
50k
100k
0
−30
−60
−90
fc  1 kHz
f (kHz)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–65
R
L


vout
2.5 k
400 mH


vin
t (ms)
0
1.0
vin(t) (V)
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–64
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24. Repeat Problem 23 for Figures 25–66 and 25–67.
948
Chapter 25 | Nonsinusoidal Waveforms
R
C = 31.8 nF


vout
vin
t (ms)
0.5
1.0
1 kΩ
1.5
1
vin(t) (V)


© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–66
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
50
100
200
500
1000
0
−10
−20
Av
(dB)
fc  5 kHz
f (kHz)
θ ()
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
50
100
200
500
1000
0
+30
+60
+90
fc  5 kHz
f (kHz)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE 25–67
25.6
Circuit Analysis Using Computers
25. Use PSpice to ﬁnd the Fourier series for both the input and output waveforms
for the circuit of Figure 25–64. Use the Probe postprocessor to obtain both a
time-domain and frequency-domain display of the output waveform.
Compare your results to those obtained in Problem 23.
26. Repeat Problem 25 for the circuit of Figure 25–66. Compare your results to
those obtained in Problem 24.
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 1
The waveform of Figure 25–12 has an average value of zero.
Therefore, a0  0. The waveform also has a peak-to-peak
value which is double that of Figure 25–6, which means that
the amplitude of each harmonic must be doubled.
v(t)  p
4
 sin qt  3
4
p
 sin 3qt  5
4
p
 sin 5qt  …
IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECK 2
a. Figure 25–15 with Vm  25 V and T  20 ms
b. Figure 25–16 with Vm  25 V and T  20 ms
c. v(t)  12.5  18.9 sin(100pt  32.48) 
7.96 sin(200pt)  5.42 sin(300pt  11.98) 
3.98 sin(400pt)
ANSWERS TO IN-PROCESS LEARNING CHECKS
PSPICE
PSPICE
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In this book, we use Multisim 11 and PSpice Demo 16.3, the software ver-
sions current at the time of writing. To help get you started (and to provide
an ongoing reference), we have put together this appendix. (If you are a
legacy Multisim user, you can still use this appendix, but there may be some
differences—see Note 1—and follow the links to Special Instructions for
Multisim 9 and 10 Users.
This appendix assumes that you are using your own personal computer. If
you are using a college or university network, your professor may have differ-
ent instructions for you to follow.
Organizing Your Simulation Files
Since you will create a lot of simulation ﬁles while studying Multisim or PSpice,
you should set up a simple ﬁle structure to organize them. The Windows
Documents folder (or My Documents on older versions of Windows) is the standard
location for saving user-created ﬁles. We will start there. (This is a Windows file
creation process, and if you already know how to do it, you can skip this section.)
Multisim Users: Click the Windows Start button, then Documents. Right-click
the screen that opens, and from the menu select New then click Folder. For the
new folder name, type Multisim Files—see Note 2. This is your main folder.
You need to create individual chapter subfolders. To do this, double-click the
Multisim Files folder that you have just created, and when it opens, right-click
the screen, select New, click Folder, and type in Ch 4. (You should save every
simulation ﬁle that you create in Chapter 4 in this subfolder.) In a similar
manner, create a subfolder for Ch 5. [You should now have the beginnings of
the ﬁle structure shown in Figure A–1(a). Additional chapter folders can be
added as you progress through the book.]
PSpice Users: Click the Windows Start button, then Documents. Right-click
the screen that opens, and from the menu select New then click Folder. For the
new folder name, type PSpice Files—see Note 2. This is your main folder. You
need to create individual chapter subfolders. To do this, double-click the
PSpice Files folder that you have just created, and when it opens, right-click
Appendix A
949
MULTISIM AND PSPICE
NOTES...
1. To access our Web site, please
visit www.cengagebrain.com.
In the search box at the top of
the page, key in Robbins and
Miller (or the book title or ISBN
number). This will take you to
the product page where your
resources can be found.
2. You can use any name you
want, but this is the name we
use in this appendix and
throughout the book.
A.1 Introduction
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

950
Appendix A | Multisim and PSpice
the screen, select New, click Folder, and type in Ch 4. (You should save every
simulation file that you create in Chapter 4 in this subfolder.) In a similar
manner, create a subfolder for Ch 5. [You should now have the beginnings of
the file structure shown in Figure A–1(b). Additional chapter folders can be
added as you progress through the book.]
© Cengage Learning 2013
(a) Multisim directory structure
(b) PSpice directory structure
FIGURE A–1
Suggested file structures for user-created simulation files. (On older versions of Windows, your files will be organized under
My Documents instead of Documents.)
Multisim is a trademark of National Instruments Corporation. For the most
part, its usage is straightforward. Section 4.8 of Chapter 4 describes how to get
started. Alternatively, you can utilize the Multisim Beginner’s Tutorial that we
have put together—see Notes 1 and 3.
When you install Multisim on your computer, be sure to place its shortcut
icon on your screen. Normally, you launch Multisim from this icon, but if it is
missing, you can launch from the Windows Start menu—see Note 2. This
opens the screen shown in Figure 4–28 of Chapter 4. 
Some Key Points for Multisim Users
1. All Multisim circuits require a ground. (Without a ground, Multisim refuses
to work.)
2. To select a component already on the screen, click it. A dashed box appears,
indicating selection. To deselect, place the cursor outside the dashed box
and click.
3. To reposition a component, select it, hold down the left button, and drag it
to the new position.
4. To delete a component, select it, then press the Delete key.
5. To rotate a component, select it, then, while holding down the Ctrl key,
press the R key. (We denote this as CtrlR or Ctrl  R. Each CtrlR rotates
the component by 90o.) Alternatively, right-click and select the desired
rotation from the menu.
6. To place a connector dot, select Place on the menu bar, then click
Junction. Position the dot on the screen and click to place it. A maximum
of four wires may be connected to any junction point.
7. We sometimes use shorthand designations for mouse operations. For
example, if you are told to click View/Toolbars, this is a shorthand way of
saying, “Click View on the menu bar, then select Toolbars on the drop-
down list that appears.”
NOTES...
1. The Multisim Beginner’s Tutorial
shows you how to get started.
Using a sequence of annotated
screen shots and sample runs, it
walks you step by step through
the process of building and run-
ning your ﬁrst simulation. To use
the tutorial, go to our Web site,
download either the Multisim 11
or Multisim 9 version, unzip,
launch, then follow the instruc-
tions on your screen. (Note that
this is a Multisim ﬁle and you
must have Multisim loaded on
you computer to use it.)
2. To launch Multisim from the Start
menu—click the Start button and
double-click the Multisim icon on
the Start menu. If there is no
Multisim icon on the Start menu,
you should see the National
Instruments icon instead. Click
and you should see Circuit
Design Suite 11, then below that,
the Multisim icon. Double-click it.
A.2 Multisim
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix A.2 | Multisim
951
3. All Multisim examples in this
book were prepared using the
Multisim Educational version. 
Component Orientation
Two-terminal components have an implied “1” end and a “2” end. When you place
such a component, it takes up a default position. For example, for resistors, capac-
itors, and inductors, the default position is with the “1” end to the left, while for
sources, it is at the top. Components may be rotated as in point number 5 under
“Some Key Points for Multisim Users.” To get the “1” end of a capacitor up, for
example, rotate it right once from its default position. Knowing about orientation
is important when you are setting initial conditions. For example, if you set a
capacitor’s initial voltage to 10 V, Multisim places 10 volts across the capacitor
with its “1” end positive. If you have inserted the capacitor into your circuit upside
down, its polarity will be reversed from what you expect. If this happens, discon-
nect its wiring, rotate it to its desired orientation, rewire, then set its initial condi-
tion again. For components like resistors, you don’t care which end is which.
Cleaning Up Grapher View Displays
Click View and ensure that Toolbars is selected. Use your mouse pointer and
locate the Black Background icon and click. Similarly, locate Show Grid and
click and Show Cursors and click. Move your mouse pointer to an empty spot
on the display area and right-click, then left-click Show Select Marks.
Adding Expressions to Graphic Displays
When you use Grapher View to display results, you can combine variables
to form expressions. For example, suppose you want to multiply voltage
V(1) times current I(L1) to display power. Proceed as follows: In the Output
tab dialog box, click Add Expression to open the box of Figure A–2. Double-
click V(1), and it appears in the Expression box. Then double-click *,
double-click I(L1), then click OK. The resulting expression V(1)*I(L1)
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE A–2
Using the Multisim Add expression facility to create a power waveform by multiplying voltage times current.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

952
Appendix A | Multisim and PSpice
appears in the Output display list. Now click Simulate and the result is graphed
on your screen. (An example waveform created in this fashion is shown in
Figure 17–29, Chapter 17.)
Displaying Multiple Traces
When graphing multiple traces, you can add a second vertical scale if you need
one. The new scale is added to the right-hand side of the graph. To illustrate,
suppose you compute and display capacitor voltage V(2) and current I(C1), but
because the current (which is a few mA) is so small relative to the voltage, it
displays as a flat line along the zero axis. You need an expanded current scale
to display the result. Proceed as follows: 
• On Grapher View, click Trace/Trace Properties. In the dialog box, select the
Traces tab at the top of the box. The item marked Trace Label should indi-
cate I(C1). If it doesn’t, use the Trace ID up/down arrows to change it,
Figure A–3(a).
• Near the bottom of the box (under Y-vertical axis), click the Right axis
button, then click Apply. Select the Right Axis tab at the top of the box, click
the Axis Enabled box, click Auto-range, click Apply then OK, Figure A–3(b) 
• The new scale appears on the right-hand side of the graph, and the expanded
waveform appears. (An example scale and waveform created in this fashion
are shown in Figure 11–42.)
© Cengage Learning 2013
(a)
(b)
FIGURE A–3
Illustrating how to create a new scale for the current trace.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix A.3 | PSpice
953
Using the Cursors
Cursors are used to read values from graphs created by Multisim (for exam-
ple, Figure 11–42). To activate the cursors, click the Show Cursors icon (or
click Cursors on the Grapher View window, then Show Cursors). Two cursors
appear. To move a cursor, position the mouse pointer on it, then press the left
button and drag it to the display area. The x-y coordinates of the cursors
appear in a display box. To move the cursor to an exact time point, right-click
the cursor, click Set X Value, type the time value (e.g., 20m) into the data entry
box, then click OK. (Note: You must enter the value without a space. Thus, 
20 m is wrong.)
Setting the Phase Angle for ac
In its default setting, Multisim does not generate the angle that you expect. To
set the angle correctly, click Options, Global Preferences, select the Simulation
tab, look for the red sine wave, and ensure that Shift right is selected. (Legacy
users, select the Parts tab instead.)
PSpice is a product of Cadence Design Systems Inc.—see Note 1. When you
install it, be sure to install its shortcut icon—it will show on your screen as
ORCAD Capture CIS. Normally, you launch from this icon, but if it is missing,
you can launch from the Windows Start menu—see Note 2. The screen that
opens is that shown in Figure 4–29, Chapter 4 (except that it is blank). Chapter 4,
Section 4.8 describes how to get started using PSpice. (Alternatively, you can
use the PSpice Beginner’s Tutorial found on our Web site.)
Some Key Points for PSpice Users
1. All PSpice circuits require a ground. If you don’t use a ground, you will
get an error message signifying “ﬂoating nodes.”
2. All circuit components have default values. To change these, double-click
and type in the new values. You can include a unit if you wish, but if you
don’t, basic units (volts, amps, ohms) are assumed.
3. If you do include a unit, be sure that you do not leave a space. Thus, 25
and 25V are acceptable, but 25 V is not.
4. You can use either basic notation, scientiﬁc notation, or engineering pre-
ﬁxes. For example, you can specify a 12000- resistor as 12000, 1.2E04,
12k, or 0.012Meg. Table A–1 shows PSpice preﬁxes.
5. For transient analysis, capacitors and inductors always need initial condi-
tions. In some cases, PSpice can determine these for you, while in others,
you will have to enter them yourself. Note the following:
a. PSpice can automatically determine initial conditions only if it is pos-
sible to compute them by performing a pre-transient steady state analy-
sis of the circuit. For circuits containing isolated capacitors, this is not
possible, since the voltage on the capacitor is totally indeterminate—
that is, it can be anything—thus, for isolated capacitors, you must
always manually enter (i.e., type in) the values yourself.
b. You can always manually enter an initial condition, even if it is possible
for PSpice to compute it for you. Thus, if in doubt, do it yourself.
A.3 PSpice
NOTES...
1. The PSpice Demo version is
available as a free download
from Cadence. To obtain a copy,
go to the Internet and search for
Cadence OrCAD Downloads and
click on the Cadence Web site.
Next, set up a Cadence account
as noted when the Web site
opens. Scroll the list of down-
loads until you ﬁnd OrCAD
Demo (Capture and PSpice
only). Download it and install.
2. To launch PSpice from the
Windows Start menu, click the
Start button and double-click the
ORCAD icon that you see on
the Start menu. If there is no
ORCAD icon on your Start
menu, you might see Cadence
instead. Click and you should
ﬁnd the ORCAD Capture icon
that you are looking for.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

954
Appendix A | Multisim and PSpice
Symbol
Scale
Name
T or t
1012
tera
G or g
109
giga
MEG or meg
106
mega
K or k
103
kilo
M or m
10–3
milli
U or u
10–6
micro
N or n
10–9
nano
P or p
10–12
pico
TABLE A–1
Standard Preﬁxes 
Used by PSpice
© Cengage Learning 2013
(a) Default
(b) First rotation (90°) 
(c) Third rotation (270°)
FIGURE A–4
Rotating a component. (Second rotation not shown.)
6. PSpice does not permit source/inductor loops—that is, you cannot have a
source and an inductor alone in a loop. If you do, PSpice will display an
error message. If you get such a message, add a small valued resistor to the
loop. Make its resistance much smaller than any other impedance in the
circuit. The process is similar for source/capacitor loops.
7. PSpice requires a dc path from all nodes to the ground. If no path exists
from a particular node to ground, add a large valued resistor from that node
to ground. Make the value of this resistance much larger than the imped-
ance of any other component in the circuit.
8. To select a component that has already been placed on your screen, place
your cursor over it and left-click. To deselect it, move your cursor off the
component and click left.
PSpice Component Orientation
Resistors, capacitors, and inductors have an implied “1” end, a “2” with a
default position, and rotational sequence as depicted in Figure A–4. For
capacitors and inductors in transient analysis problems, a basic understanding
of orientation is important to you. For example, one of the capacitor symbols
that PSpice uses is that of Figure 10–1 in Chapter 10. When you double-click
such a capacitor and type an initial condition such as IC  10 volts, this places
10 volts across the capacitor with the ﬂat plate positive with respect to the
curved plate. However, on some versions of PSpice, the capacitor symbol has
no curved plate and it is not obvious which end is which. A problem occurs if
you insert such a capacitor upside down. In this case, its polarity will be
reversed from what you expect and when you run the simulation, you will ﬁnd
that your initial conditions are reversed. (If this happens, disconnect the
wiring from the capacitor, rotate it to its appropriate orientation, rewire, then
set its initial condition again.) If you have no way of knowing how your capac-
itor is connected, you may have to experiment to ﬁnd out. Similarly, you may
have to do some simulation testing to ﬁnd out how to handle nonzero initial
inductor currents in RL circuits.
© Cengage Learning 2013
Labeling Graph Traces and Naming Axes
To add text to a plot as in Figure A–5, select Plot, Label, and then Text. Type
your text, then position it as desired. To add a Y-axis title, select Plot, Axis
Setting, click the Y-Axis tab, select the Y-Axis Number, then in the Axis Title
data entry box, type the desired title (e.g., Voltage as in Figure A–5), then
click OK.
Displaying Multiple Traces
Multiple traces may be displayed on the same vertical axis or you may use
independent axes as in Figure A–5. Often the ﬁrst trace (assume voltage here)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix A.3 | PSpice
955
is created using a marker probe. This automatically creates the ﬁrst Y-axis and
scales it. To add a second axis and trace as in Figure A–5, do the following:
• Click Plot, then Add Y Axis. The second axis appears.
• Click Trace, Add Trace, then double-click the variable whose trace you want
to add—see Figure A–5.
Using the Cursors
Two cursors are provided for reading values from graphs. To activate the ﬁrst
cursor, click the toggle cursor icon (or click Trace, Cursor, Display), then
click anywhere on the screen. To move the cursor, hold the left button down
and drag to the desired position. (You can also move it using the left and right
arrow keys on your keyboard.) The x-y coordinates of the cursor appear in a
display box. To utilize the second cursor, use the right mouse button to acti-
vate and position it.
Unidentiﬁed Subcircuit Error Message
If you get an error message such as Subcircuit SW_tClose used by X_U1 is
unidentiﬁed, you can correct the problem as follows:
• Click the Edit Simulation Proﬁle button and click the Conﬁguration Files tab.
• Under Category, select Library. Click the upper Browse button.
• You need to ﬁnd your way to where you placed OrCAD. It is probably on
drive C.
• Double-click OrCAD and OrCAD_16.3_Demo (or whatever your actual
version is) should appear. Double-click it.
• Double-click tools, double-click pspice, and double-click library.
• Click nomd.lib, then click Open. This returns you to Simulations Settings.
• Click Add to Proﬁle, click Apply, then click OK.
• Click Run.
It should work now.
Note: If all of this looks scary, get a knowledgeable friend to help you.
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE A–5
Displaying and labelling multiple traces.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

T
his tutorial looks at some of the mathematical techniques that you will
need to be able to use in order to solve the problems and examples in this
book. Among the topics that we cover are methods for solving simultaneous
equations that have real and complex coefﬁcients—including calculator
methods and the traditional determinant approach. While many of the ideas
and techniques discussed here have already been described brieﬂy in the
main text, there are some new ideas presented here, as well as some ideas that
you may have already encountered in your various mathematics courses. We
bring them together in this appendix to provide a handy reference and a focal
point for study.
We begin with a discussion of calculator techniques.
Appendix B
956
MATHEMATICS IN CIRCUIT ANALYSIS: 
A BRIEF TUTORIAL
B.1 Some Basic
Mathematics and
Calculator Ideas
EXAMPLE B–1       
In mathematics, a common error is to write 
as 
. The fact that this is
incorrect can be seen easily if we use numbers. For example,
Clearly, this does not equal
. Thus,
Note that this is a mathematics mistake and not a calculator mistake. However,
a somewhat similar error can result from incorrect calculator usage. This is illus-
trated next.
1
1
1
a
b
a
b
+
≠
+
.
1
2
1
8
0 5
0 125
0 625
+
=
+
=
.
.
.
1
2
8
1
10
0 1
+
=
=
. .
1
1
a
b
+
1
a
b
+
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix B.1 | Some Basic Mathematics and Calculator Ideas
957
EXAMPLE B–2        
A problem can sometimes inadvertently arise when calculators are used to per-
form the type of computation shown in Example B–1. To illustrate, suppose you wish
to determine
. If you unthinkingly key in 1 divided by 2 plus 8, you get an
answer of 8.5. Why? Well, the answer has to do with the order of operations
implemented by most calculators—there is an order of precedence to consider.
For example, in general, multiplication and division are performed before addi-
tion and subtraction. Thus, in this example, the calculator evaluates 1 divided by
2 ﬁrst (to yield an answer of 0.5), then adds 8 to this intermediate answer in
order to yield a ﬁnal answer of 8.5. A way around this problem is demonstrated
in Example B–3.
1
2
8
+
EXAMPLE B–3        
One way to work around precedence issues is to use parentheses. Parentheses
force the calculator to evaluate the parenthetical expression ﬁrst. Thus, if you
key in 1 divided by (2  8), your calculator evaluates the expression within
parentheses as 10, then performs the division to yield the correct answer of 0.1.
Here is a typical calculator sequence that illustrates this process:
1


=
(
)
2
8
Order of Precedence: We can now summarize the order of precedence used
by calculators and computer programs: (1) Operations within parentheses are
performed ﬁrst, (2) exponentiation (roots and powers) is performed next, then
(3) negation and single-key operations, (4) multiplication and division, and
(5) addition and subtraction. As a recommendation, always use parentheses to
remove any ambiguity about the order of evaluation.
EXAMPLE B–4        
A companion problem exists when dealing with complex numbers. Suppose, for
example, that you want the reciprocal of a complex number C where C  a  jb. 
A common mistake is to write 
. The fact that this is clearly
1
1
1
a
jb
a
jb
+
=
+
wrong can be demonstrated by using numbers. For example, suppose C  1.5  j2.
You can ﬁnd the reciprocal of this by using the inverse key. (Be sure you are 
in complex mode.) Enter (1.5  j2) using whatever procedure your calculator
requires, then use the inverse key (sometimes denoted as x1 on calculators) to ﬁnd 
.You should get an answer of 0.24  j 0.32. Clearly, this does not equal
 0.667  j 0.5. Remember that two complex numbers are only 
equal if the real components are equal and the imaginary components are equal. 
Thus,
. 
1
1
1
a
jb
a
jb
+
≠
+
1
1 5
1
2
.
(
)
+ −j
1
1 5
2
. −j
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

958
Appendix B | Mathematics in Circuit Analysis: A Brief Tutorial
Logarithms provide a way to reverse the operation of exponentiation because,
technically, the logarithm function is the inverse of the exponentiation function.
Stripped to its essentials, a logarithm is just an exponent.
Basics Review
If you are given 103, you can easily produce the answer 103  10  10  10 
1000. However, if you are given the expression 10y  1000 and asked to find
y, how do you do it? Note that the question that you are really asking yourself
is, “Given the base 10 and its power 1000, what is the exponent that will pro-
duce it?” The exponent is called a “logarithm”—thus, in the preceding example,
the exponent 3 is the logarithm. Usually, you see it written as,
y  log10 (1000)  3
This is an example of a “base 10” log.  In circuit theory, you encounter base 
10 logs when you study decibels (Chapter 22).
In general, if
by  x
(B–1)
then
y  logb x
(B–2)
Natural Logs and Exponentials
In transient analysis, you sometimes come across natural logs. A natural log
uses the transcendental number e  2.71828… as its base. Base e logs are writ-
ten as ln. Thus, if
ey  x
(B–3)
then
y  ln x
(B–4)
EXAMPLE B–5       
Simplifying the Computation of Parallel Resistance, Parallel Inductance,
and Series Capacitance
The inverse key can also be used to good effect in order to speed solutions and
reduce errors in the computation of parallel resistance, parallel inductance, and
series capacitance. This key also reduces the need to rely on memorizing
numerous formulas. To illustrate, recall that the basic formula for determining
parallel resistance is
1
1
1
1
1
2
R
R
R
RN
=
+
+
+
....
NOTES...
Depending on your calculator, the
details of the procedure may be 
different than this one, so consult
your manual. For example, on some
calculators, you have to press the
second function key in order to
access the inverse key. The order of
steps may also be different. However,
the basic principle is the same—all
you do is enter a number, inverse it,
enter the next number, inverse it,
then add the new inversed number
to the ﬁrst inversed number, and 
so on. Finally, you inverse the result.
B.2 Logarithms,
Natural Logs, 
and Exponential
Functions
Suppose you have resistances of 60 , 30 , and 12  in parallel. Following is
the general procedure you can use—see Note.
Procedure:
1. Key in 60, press the inverse key, then press the  key.
2. Key in 30, press the inverse key, then press the  key.
3. Key in 12, press the inverse key, then press the Enter key.
At this point, the calculator will have computed and stored the sum of the inverses.
4. To inverse the stored result and get the ﬁnal answer, press the inverse key,
then press Enter. You should get an answer of 7.5 ohms.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix B.3 | Solving Simultaneous Equations
959
In Chapter 11, you encountered, etRC  0.2 where t and C were known 
and you were asked to solve for R. Using the relationships of Equations B–3
and B–4, you can see that tRC  ln (0.2)  1.6094 where ln (0.2) 
1.6094 is obtained using your calculator. Now finding R is straightforward.
Simultaneous linear equations appear often in the solution of problems in elec-
trical/electronics technology. Solving these equations has been simplified by a
branch of mathematics called linear algebra. Although the actual theorems and
proofs are well outside the scope of this textbook, we will use some of the prin-
ciples of linear algebra to solve simple linear equations. The following is a set
of n simultaneous linear equations in n unknowns:
a11x1  a12x2  …  a1nxn  b1
a21x1  a22x2  …  a2nxn  b2
.
.
.
an1x1  an2x2  …  annxn  bn
When analyzing electric circuits, the resulting simultaneous linear equations
may have either real or complex coefﬁcients. In either case, we can solve for
the unknowns using determinants, a computer program such as Mathcad, or a
calculator. Note however that, while most calculators used in circuit analysis
can solve simultaneous equations with real coefﬁcients, few (other than high-
end calculators such as the TI-89) can handle simultaneous equations with
complex coefﬁcients—see Note.
The Determinant Approach
Consider a set of simultaneous linear equations in two variables (shown
below):
a11 x1  a12 x2  b1
(B–5)
a21 x1  a22 x2  b2
(B–6)
The unknown variables x1 and x2 can be determined by using determinants. To
get at the idea, let us gather up their coefﬁcients and arrange them in an array
in exactly the same order as they appear in these equations, then enclose the
array within vertical lines. The resulting structure is known as a determinant.
Let us call it D. Thus,
D 

The number of rows (or columns) deﬁnes the order of the determinant. Thus,
this is a second-order determinant.
A determinant has a value. By deﬁnition, the value of a second-order deter-
minant is found by taking the product of the upper-left term and the lower-right
term (elements of the principal diagonal) and then subtracting the product of
the lower-left term and the upper-right term (elements of the secondary diago-
nal). The result is given as
D  a11a22  a12a21
a11 a12
a21 a22
B.3 Solving
Simultaneous
Equations 
NOTES...
Solving Simultaneous Equations
with Complex Coefﬁcients Using
Any Calculator
As an alternative, note that it is 
relatively easy to convert a set of n
complex equations into a set of 2n
real equations, and once you have
real equations, you can use any sci-
entiﬁc calculator that is capable of
solving simultaneous equations with
real coefﬁcients. Although there is
some additional work required to
arrange and input the data beyond
that required for calculators like the
TI-89 (which can solve the complex
equations directly), it may save you
time and result in fewer errors than
manual solution by determinants. 
To learn how to do it, go to our 
Web site and follow 
the links to For Further
Investigation and select
Solving Simultaneous Equations
with Complex Coefﬁcients.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

960
Appendix B | Mathematics in Circuit Analysis: A Brief Tutorial
The unknowns of the simultaneous linear equations are found by using a
technique called Cramer’s rule. In applying this rule, we need to solve the fol-
lowing determinants:
The application of Cramer’s rule gives the solution for each unknown by
ﬁrst placing the determinant of the coefﬁcients in the denominator. The numer-
ator is then developed by using the same determinant with the exception that
the coefﬁcients of the variable to be found are replaced by the coefﬁcients
found on the right-hand side of the equal signs.
x
a b
a b
a a
a a
a b
a b
a a
a
2
11
1
21
2
11
12
21
22
11 2
21 1
11
22
21


-
-
a12
x
b a
b a
a a
a a
a b
a b
a a
a
1
1
12
2
22
11
12
21
22
22 1
12
2
11
22
21


-
-
a12
EXAMPLE B–6       
Use determinants to ﬁnd solutions for the following linear equations:
2x1  8x2  2
x1  2x2  5
Solution
The determinant of the denominator is found as
D    (2)(2)  (1)(8)  4
2 8
1 2
The variables are now calculated as
and


2 8
5 2
x1 

(2)(2

) 
4
(5)(8)
  


4
4
4
  11
4


2 2
1   5
x2 

(2)(5) 
4
(1)(2)
  
12
4  3
4
The solution of third-order simultaneous linear equations is similar to the
method used for solving second-order equations. Consider the following third-
order simultaneous linear equation set:
a11x1  a12x2  a13x3  b1
a21x1  a22x2  a23x3  b2
a31x1  a32x2  a33x3  b3
Although the value of the third-order determinant may be found in one of
several ways, we will examine the more general approach.
This evaluation of determinants is achieved by expansion by minors. The
minor of an element is the determinant which remains after deleting the row
and the column in which the element lies. The value of any nth-order determi-
nant is found as follows:
1. For any row or column, ﬁnd the product of each element and the determi-
nant of its minor.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix B.3 | Solving Simultaneous Equations
961
2. A product is given a positive sign if the sum of the row and the column of
the element is even. The product is given a negative sign if the sum is odd.
3. The value of the determinant is the sum of the resulting terms.
As before, Cramer’s rule is used to solve for the unknowns, x1, x2, and x3,
by using determinants and replacing the appropriate terms of the numerator
with the terms from the right-hand side of the equal sign. The resulting deter-
minants and solutions are given as follows:
The solution for x1 is now found to be
Similarly, for x2, we get


b1 a12 a13
b2 a22 a23
b3 a32 a33
x1 


a11 a12 a13
a21 a22 a23
a31 a32 a33
By expansion of minors, the determinant of the denominator is found as
D  a11
  a21
  a31

 a11(a22a33  a23a32)  a21(a12a33  a13a32)  a31(a12a23  a13a22)
a12 a13
a22 a23
a12 a13
a32 a33
a22 a23
a32 a33
b1
  b2
  b3

a12 a13
a22 a23
a12 a13
a32 a33
a22 a23
a32 a33
x1 
D
 b1(a22a33  a23a32)  b2(a12a33  a13a32)  b3(a12a23  a13a22)

D
x2 


a11 a12 a13
a21 a22 a23
a31 a32 a33


a11 b1 a13
a21 b2 a23
a31 b3 a33
x2  b1(a21a33  a23a31)  b2 (a11a33  a13a31)  b3 (a11a23  a13a21)
D


a11 a12 b1
a21 a22 b2
a31 a32 b3
x3  b1(a21a32  a22a31)  b2(a11a32  a12a31)  b3 (a11a22  a12a21)

D
x3 


a11 a12 a13
a21 a22 a23
a31 a32 a33
and for x3 we have
EXAMPLE B–7        
Solve for x1 in the following system of linear equations using minors.
3x1  x2  2x3  1
x1  2x2  3x3  11
2x1  3x2  2x3  3
Solution
The determinant of the denominator is evaluated as follows:
D 

 (3) 
 (1) 
 (2) 
   
 (3)(4  9)  (2  6)  (2) (3  4)
 49
1 2
2
3
1 2
3
2
2 3
3 2
2
3
2
1
2
3
3
1
2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

962
Appendix B | Mathematics in Circuit Analysis: A Brief Tutorial
The Calculator Approach
As noted previously, many calculators have built-in routines for solving simul-
taneous equations that have real coefﬁcients. The Sharp EL-506W/EL-546W
calculator can solve for both second-order and third-order simultaneous linear
equations (having real coefﬁcients).
and so the unknown x1 is calculated to be

 2
(4  9)  (11)(2  6)  (3)(3  4)

4


2
3
2
1
2
3
1
11
3
x1 
49
(1)
 (11)
 (3)

1 2
2
3
1 2
3   2
2 3
3 2

49
Use expansion by minors to solve for x2 and x3 in Example B–7.
Answers
x2  3, x3  1
PRACTICE PROBLEM 
EXAMPLE B–8       
Equations with Real Coefﬁcients
Consider the system of linear equations shown in the previous example:
3x1  x2  2x3  1
x1  2x2  3x3  11
2x1  3x2  2x3  3
Solve for the unknowns, x1, x2, and x3.
Solution
We begin by setting the calculator into the correct mode to solve the
simultaneous linear equations. For the Sharp EL-506W/EL-546W, this is done
by keying 
. You will see that you have the option of entering the
coefﬁcients for either a second-order (2-VLE) or a third-order (3-VLE) linear
system of equations. Since we wish to solve a third-order system, we key in 
.
You will observe that you are prompted with a display showing a1?. This corre-
sponds to the ﬁrst coefﬁcient of the ﬁrst equation. You will need to complete the
entries as follows:
a1?
a2?
a3?
b1?
b2?
b3?
c1?
c2?
c3?
d1?
d2?
d3?

–3

11

1

2

3

–2

3

–2

1

2

1

3
1
2
MODE
The results are displayed as x  2, y  3, and z  1. Notice that these are the
same results that were determined in Example B–7 and in the corresponding
Practice Problem.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix B.3 | Solving Simultaneous Equations
963
EXAMPLE B–9        
Equations with Complex Coefﬁcients
Most calculators (including the Sharp EL-506W/EL-546W) cannot directly solve
simultaneous linear equations having complex coefﬁcients. Instead, you will
need to use determinants (or some other method) to solve for the unknowns in a
linear equation. This example shows how to solve a 2  2 set of simultaneous
linear equations.
Complex Linear Equation
Given the following simultaneous linear equations, solve for I1 and I2:
(25  j100)I1  (10  j80)I2  1000
(10  j80)I1  (30  j190)I2  0
Solution
Similarly to Example B–6, create the denominator,
Ensure that your calculator is set for complex mode, then evaluate this determi-
nant using a procedure similar to that of Example B–6 as shown below.
(Coefﬁcients can be entered as rectangular or polar. Depending on how your cal-
culator is set, your answers will be either in rectangular or polar form.)  
Next, as we did in Example B–6, solve for the unknowns, I1 and I2. Thus,
and



 

1000
8000
13 439 7 152 77
0 600
69 89
j
,
.
.
.
.
∠
∠−
A
I
D
2
25
100
100
10
80
0
0
100
30
190





j
j
j
(
)
[ (
)
−
−
−
]
D



 

3000
19 000
13 439 7 152 77
1 43
71 74
j
,
,
.
.
.
.
∠
∠−
A
I
D
1
100
10
80
0
30
190
100 30
190





(
)
(
−
j
j
j
) −0
D
D





(
)(
)
[ (
)][ (
)]
25
100 30
190
10
80
10
80
j
j
j
j
−−
−
(
)(
)
(
)(
)
,
25
100 30
190
10
80 10
80
11 950





j
j
j
j
−
−



j6150
13 439 7 152 77
,
.
.
∠
D




25
100
10
80
10
80
30
190
j
j
j
j
(
)
(
)
−
−
NOTES...
For additional information on solving
linear equations having complex
coefﬁcients, you may wish to use
the procedure detailed on our Web
site. See Note on page 959.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix C
964
MAXIMUM POWER TRANSFER THEOREM
Figure C–1 shows the Thévenin equivalent of a dc circuit.
RTh
ETh
a
b


RL
VL
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE C–1
For the preceding circuit, the values of ETh and RTh are constant. Therefore,
power delivered to the load is determined as a function of the load resistance
and is given as
(C–1)
Maximum power will be delivered to RL when the ﬁrst derivative, 
. 
Applying the quotient rule, d
d
x
u
v
 
, we ﬁnd the derivative of
power with respect to load resistance as

d
d
P
R
L
L
 

(C–2)
ETh2[(RL  RTh)2  2RL(RL  RTh)]

(RL  RTh)4
(RL  RTh)2(ETh)2  (ETh2RL)(2)(RL  RTh)

(RL  RTh)4
vd
d
u
x
  ud
d
v
x


v2
dP
dR
L
L
0
P
V
R
R E
R
R
R
E R
R
R
L
L
L
L
Th
L
Th
L
Th
L
L
Th





2
2
2
2
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
(
)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix C | Maximum Power Transfer Theorem
965
Now, since the ﬁrst derivative can only be zero if the numerator of the preced-
ing expression is zero, and since ETh is a constant, we have
(RL  RTh)2  2RL(RL  RTh)  0
(C–3)
And so,
RL2  2RLRTh  RTh2  2RLRL  2RLRTh  0
RTh2  RL2  0
(C–4)
RL  RTh
Figure C–2 shows the Thévenin equivalent of an ac circuit.
a
b


RTh
RL
jXTh
ZTh
ETh
X
I
© Cengage Learning 2013
FIGURE C–2
For the preceding circuit, the values of ETh, RTh, and XTh are constant. Although
XTh is shown as an inductor, it could just as easily be a capacitor. The power
delivered to the load is determined as a function of the load impedance as
PL  I2RL 
(C–5)
Maximum power is dependent on two variables, RL and X. Therefore, we will
need to solve for partial derivatives. Maximum power will be transferred to the 
load when 


P
R
L
L
  0 and 


P
X
L  0.
We begin by ﬁnding 


P
X
L. Using d
d
x
1
v
  v
1
2 d
d
v
x
, we get


P
X
L
 
(C–6)
Now, since the partial derivative can only be zero if the numerator of the pre-
ceding expression is zero, and since ETh and RL are treated as constants, we have
X  XTh  0
or
X  XTh
(C–7)
This result implies that if the Thévenin impedance contains an inductor of
magnitude X, the load must contain a capacitor with the same magnitude.
(ETh2RL)(2)(X  XTh)

[(RL  RTh)2  (X  XTh)2]2
ETh2RL

(RL  RTh)2  (X  XTh)2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

966
Appendix C | Maximum Power Transfer Theorem
(Conversely, if the Thévenin impedance were to contain a capacitor, then the
load impedance would need to have an inductor of the same magnitude.)
Next, we determine the partial derivative, 

P
R
L
L
 of Equation C–5. Applying
the quotient rule,
d
d
x
u
v
 
we get


P
R
L
L
 
(C–8)
Now, since the partial derivative can only be zero if the numerator of the preceding
expression is zero, and since ETh and X are treated as constants, we have
(RL  RTh)2  (X  XTh)2(ETh2)  (ETh2RL)(2)(RL  RTh)  0
(RL  RTh)2  (X  XTh)2  (RL)(2)(RL  RTh)  0
RL2  2RLRTh  RTh2  (X  XTh)2  2RL2  2RLRTh  0
RTh2  RL2  (X  XTh)2  0
In general, the preceding equation determines the value of load resistance
regardless of the load reactance. Therefore, we have
RL  RTh
2
 (X 
 X
Th
)2

(C–9)
This result shows that the load resistance is dependent upon the load reactance,
X. If the reactance of the load is the same type as the Thévenin reactive com-
ponent (both inductive or both capacitive), then the reactances are added. If the
load reactance is the opposite type of the Thévenin reactive component, then
the reactances are subtracted. If the reactance of the load can be adjusted to
result in maximum power transfer (X  XTh), then Equation C–9 is simpli-
ﬁed to the expected result, namely
RL  XTh
(C–10)
[(RL  RTh)2  (X  XTh)2](ETh2)  (ETh2RL)[(2)(RL  RTh)]

[(RL  RTh)2  (X  XTh)2]2
vd
d
u
x
  ud
d
v
x


v2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1
1. a. 1620 s
c. 7427 s
e. 2.45 hp
b. 2880 s
d. 26 110 W
f. 8280
3. a. 0.84 m2
c. 0.02 m3
b. 0.0625 m2
d. 0.0686 m3
5. 4500 parts/h
7. 11.5 km/l
9. 150 rpm
11. 8.33 mi
13. 0.508 m/s
15. 7.45 km
17. 20.4 min
19. Machine 1: $25.80/h;
Machine 2: $25.00/h;
Machine 2
21. a. 8.675  103
d. 3.72  101
g. 1.47  101
b. 8.72  103
e. 3.48  102
c. 1.24  103
f. 2.15  107
23. a. 1.25  101
c. 2.0  102
b. 8  107
d. 2.05  104
25. a. 10
c. 3.6  103
e. 12.0
b. 10
d. 15  104
27. 1.179;
4.450;
Direct computation is less work for these 
examples.
29. 6.24  1018
31. 62.6  1021
33. 1.16 s
35. 13.4  1010 l/h
37. a. kilo, k
c. giga, G
e. milli, m
b. mega, M
d. micro, 
f. pico, p
39. a. 1.5 ms
b. 27 s
c. 350 ns
41. a. 150, 0.15
b. 0.33, 33
43. a. 680 V
b. 162.7 W
45. 1.5 kW
47. 187 A
49. 39 pF
51. Radio signal, 16.68 ms;
Telephone signal, 33.33 ms;
The
radio signal by 16.65 ms.
53. a. 2.083 k
b. The actual value of R lies somewhere between 2.07 k
and 2.10 k.
CHAPTER 2
1. a. 1029
b. 10.4  1023
3. Increases by a factor of 24.
5. a. Material with many free electrons (i.e., material with 
1 electron in the valence shell).
b. Inexpensive and easily formed into wires.
c. Full valence shell. Therefore, no free electrons.
d. The large electrical force tears electrons out of orbit.
7. a. 630 N (repel)
d. 8.22  108 N (attract)
b. 20 N (attract)
e. Neutron is uncharged, thus F  0
c. 1.6  1014 N (repel)
9. 2 C;
(Attraction)
11. 0.333 C, 1.67 C;
both () or both ()
13. 30.4 C
15. 27.7 C ()
17. 24 V
19. 2400 V
21. 4.25 mJ
23. 4.75 C
25. 50 mA
27. 334 C
Appendix D
967
ANSWERS TO ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

968
Appendix D | Answers to Odd-Numbered Problems
29. 3 mA
31. 80 A
33. 18 V, 0.966 A
35. a. 4.66 V
b. 1.50 V
37. 50 h
39. 11.7 h
41. (c) Both
43. Meter 1, 7 A; Meter 2, 7 A
45. The voltmeter and ammeter are interchanged.
47. If you exceed a fuse’s voltage rating, it may arc over when 
it “blows.”
CHAPTER 3
1. a. 3.6 
c. 36.0 k
b. 0.90 
d. 36.0 m
3. 0.407 inch
5. 300 m  986 feet
7. 982  108  	 m (Resistivity is less than for carbon.)
9. 2.26  108  	 m (This alloy is not as good a conductor 
as copper.)
11. AWG 22: 4.86 
AWG 19: 2.42 
Diameter of AWG 19 is 1.42 times the diameter of AWG 22.
The resistance of AWG 19 is half the resistance of an equal
length of AWG 22.
13. AWG 19 should be able to handle 4 A.
AWG 30 can handle about 0.30 A.
15. 405 meters
17. a. 256 CM
b. 6200 CM
c. 1910 MCM
19. a. 16.2 
b. 0.668 
c. 2.17  103 
21. a. 4148 CM  3260 sq mil
b. 0.0644 inch
23. a. 1600 CM  1260 sq mil
b. 1930 feet
25. R30C  40.2  R0C  46.1  R200C  85.2 
27. a. Positive temperature coefﬁcient
b. 0.00385 (C)1
c. R0C  18.5 
R100C  26.2 
29. 16.8 
31. T  260C
33. a. Rab  10 k
Rbc  0 
b. Rab  8 k
Rbc  2 k
c. Rab  2 k
Rbc  8 k
d. Rab  0 k
Rbc  10 k
35. a. 150 k 
 10%
b. 2.8  
 5% with a reliability of 0.001%
c. 47 M 
 5%
d. 39  
 5% with a reliability of 0.1%
37. Connect the ohmmeter between the two terminals of the
light bulb. If the ohmmeter indicates an open circuit, the
light bulb is burned out.
39. AWG 24 has a resistance of 25.7 /1000 ft. Measure the
resistance between the two ends and calculate the length as
  
0.025
R
7 /ft

41. a. 380 
b. 180 
c. Negative temperature coefﬁcient. Resistance decreases as
temperature increases.
43. a. 4.0 S
c. 4.0 S
b. 2.0 mS
d. 0.08 S
45. 2.93 mS
CHAPTER 4
1. a. 2 A
c. 5 mA
e. 3 mA
b. 7.0 A
d. 4 A
f. 6 mA
3. a. 40 V
c. 400 V
b. 0.3 V
d. 0.36 V
5. 96 
7. 28 V
9. 6 A
11. Red, Red, Red
13. 22 V
15. a. 2.31 A
b. 2.14 A
17. 2.88 V
19. 4 
21. 400 V
23. 3.78 mA
25. a.  45 V 
c.  90 V 
b. 4 A (→)
d. 7 A (←)
27. 3.19 J/s;
3.19 W
29. 36 W
31. 14.1 A
33. 47.5 V
35. 50 V, 5 mA
37. 37.9 A
39. 2656 W
41. 23.2 V;
86.1 mA
43. 361 W →441 W
45. a. 48 W (→)
c. 128 W (←)
b. 30 W (←)
d. 240 W (→)
47. a. 1.296  106 J
b. 360 Wh
c. 2.88 cents
49. 26 cents
51. $5256
53. 5 cents
55. 51.5 kW
57. 82.7%
59. 2.15 hp
61. 8.8 hp
63. 1.97 hp
65. $137.45
67. a. 10 
b. 13.3 
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix D | Answers to Odd-Numbered Problems
969
CHAPTER 5
1. a. 30 V
b. 90 V
3. a. 45 V
b. 60 V
c. 90 V
d. 105 V
5. a. 7 V
b. V2  4 V
V1  4 V
7. V3  12 V V4  2 V
9. a. 10 k
b. 2.94 M
c. 23.4 k
11. Circuit 1: 1650 , 6.06 mA
Circuit 2: 18.15 k, 16.5 mA
13. a. 10 mA
b. 13 k
c. 5 k
d. V3-k  30 V V4-k  40 V V1-k  10 V VR  50 V
e. P1-k  100 mW P3-k  300 mW P4-k  400 mW
PR  500 mW
15. a. 40 mA
b. VR1  12 V
VR3  10 V
c. 26 V
17. a. VR2  4.81 V VR3  3.69 V
b. 1.02 mA
c. 7.32 k
19. a. 457 
b. 78.8 mA
c. V1  9.45 V
V2  3.07 V
V3  6.14 V
V4  17.33 V
d. VT  36 V
e. P1  0.745 W
P2  0.242 W
P3  0.484 W
P4  1.365 W
f. R1: 1 W R2: 1/4 W R3: 1/2 W R4: 2 W
g. 2.836 W
21. R  2.02 k
23. a. 0.15 A
b. 0.115 mA
25. Circuit 1: V6-  6 V
V3-  3 V
V5-  5 V V8-  8 V
V2-  2 V
VT  24 V
Circuit 2: V4.3-k  21.6 V
V2.7-k  13.6 V
V7.8-k  39.2 k
V9.1-k  45.7 V
VT  120 V
27. Circuit 1:
a. R1  0.104 k
R2  0.365 k
R3  0.730 k
b. V1  2.09 V
V2  7.30 V
V3  14.61 V
c. P1  41.7 mW
P2  146.1 mW
P3  292.2 mW
Circuit 2:
a. R1  977 
R2  244 
R3  732 
b. V1  25.0 V
V2  6.25 V
V3  18.75 V
c. P1  640 mW
P2  160 mW
P3  480 mW
29. a. 0.2 A
b. 5.0 V
c. 1 W
d. RT  550  I  0.218 A V  5.45 V P  1.19 W
e. Life expectancy decreases.
31. Circuit 1: Vab  9.39 V Vbc  14.61 V
Circuit 2: Vab  25.0 V Vbc  6.25 V
33. Circuit 1:
V3k-  9 V
V9k-  27 V V6k-  18 V Va  45 V
Circuit 2: V330-  2.97 V
V670-  6.03 V
Va  3.03 V
35. a. 109 V
b. 9.20 
37. Circuit 1:
Iactual  0.375 mA
Imeasured  0.3745 mA
loading error  0.125%
Circuit 2:
Iactual  0.375 mA
Imeasured  0.3333 mA
loading error  11.1%
39. Circuit 1:
a. 1 A
b. V6-  6 V
V3-  3 V
V5-  5 V
V8-  8 V
V2-  2 V
Circuit 2:
a. 5.06 mA
b. V4.3-k  21.7 V
V2.7-k  13.6 V
V7.8-k  39.1 V
V9.1-k  45.6 V
41. a. 78.8 mA
b. V1  9.45 V
V2  3.07 V
V3  6.14 V
V4  17.33 V
CHAPTER 6
1. a. A and B are in series;
D and E are in series;
C and F are parallel
b. B, C, and D are parallel
c. A and B are parallel;
D and F are parallel;
C and E are in series
d. A, B, C, and D are parallel
5. a. I1  3 A
I2  1 A
b. I1  7 A
I2  2 A
I3  7 A
c. I1  4 mA
I2  20 mA
7. a. I1  1.25 A
I2  0.0833 A
I3  1.167 A
I4  1.25 A
b. R3  4.29 
9. a. I1  200 mA
I2  500 mA
I3  150 mA
I4  200 mA
b. 2.5 V
c. R1  12.5  R3  16.7  R4  50 
11. a. RT  2.4 
GT  0.417 S
b. RT  32 k
GT  31.25 S
c. RT  4.04 k
GT  247.6 S
13. a. 2.0 M
b. 450 
15. a. R1  1250 
R2  5 k
R3  250 
b. IR1  0.40 A
IR2  0.10 A
c. 2.5 A
17. a. 900 mV
b. 4.5 mA
19. a. 240 
b. 9.392 k
c. 1.2 k
21. I1  0.235 mA
I2  0.706 mA
I3  1.059 mA
R1  136 k
R2  45.3 k
R3  30.2 k
23. a. 12.5 k
b. 0
c. 75 
25. RT  15 
27. I  0.2 A
I1  0.1 A  I2
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

970
Appendix D | Answers to Odd-Numbered Problems
29. a. I1  2 A
I2  8 A
b. I1  4 mA I2  12 mA
31. a. I1  6.48 mA
I2  9.23 mA
I3  30.45 mA
I4  13.84 mA
b. I1  60 mA
I2  30 mA
I3  20 mA
I4  40 mA
I5  110 mA
33. 12 
35. a. 8 
b. 1.50 A
c. I1  0.50 A
I2  0.25 A
I3  0.75 A
d. Iin  Iout  1.50 A
37. a. 25  I  9.60 A
b. I1  4.0 A
I2  2.40 A
I3  3.20 A I4  5.60 A
c. Iin  Iout  9.60 A
d. P1  960 W
P2  576 W
P3  768 W 
PT  2304 W  P1  P2  P3
39. a. I1  1.00 A
I2  2.00 A
I3  5.00 A
I4  4.00 A
b. 12.00 A
c. P1  20 W
P2  40 W
P3  100 W
P4  80 W
41. a. R1  2 k
R2  8 k
R3  4 k
R4  6 k
b. IR1  24 mA
IR2  6 mA
IR4  8 mA
c. I1  20 mA
I2  50 mA
d. P2  288 mW
P3  576 mW
P4  384 mW
43. I1  8.33 A
I2  5.00 A
I3  2.50 A
I4  7.50 A 
IT  15.83 A
The rated current of the fuse will be exceeded;
the fuse
will “blow.”
45. a. Vmeasured  20 V
b. loading effect  33.3%
47. 25.2 V
49. I1  4.0 A
I2  2.4 A
I3  3.2 A
51. 20 V
53. I1  4.0 A
I2  2.4 A
I3  3.2 A
CHAPTER 7
1. a. RT  R1  R5  [(R2  R3)R4]
b. RT  (R1R2)  (R3R4)
3. a. RT1  R1  [(R3  R4)R2]  R5, RT2  R5
b. RT1  R1  (R2R3R5), RT2  R5R3R2
7. a. 1500 
b. 2.33 k
9. Rab  140 
Rcd  8.89 
11. a. RT  314 
b. IT  63.7 mA
I1  19.2 mA
I2  44.5 mA
I3  34.1 mA
I4  10.4 mA
c. Vab  13.6 V Vbc  2.9 V
13. a. I1  5.19 mA
I2  2.70 mA
I3  1.081 mA
I4  2.49 mA
I5  1.621 mA
I6  2.70 mA
b. Vab  12.43 V
Vcd  9.73 V
c. PT  145.3 mW
P1  26.9 mW
P2  7.3 mW
P3  3.5 mW
P4  30.9 mW
P5  15.8 mW
P6  7.0 mW
P7  53.9 mW
15. Circuit (a):
a. I1  4.5 mA
I2  4.5 mA
I3  1.5 mA
b. Vab  9.0 V
c. PT  162 mW
P6-k  13.5 mW
P3-k  27.0 mW 
P2-k  40.5 mW
P4-k  81.0 mW
Circuit (b):
a. I1  0.571 A
I2  0.365 A
I3  0.122 A
I4  0.449 A
b. Vab  1.827 V
c. PT  5.14 W
P10-  3.26 W
P16-  0.68 W
P5-  0.67 W
P6-  0.36 W
P8-  0.12 W
P4-  0.06 W
17. I1  93.3 mA
I2  52.9 mA
IZ  40.4 mA
V1  14 V
V2  2.06 V
V3  7.94 V
PT  2240 mW
P1  1307 mW
P2  109 mW
P3  420 mW
PZ  404 mW
19. R  31.1  →3900 
21. IC  1.70 mA
VB  1.97 V
VCE  8.10 V
23. a. ID  3.6 mA
b. RS  556 
c. VDS  7.6 V
25. IC  3.25 mA VCE  8.90 mV
27. a. VL  0 →7.2 V
b. VL  2.44 V
c. Vab  9.0 V
29. Vbc  7.45 V
Vab  16.55 V
31. a. Vout(min)  0 V
Vout(max)  40 V
b. R2  3.82 k
33. 0 V, 8.33 V, 9.09 V
35. a. 11.33 V
c. 44.1%
b. 8.95 V
d. 1.333 V
37. a. Break the circuit between the 5.6- resistor and the volt-
age source. Insert the ammeter at the break, connecting
the red () lead of the ammeter to the positive terminal
of the voltage source and the black () lead to the 5.6-
resistor.
b. I1(loaded)  19.84 mA
I2(loaded)  7.40 mA
I3(loaded)  12.22 mA
c. loading effect (I1)  19.9%
loading effect (I2)  18.0%
loading effect (I3)  22.3%
39. 12.0 V, 30.0 V, 5.00 A, 3.00 A, 2.00 A
41. 14.1 V
43. 12.0 V, 30.0 V, 5.00 A, 3.00 A, 2.00 A
CHAPTER 8
1. 38 V
3. a. 12 mA
b. VS  4.4 V
V1  2.0 V
5. I1  400 mA
I2  500 mA
7. PT  7.5 mW
P50-k  4.5 mW
P150-k  1.5 mW
Pcurrent source  1.5 mW
Note: The current source is absorbing energy from the 
circuit rather than providing energy.
9. Circuit (a):
0.25 A-source in parallel with a 20- resistor
Circuit (b):
12.5-mA source in parallel with a 2-k resistor
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix D | Answers to Odd-Numbered Problems
971
11. a. 7.2 A
b. E  3600 V
IL  7.2 A
13. a. 21.45 V
b. 6.06 mA
c. 0.606 V
15. V2  80 V
I1  26.7 mA
17. Vab  7.52 V
I3  0.133 mA
19. I1  0.467 A
I2  0.167 A
I3  0.300 A
21. I2  0.931 A
23. a. (8 )I1  0 I2  (10 )I3  24 V
0 I1  (4 )I2  (10 )I3  16 V
I1  I2  I3  0
b. I  3.26 A
c. Vab  13.89 V
25. I1  0.467 A
I2  0.300 A
27. I2  0.931 A
29. I1  19.23 mA
Vab  2.77 V
31. I1  0.495 A
I2  1.879 A
I3  1.512 A
33. V1  6.73 V
V2  1.45 V
35. V1  6 V
V2  20 V
37. V6  6.10 V
39. Network (a): R1  6.92 
R2  20.77 
R3  62.33 
Network (b): R1  1.45 k
R2  2.41 k
R3  2.03 k
41. Network (a): RA  110 
RB  36.7 
RC  55 
Network (b): RA  793 k
RB  1693 k
RC  955 k
43. I  6.67 mA
45. I  0.149 A
47. a. The bridge is not balanced.
b. (18 )I1  (12 )I2  (6 )I3  15 V
(12 )I1  (54 )I2  (24 )I3  0
(6 )I1  (24 )I2  (36 )I3  0
c. I  38.5 mA
d. VR5  0.923 V
49. IR5  0
IRS  60 mA
IR1  IR3  45 mA
IR2  IR4  15 mA
51. IR1  0.495 A
IR2  1.384 A
IR3  1.879 A
IR4  1.017 A
IR5  0.367 A
53. IR1  6.67 mA
IR2  0 
IR3  6.67 mA
IR4  6.67 mA
IR5  6.67 mA
IR6  13.33 mA
CHAPTER 9
1. IR1  75 mA (up)
IR2  75 mA (to the right)
IR3  87.5 mA (down)
IR4  12.5 mA (to the right)
3. Va  3.11 V
I1  0.1889 A
5. E  30 V
IL(1)  2.18 mA
IL(2)  2.82 mA
7. RTh  20 
ETh  10 V
Vab  6.0 V
9. RTh  2.02 k
ETh  1.20 V
Vab  0.511 V
11. a. RTh  16 
ETh  5.6 V
b. When RL  20 : Vab  3.11 V
When RL  50 : Vab  4.24 V
13. a. ETh  75 V
RTh  50 
b. I  0.75 A
15. a. ETh  50 V
RTh  3.8 k
b. I  13.21 mA
17. a. RTh  60 k
ETh  25 V
b. RL  0:
I  0.417 mA
RL  10 k:
I  0.357 mA
RL  50 k:
I  0.227 mA
19. a. ETh  28.8 V,
RTh  16 k
b. RL  0:
I  1.800 mA
RL  10 k:
I  1.108 mA
RL  50 k:
I  0.436 mA
21. ETh  4.56 V
RTh  7.2 
23. a. ETh  8 V
RTh  200 
b. I  22.2 mA (upward)
25. IN  0.5 A,
RN  20 ,
IL  0.2 A
27. IN  0.594 mA,
RN  2.02 k,
IL  0.341 mA
29. a. IN  0.35 A,
RN  16 
b. RL  20 :
IL  0.156 A
RL  50 :
IL  0.085 A
31. a. IN  1.50 A,
RN  50 
b. IN  1.50 A,
RN  50 
33. a. IN  0.417 mA,
RN  60 k
b. IN  0.417 mA,
RN  60 k
35. a. IN  0.633 A,
RN  7.2 
b. IN  0.633 A,
RN  7.2 
37. a. 60 k
b. 2.60 mW
39. a. 31.58 
b. 7.81 mW
41. a. R1  0 
b. 19.5 mW
43. E  1.5625 V
45. I  0.054 A,
PL  0.073 W
47. I  0.284 mA,
PL  0.807 W
49. a. I  0.24 A
b. I  0.24 A
c. Reciprocity does apply.
51. a. V  22.5 V
b. Reciprocity does apply.
53. ETh  10 V,
RTh  20 
IN  0.5 A,
RN  20 
55. RL  2.02 k for maximum power.
CHAPTER 10
1. a. 800 C
c. 100 C
e. 150 V
b. 2 F
d. 30 V
f. 1.5 F
3. 200 V
5. 420 C
7. 73 pF
9. 5.65  104 m2
11. 117 V
13. a. 2.25  1012 N/C
b. 0.562  1012 N/C
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

972
Appendix D | Answers to Odd-Numbered Problems
15. 4.5 kV
17. 3.33 kV
19. a. points
b. spheres
c. points
21. 24.8 F
23. 77 F
25. 3.86 F
27. a. 9.6 F
c. 3.6 F
b. 13 F
d. 0.5 F
29. 9 F
31. 60 F;
30 F
33. 81.2 F;
1.61 F
35. The 10-F capacitor is in parallel with the series combination
of the 1-F and 1.5-F capacitors.
37. a. V1  60 V;
V2  V3  40 V
b. V1  50 V;
V2  V3  25 V;
V4  25 V;
V5  8.3 V;
V6  16.7 V
39. 14.4 V;
36 V;
9.6 V
41. 800 F
43. 50 mA from 0 to 1 ms;
50 mA from 1 ms to 4 ms;
0 mA from 4 ms to 6 ms;
50 mA from 6 ms to 7 ms;
75 mA from 7 ms to 9 ms.
45. 23.5 e0.05t A
47. 0 mJ, 0.25 mJ, 1.0 mJ, 1.0 mJ, 2.25 mJ, 0 mJ
49. a. C3 shorted
b. C2 open
c. C2 shorted
CHAPTER 11
1. a. 0 V;
5 A
b. 20 V;
0 A
3. a. Short circuit
b. Voltage source
c. Open circuit
d. i(0)  current just before t  0 s;
i(0)  current just
after t  0 s
5. 15.1 V
7. a. 45(1  e80t) V
b. 90e80t mA
c. t (ms)
vC (V)
iC (mA)
0
0
90
20
35.9
18.2
40
43.2
3.67
60
44.6
0.741
80
44.93
0.150
100
44.98
0.030
9. 40(1  et/39 ms) V
10.3et/39 ms mA 28.9 V
2.86 mA
11. 40 s;
200 s
13. vC: 0, 12.6, 17.3, 19.0, 19.6, 19.9 (all V)
iC: 5, 1.84, 0.675, 0.249, 0.092, 0.034 (all A)
15. 25 k;
8 F
17. 45 V;
4.5 k;
0.222 F
19. 2.5 A
21. a. 20  10e25 000t V
b. 2.5e25 000t A
c. vC starts at 30 V and decays exponentially to 20 V in 
200 s. iC is 0 A at t  0, 2.5 A at t  0, and decays
exponentially to zero in 200 s.
23. a. 50e2t V
b. 2e2t mA
c. 0.5 s
d. vC: 50 V, 18.4 V, 6.77 V, 2.49 V, 0.916 V, 0.337 V
iC: 2 mA, 0.736 mA, 0.271 mA, 0.0996 mA,
0.0366 mA, 0.0135 mA
25. 14.4 V
27. a. 200 V;
12.5 mA
b. 8 ms
c. 200e125t V, 12.5e125t mA
29. 45(1  et/0.1857) V,
28.4 V (same)
31. a. 60(1  e500t) V
b. 1.5e500t A
33. 90 V;
15 k;
100 F
35. VC1  65 V;
VC2  10 V;
VC3  55 V;
IT  0.5 A
37. 14.0 F
39. a. 5 s
b. 40%
c. 200 000 pulses/s
41. 0.8 s;
0.8 s;
4 s
43. 6.6 ns
45. 17.8 V, 179 mA
47. a. 51.9 V
b. 261 mA
49. Veriﬁcation point: At t  20 ms, 17.8 V and 0.179 A
51. 29.3 V, 0.227 mA
CHAPTER 12
1. a. A1
b. 1.4 T
3. 0.50 T
5. 1.23  103 Wb
7. 1 T;
9. 264 Wb;
738 Wb;
807 Wb
11. 1061 At/m
13. N1I1  H11  H22;
N2I2  H22  H33
15. 0.47 A
17. 0.88 A
19. 0.58 A
21. 0.53 A
23. 0.86 A
25. 3.7 A
27. 4.4 10 4 Wb
29. 1.06  104 Wb
CHAPTER 13
1. 225 V
3. 6.0 V
5. 150 mV
7. 0.111 s
9. 79.0 H
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix D | Answers to Odd-Numbered Problems
973
11. L  N
I
  
N(B
I
gAg)
  
N(0H
I
g)Ag


 
m0N
g
2Ag

13. 4 H
15. a. 4 H
c. 5 A
17. 84 mH
19. 4.39 mH
21. a. 21 H
d. 4 H
b. 2 H
e. 4 mH
c. 20 H
23. 9 H
25. Circuit (a): 6 H;
1.5 H
Circuit (b): 2 H;
8 H
27. 1.6 H, in series with 6 H4 H
29. 1.2 H in series with 8 H12 H
31. a. 1 H in series with 3 F
b. 2 H in series with 10 F
c. 10 , 10 H, and 25 F in series
d. 10  in series with 40 (50 H in series with 20 F)
33. 0.32 J
35. The path containing L1 and L2 is open.
CHAPTER 14
1. a. open circuit
b. Circuit (a): 1.6 A
Circuit (b): 6 A;
60 V
Circuit (c): 0 A;
E
Circuit (d): 2 A;
30 V
3. vR1  180 V;
vR2  120 V;
vR3  60 V;
vR4  32 V
vR5  28 V;
vR6  0 V;
iT  21 A;
i1  18 A
i2  3 A;
i3  1 A;
i4  i5  2A;
i6  0 A
5. a. 50 ms
b. 250 ms
c. 3(1  e20t) A;
180e20t V
d. t
iL (A)
vL (V)
0
0
180

1.90
66.2
2
2.59
24.4
3
2.85
8.96
4
2.95
3.30
5
2.98
1.21
7. a. 0.2 s
b. 1 s
c. 20 e5t V;
(1  e5t) A
d. vL: 20, 7.36, 2.71, 0.996, 0.366, 0.135 (all V)
iL: 0, 0.632, 0.865, 0.950, 0.982, 0.993 (all A)
9. 182 (1  e393t) mA;  40e393t V; 134 mA; 10.5 V
11. 80 V;
20 ;
2 H
N0N
g
IAg

I
13. 40 V;
4 k;
2 H
15. a. 2 ms
b. 5e500t A;
1250e500t V
c. t
iL (A)
vL (V)
0
5
1250

1.84
460
2
0.677
169
3
0.249
62.2
4
0.092
22.9
5
0.034
8.42
17. 365 V
19. R1  20 ;
R2  30 
21. 5.19 A
23. a. 8.89 ms
b. 203et/8.89ms V;
5et/8.89ms mA
c. 27.3 V;
0.675 mA
25. a. 10 ms
b. 90 (1  et/10 ms) mA;
36et/10 ms V
c. 2.96 V
82.6 mA
27. 103.3 mA;
3.69 V
29. 33.1 V
31. 4.61 A
33. iL(25 ms)  126 mA;
iL(50 ms)  173 mA
CHAPTER 15
1. AC voltage is voltage whose polarity cycles periodically
between positive and negative. AC current is current whose
direction cycles periodically.
3. a. The magnitude of a waveform (such as a voltage or cur-
rent) at any instant of time.
b. 0, 10, 20, 20, 20, 0, 20, 20, 0 (all V)
5. 0 mA, 2.5 mA, 5 mA, 5 mA, 5 mA, 0 mA, 5 mA, 5 mA,
0 mA
7. a. 2 Hz
b. 10 Hz
c. 62.5 kHz
9. 7 ms;
142.9 Hz
11. 15 V;
6 mA
13. 149 919 cycles
15. 100 s;
400 s;
2500 Hz
17. 144.4 V
19. 100 V
21. a. 0.1745
c. 1.3963
e. 6.1087
b. 0.4363
d. 2.618
f. 10.821
23. 43.3 A;
25 A;
49.2 A;
50 A
25. Vm  85.1 V. Waveform is like Figure 15–25 except T  50 s.
27. a. 62.83  106 rad/s
c. 157.1 rad/s
e. 1571 rad/s
b. 188.5 rad/s
d. 314.2 rad/s
29. a. v  170 sin 377t V
b. i  40 sin 628t A
c. v  17 sin 52.4  103t V
31. v  20 sin 125.7t V
33. 0, 28.8, 11.4, 22 (all mA)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

974
Appendix D | Answers to Odd-Numbered Problems
35. a. 5 sin(1000 t  36) mA
b. 10 sin(40p t  120) A
c. 4 sin(1800p t  45) V
37. 4.46 V;
3.54 V;
0.782 V
39. v  100 sin(3491t  36) V
41. 6.25 ms;
13.2 ms;
38.2 ms
43. a. 20;
i leads
c. 50;
i1 leads
b. in phase
d. 60;
i leads
45. a. A leads by 90
b. A leads by 150
47. Zero for each
49. a. 1.1 A
b. 5 V
c. 1.36 A
51. a. Similar to Figure 15–61(b), except positive peak is 40 V,
negative peak is 10 V, and Vavg  15 V. T  120 ms.
b. 40 V;
10 V
c. 27.5 V;
36.7 V;
2.5 V;
6.65 V
d. 15 V
53. 2.80 V
55. a. 12 V
c. 19.7 V
b. 17.0 mA
d. 48.9 V
57. a. 5 mA
b. 23.2 V
59. a. 8.94 A
b. 16.8 A
61. 24 V;
Its magnitude is always 24 V;
therefore, it produces
the same average power to a resistor as a 24-V battery.
63. 26.5 mA
65. a. 108 V
c. 14.6 V
b. 120 V
d. 422 V
67. 6.25 ms; 13.2 ms; 38.2 ms
CHAPTER 16
1. a. 13∠67.4
c. 17∠118.1
b. 10.8∠33.7
d. 10.8∠158.2
5. a. 7  j6
d. 4.64  j1.86
b. 1  j10
e. 7.2  j12.1
c. 15.4  j3.50
f. 0.2  j0.1
7. a. 14.2∠23.8
b. 1.35∠69.5
c. 5.31∠167.7
9. a. 10 sin(qt  30) V
b. 15 sin(qt  10) V
11. a. 10 V∠30,
15 V∠20
b. 11.5 V∠118.2
c. 11.5 sin(qt  118.2) V
13. a. 17.7 mA ∠36;
28.3 mA ∠80;
42.8 mA ∠63.3
b. 60.5 sin(qt  63.3) mA
15. a. 4.95 mA ∠0;
2.83 mA ∠90;
4.2 mA ∠90;
5.15 mA ∠15.9
b. 7.28 sin(qt  15.9) mA
17. a. 10 sin qt A
c. 204 sin(qt  56) mV
b. 10 sin(qt  27) A
d. 204 sin(qt  157) mV
19. a. 147 sin(qt  39) V;
183.8 sin(qt  39) V
b. 330.8 sin(qt  39) V;
Identical
21. a. 5 sin(qt  30) A
b. 5 sin(qt  105) A
c. 10 sin(qt  120) V
d. 10 sin(qt  100) V
23. a. 0.531 sin(377t  90) A
b. 31.8 sin(6283t  90) mA
c. 0.4 sin(500t  90) A
25. a. 8.74 kHz;
b. 50.9 mH;
130
27. a. 530.5 
b. 31.83 
c. 400 
29. a. 1.89 sin(377t  90) A
b. 79.6 sin(2p  400t  150) mV
31. a. 48 ∠0
b. j37.7 
c. j50 
33. a. VR  25 V∠0;
VL  12.5 V∠90;
VC  5 V∠90
b. vR  35.4 sinqt V;
vL  17.7 sin(qt  90) V;
vC  7.07 sin(qt  90) V
35. a. 39.8 Hz
b. 6.37 F
37. Theoretical: 45.2 mA
39. 1.59 A∠90
41. 7.96 A
CHAPTER 17
1. When p is , power ﬂows from source to load. When p
is , power ﬂows out of load. Out of the load.
3. a. 1000 W and 0 VAR;
500 W and 0 VAR
b. 1500 W and 0 VAR
5. 151 VAR (cap.)
7. a. 10 
b. 6 
c. 265 F
9. 30 
11. 160 W;
400 VAR (ind.)
13. 900 W;
300 VAR (ind.)
15. a. 20 
c. 8 
b. 6 
d. 1.2 H
17. 125 VA
19. 1150 W;
70 VAR (cap.);
1152 VA;
v  3.48
21. 2.36 
23. 120 
25. a. 721 W;
82.3 VAR (cap.);
726 VA
b. I  6.05 A;
No
27. a. Across the load
b. 73.9 F
29. 57.3 kW
31. 2598 W
33. 160 
35. Same as Figure 17–5 with peak value of p  3.14 W.
37. A sawtooth wave oscillating between 8 W and 8 W.
CHAPTER 18
1. a. 0.125 sinqt
3. a. 1.87  103 sin(qt  30)
5. a. 1.36 sin(qt  90)
7. a. 1333 sin(2000pt  30)
9. a. 62.5 sin(10000t  90)
11. a. 67.5 sin(20000t  160)
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix D | Answers to Odd-Numbered Problems
975
13. Network (a): 31.6 ∠18.43
Network (b): 8.29 k∠29.66
15. a. 42.0 ∠19.47  39.6   j14.0 
17. R  1.93 k, L  4.58 mH
19. R  15 , C  1.93 F
21. a. ZT  50 ∠36.87, I  2.4 A∠36.87,
VR  96 V∠36.87, VL  48 V∠126.87,
VC  120 V∠53.13
c. 230.4 W
d. 230.4 W
23. a. ZT  45 ∠36.87
b. i  0.533 sin(qt  36.87),vR  19.20 sin(qt  36.87),
vC  25.1 sin(qt  53.13), vL  10.7 sin(qt  126.87)
e. 5.12 W
f. 5.12 W
25. a. VR  9.49 V∠18.43, VL  11.07 V∠71.57,
VC  7.91 V∠108.43
b. V  10.00 V∠0
27. a. VC  317 V∠30, VL  99.8 V∠150
b. 25 
29. a. VC  6.0 V∠110
b. VZ  13.87 V∠59.92
c. 69.4 ∠79.92
d. 1.286 W
31. Network (a): 199.9 ∠1.99,
Network (b): 485 ∠14.04
33. a. ZT  3.92 k∠78.79, IT  2.55 mA∠78.69,
I1  0.5 mA∠0, I2  10.0 mA∠90,
I3  12.5 mA∠90
d. 5.00 mW
35. a. 5.92 k∠17.4
b. 177.6 V∠17.4
37. 2.55 ∠81.80
39. Network (a): IR  10.00 mA∠31.99,
IL  4.00 mA∠121.99, IC  4.35 mA∠58.01
Network (b): IR  9.70 mA∠44.04,
IC1  1.62 mA∠45.96, IC2  0.81 mA∠45.96
41. IL  2.83 mA∠135, IC  3.54 mA∠45,
IR  0.71 mA45, Iout  in  1.00 mA∠0
43. a. 6.245 A∠90
b. 40.0 
c. 8.00 A∠51.32
45. a. ZT  22.5 ∠57.72
IL  5.34 A∠57.72
IC  4.78 A∠84.29
IR  2.39 A∠5.71
c. PR  342 W
d. PT  342 W
47. a. ZT  10.53 ∠10.95, IT  1.90 A∠10.95,
I1  2.28 A∠67.26, I2  2.00 A∠60.61
b. Vab  8.87 V∠169.06
49. a. ZT  7.5 k∠0, I1  0.75 mA∠0,
I2  0.75 mA∠90, I3  0.79A∠71.57
b. Vab  7.12 V∠18.43
51. qC  2000 rad/s
53. fC  3.39 Hz
55. Network (a): 5.5-k resistor in series with a 9.0-k induc-
tive reactance
Network (b): 207.7- resistor in series with a 138.5-
inductive reactance
57. q  1 krad/s: YT  0.01 S  j0, ZT  100 
q  10 krad/s: YT  0.01 S  j0, ZT  100 
CHAPTER 19
1. a. 5.00 V∠180
b. 12.50 V∠0
c. 15.00 V∠120
3. a. 3.20 mV∠180
b. 8.00 mV∠0
c. 9.60 mV∠120
5. 7.80 V∠150
7. Circuit (a): E  54 V∠0, VL  13.5 V∠0
Circuit (b): E  450 mV∠60, VL  439 mV∠47.32
9. a. 4.69 V∠180
b. E  (7.5 M)I, V  4.69 V∠180
11. a. (4   j2 )I1  (4 )I2  20 V∠0
(4 )I1  (6   j4 )I2  48.4 V∠161.93
b. I1  2.39 A∠72.63, I2  6.04 A∠154.06
c. I  6.15 A∠3.33
13. a. (12   j16 )I1  (j15 )I2  13.23 V∠79.11
(j15 )I1  0I2  10.27 V∠43.06
b. I1  0.684 A∠133.06, I2  1.443 A∠131.93
c. V  11.39 V∠40.91
15. 27.8 V∠6.79 I  6.95 mA∠6.79
17. a. (0.417 S∠36.87)V1  (0.25 S∠90)V2  3.61 A∠56.31
(0.25 S∠90)V1  (0.083 S∠90)V2  7.00 A∠90
b. V1  30.1 V∠139.97, V2  60.0 V∠75.75
c. I  13.5 V∠44.31
19. a. (0.0893 S∠22.08)V1  (0.04 S∠90)V2  0.570 A∠93.86
(0.04 S∠90)V1  (0.06 S∠90)V2  2.00 A∠180
b. V1  17.03 V∠18.95, V2  31.5 V∠109.91
c. V  11.39 V∠40.91
21. (0.372 S∠5.40), V  10.33 mA∠1.39
27.8 V∠6.79, I  6.95 mA∠6.79
As expected, the answers are the same as those in Problem 15.
23. Network (a):
Z1  284.4 ∠20.56, Z2  94.8 ∠69.44
Z3  31.6 ∠159.44
Network (b):
Z1  11.84 k∠9.46, Z2  5.92 k∠80.54
Z3  2.96 k∠80.54
25. IT  0.337 A∠2.82
27. a. ZT  3.03 ∠76.02
b. I  5.28 A∠76.02, I1  0.887 A∠15.42
29. a. Z2  1   j7   7.07 ∠81.87
b. I  142.5 mA∠52.13
31. Z1Z4  Z2Z3 as required.
35. R3  50.01 , R1  253.3 
39. Same as Figure 19–21.
41. Same as Problem 26.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

976
Appendix D | Answers to Odd-Numbered Problems
CHAPTER 20
1. I  4.12 A∠50.91
3. 16 V∠53.13
5. a. V  15.77 V∠36.52
b. P(1)  P(2) 1.826 W ≠P100-  2.49 W
7. 0.436 A∠9.27
9. 19.0 sin(qt  68.96)
11. a. VL  1.26 V∠161.57
b. VL  6.32 V∠161.57
13. 0.361 mA∠3.18
15. VL  9.88 V∠0
17. 1.78 V
19. ZTh  3 ∠90, ETh  20 V∠90
21. a. ZTh  37.2 ∠57.99
ETh  9.63 V∠78.49
b. 0.447 W
23. ZTh  22.3 ∠15.80, ETh  20.9 V∠20.69
25. ZTh  109.9 ∠28.44, ETh  14.5 V∠91.61
27. a. ZTh  20.6 ∠34.94, ETh  10.99 V∠13.36
b. PL  1.61 W
29. ZN  j3 , IN  6.67 A∠0
31. a. ZN  22.3 ∠15.80, IN  0.935 A∠36.49
b. 0.436 A∠9.27
c. 3.80 W
33. a. ZN  109.9 ∠28.44, IN  0.131 A∠63.17
b. 0.0362 A∠84.09
c. 0.394 W
35. a. ZN  14.1 ∠85.41, IN  0.181 A∠29.91
b. 0.0747 A∠90.99
37. a. ZTh  17.9 k∠26.56, ETh  1.79 V∠153.43
b. 31.6 mA∠161.56
c. 40.0 mW
39. ETh  10 V∠0, IN  10.5 A∠0, ZTh  0.952 ∠0
41. a. ZL  8 ∠22.62
b. 40.2 W
43. a. ZL  2.47 ∠21.98
b. 1.04 W
45. 4.15 ∠85.24
47. a. ZL  37.2 ∠57.99
b. 19.74 
c. 1.18 W
49. ZTh  3 ∠90, ETh  20 ∠90
51. ZTh  109.9 ∠28.44, ETh  14.5 V ∠91.61
53. ETh  10 V∠0, IN  10.5 A∠0, ZTh  0.952 ∠0
55. ZN  0.5 k∠0, IN  4.0 mA∠0
57. ETh  10 V∠0, IN  10.5 A∠0, ZN  0.952 ∠0
59. ZN  0.5 k∠0, IN  4.0 mA∠0
CHAPTER 21
1. a. qs  3835 rad/s
fs  610.3 Hz
b. I  153.8 mA∠0
c. VC  59.0 V∠90
VL  59.03 V∠87.76
VR  7.69 V∠0
d. PL  0.355 W
3. a. R  25.0 
C  4.05 nF
b. P  15.6 mW
c. XC  1.57 k
VC  39.3 V∠90
VL  39.3 V∠90
VR  E  0.625 V∠90
d. vC  55.5 sin(50,000t  90)
vL  55.5 sin(50,000t  90)
vR  0.884 sin(50,000t)
5. a. qs  500 rad/s
fs  79.6 kHz
b. ZT  200 ∠0
c. I  10 mA∠0
d. VR  1 V∠0
VL  50.01 V∠88.85
VC  50 V ∠90
e. PT  20 mW
QC  0.5 VAR (cap.)
QL  0.5 VAR (ind.)
f. Qs  25
7. a. C  0.08 F
R  6.4 
b. PT  0.625 W
c. VL  62.5 V ∠90
9. qs  8000 rad/s
11. a. qs  3727 rad/s, Q  7.45, BW  500 rad/s
b. Pmax  144 W
c. q1  3477 rad/s
q2  3977 rad/s
d. q1  3485.16 rad/s
q2  3985.16 rad/s
e. The results are close, although the approximation will
yield some error if used in further calculations. The error
would be less if Q were larger.
13. a. R  1005 , C  63.325 pF
b. P  0.625 W, VL  312.5 V∠90
c. vout  442 sin (400  103t  90)
15. Network (a):
a. Q  24
b. RP  5770 , XLP  240 
c. Q  240, RP  576 
XLP  2400 
Network (b):
a. Q  1
b. RP  200 , XLP  200 
c. Q  10, RP  10.1 k
XLP  1.01 k
Network (c):
a. Q  12.5
b. RP  314.5 , XLP  25.16 
c. Q  125, RP  31.25 , XLP  250 
17. Network (a):
Q  15, RP  4500 , XCP  300 
Network (b):
Q  2, RP  225 , XCP  112.5 
Network (c):
Q  5, RP  13 k, XCP  2600 
19. Network (a):
Q  4, Rs  4 k, XLS  16 k
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Appendix D | Answers to Odd-Numbered Problems
977
Network (b):
Q  0.333, Rs  3.6 k, XCS  1.2 k
Network (c):
Q  100, Rs  10 , XLS  1 k
21. Ls  1.2 mH, LP  2.4 mH
23. a. qP  20 krad/s
25. a. qP  39.6 krad/s, fP  6310 Hz
b. Q  6.622
c. V  668.2 V∠0, IR  11.14 mA∠0
IL  668.2 mA∠82.36
IC  662.2 mA∠90
d. PT  66.82 W
e. BW  5.98 krad/s, BW  952 Hz
27. R1  4194 k, C  405 pF, IL  5.0 mA∠89.27
29. a. 900 
d. C  500 nF, L  0.450 H
b. 1.862
e. 93.1 V∠0
c. 1074 rad/s
33. V  668.2 V, fP  6310 Hz, BW  952 Hz, Q  6.622
35. V  93.1 V, fP  318.3 Hz, BW  170.9 Hz, Q  1.86
CHAPTER 22
1. a. 2000 (33.0 dB)
c. 2  106 (63.0 dB)
b. 200,000 (53.0 dB)
d. 400 (26.0 dB)
3. a. AP  50  106 (77.0 dB), AV  500 (54.0 dB)
b. AP  10 (10.0 dB), AV  0.224 (13.0 dB)
c. AP  13.3  106 (71.3 dB), AV  258 (48.2 dB)
d. AP  320  106 (85.1dB), AV  1265 (62.0 dB)
5. Pin  12.5W, Pout  39.5 mW
Vout  3.14 V, AV  12.6, [AV]dB  22.0 dB
7. a. 17.0 dBm (13.0 dBW)
b. 30.0 dBm (0 dBW)
c. 34.0 dBm (64.0 dBW)
d. 66.0 dBm (96.0 dBW)
9. a. 0.224 W
c. 5.01 pW
b. 30.2 W
d. 1995 W
17. P1  5.05 dBm, P2  2.05 dBm, P3  14.09 dBm 
P0  25.6 dBm
19. P1  25.5 dBm, Pin  14.5 dBm, Vout  52.8 V
23. a. qC  1000 rad/s, fC  159.2 Hz
25. a. q1  50 rad/s
q2  1000 rad/s
f1  7.96 Hz
f2  159.15 Hz
35. a. TF  1  j0.00003
1 0.00006
43. a. Low-pass ﬁlter: qC  500 rad/s
High-pass ﬁlter: qC  25 krad/s
BW  475 krad/s
c. The actual cutoff frequencies will be close to the
designed values since the break frequencies are separated
by more than one decade.
45. a. R1  5 k, R2  50 k
c. The actual frequencies will not occur at the designed
values since they are one decade apart.
47. a. 10 krad/s
b. 10
c. BW  1 krad/s, q1  9.5 krad/s, q2  10.5 krad/s
d. At resonance, [AV]dB  28.0 dB
49. a. 10 krad/s, 1592 Hz
b. 100
c. 60 dB
d. 0.8 dB, 0 dB
e. 100 rad/s, 9.95 krad/s, 10.05 krad/s
CHAPTER 23
1. a. es is in phase with ep.
b. ep is 180 out of phase with es.
3. a. Step-up
c. 6 V
e. 3200 V∠180
b. 25 sinqt V
d. 96 V∠0
5. v1  24 sinqt V;
v2  144 sin(qt  180) V;
v3  48 sinqt V
7. a. 1 A∠20
b. 480 V∠0
c. 480 ∠20
9. a. 160 V∠23.1
b. 640 V∠23.1
11. a. 40   j80 
b. 1.25   j2 
13. 2.5
15. a. 22   j6 
b. 26   j3 
17. 108 kVA
19. a. 20 A
c. 2.5 A
b. 22.5 A
d. 0.708 A
21. 0.64 W
23. 3 A∠50;
1.90 A∠18.4;
1.83 A∠43.8
25. b. 2.12 A∠45;
21.2 A∠45;
120.2 V∠0
27. 98.5%
29. All are minus.
31. 0.889 H
33. 125 e500t V;
4 e500t V;
75.8 V;
2.43 V
35. 10.5 H
37. 27.69 mH;
11.5 A∠90
39. (4  j22) I1  j13 I2  100∠0
j13 I1  j12 I2  0
41. (10  j84) I1  j62 I2  120 V∠0
j62 I1  15 I2  0
43. 0.644 A∠56.1;
6.44 A∠56.1;
117 V∠0.385
47.  I1  0.286 A ∠73.3;
I2  89.6 mA ∠121.1
Simulation answers may not agree exactly.
CHAPTER 24
1. a. 8 A∠30;
8 A∠150;
8 A∠90
b. yes
3. iA is in phase with voltage eAN, iB is in phase with eBN, and
iC is in phase with eCN. Waveforms look identical to those of
Figure 24–2(b).
5. a. Vab  208 V∠45;
Vca  208 V ∠165
b. Van  120 V∠15;
Vbn  120 V∠105;
Vcn  120 V ∠135
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

978
Appendix D | Answers to Odd-Numbered Problems
7. Ia  23.1 A∠21.9;
Ib  23.1 A∠141.9;
Ic  23.1 A∠98.1
9. 8.16 A∠24;
8.16 A∠96;
8.16 A∠144
11. Iab  19.2 A∠36.9;
Ibc  19.2 A∠83.1;
Ica  19.2 A∠156.9;
Ia  33.3 A∠6.9;
Ib  33.3 A∠113.1;
Ic  33.3 A∠126.9
13. Vab  250 V∠57.9;
Vbc  250 V∠177.9;
Vca  250 V∠62.1
15. 14.4 A∠33;
14.4 A∠153;
14.4 A∠87
17. a. R  3.83 ;
C  826 F
b. R  7.66 ;
L  17.1 mH
19. a. Iab  4.5 A∠35;
Ica  4.5 A∠155
b. Ia  7.79 A∠5;
Ib  7.79 A∠115;
Ic  7.79 A∠125
c. R  43.7 ;
C  86.7 F
21. a. 122.1 V ∠0.676
b. 212 V∠30.676
23. Ia  14.4 A∠26.9;
Ib  14.4 A∠93.1;
Ic  14.4 A∠146.9
25. Ia  14.4 A∠34.9
27. 611 V ∠30.4
29. b. 489 V∠30
31. 346 V ∠10
33. Pf  86.4 W;
Qf  0 VAR;
Sf  86.4 VA;
For totals, multiply by 3.
35. 2303 W;
1728 VAR (ind.);
2879 VA
37. 4153 W;
3115 VAR (cap.);
5191 VA
39. 72 kW;
36 kVAR (ind.);
80.5 kVA;
0.894
41. 27.6 kW;
36.9 kVAR (ind.);
46.1 kVA;
0.60
43. 3.93 A∠32
45. 0.909
47. a. Same as Figure 23–28.
b. 768 W
c. 2304 W
49. a. Ia  5.82 A∠14.0;
Ib  5.82 A∠134.0;
Ic  5.82 A∠106
b. Pf  678 W;
PT  2034 W
c. W1  1164 W;
W2  870 W
d. 2034 W
51. a. 0.970
b. 0.970
53. a. Iab  4 A∠0;
Ibc  2.4 A∠156.9;
Ica  3.07 A∠170.2;
Ia  7.04 A∠4.25;
Ib  6.28 A∠171.4;
Ic  1.68 A∠119.2
b. Pab  960 W;
Pbc  461 W;
Pca  472 W;
1893 W
55. a. Ia  6.67 A∠0;
Ib  2.68 A∠93.4;
Ic  2.4 A∠66.9
b. 7.47 A∠3.62
c. Pan  800 W;
Pbn  288 W;
Pcn  173 W
d. 1261 W
57. a. Van  34.9 V∠0.737;
Vbn  179 V∠144;
Vcn  178 V∠145
b. VnN  85.0 V∠0.302
59. Iab  19.2 A∠36.87;
Ia  33.2 A∠6.87
61. Ia  6.67 A∠0;
Ib  2.68 A∠93.4;
Ic  2.40 A∠66.9;
IN  7.64 A∠3.62
CHAPTER 25
1. a. 18.37 V
b. 6.75 W
3. a. 17.32 V
b. 0.12 W
5. v(t)  1  
2
 sin qt  2
2

 sin(2qt)  3
2

 sin(3qt)  . . .
7. v(t)  3

2 sin 500 t  2
3

2 sin(1000t)
 3
3

2 sin(1500t)  . . .
9. v(t)  1

0  5 sin qt  2

0
cos(
3
2qt)
  
cos
1
(4
5
qt)
 . . .
11. v(t)  3

2 sin(qt  30°)  3
3

2 sin[3(qt  30°)]  5
3

2 sin
[5(qt  30°)]  7
3

2 sin[7(qt  30°)]
13. b. v1   1

6 sin qt  3
1

6 sin 3qt  5
1

6 sin 5qt  . . .
v2  
8
 sin qt  2
8

 sin 2qt  3
8

 sin 3qt  . . .
c. v 
8
 sin qt  2
8

 sin 2qt  3
8

 sin 3qt  . . .
15. b. Vavg  5 V
c. v1  5  1

0 sin qt  2
1

0 sin 2qt  3
1

0 sin 3qt  . . .
v2  1

0 sin qt  2
1

0 sin 2qt  3
1

0 sin 3qt  . . .
d. v1  v2  5  2

0 sin qt  3
2

0 sin 3qt  
5
1

0 sin 5qt  . . .
17. v1  v2  1

6 sin qt  2
4

 sin 2qt  3
1

6 sin 3qt  . . .
19. P  1.477 W
21. P0  23.1 dBm P1  24.0 dBm P2  26.1 dBm
P3  2.56 dBm P4  4.80 dBm
23. a. V0  0.5 V
b. V1  0.90 VP
v1  45
V3  0.14 VP
v2  63
V5  0.05 VP
v5  79
V7  0.03 VP
v7  82
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Glossary
979
absolute maximum power
In order for the absolute maximum
power to be delivered to the load of an ac circuit, the load
impedance must be equal to the complex conjugate of the Thévenin
or Norton equivalent impedance of the circuit. Refer to maximum
power transfer theorem.
absolute zero
T  273.15 °C is the theoretical temperature at
which all molecular motion stops.
ac
Although ac technically is an abreviation for alternating current,
by convention, it is used to denote periodically varying voltage as
well—thus, the voltage at your wall outlet is designated 120 volts ac.
Standard practice is that ac is not capitalized.
ac current/alternating current
Current that periodically reverses
in direction.
ac voltage
Voltage that periodically changes in polarity. The
most common ac voltage is the sine wave.
active power
In an ac system, this is the average power delivered
from a source to a load. Other terms used for active power are real
power and average power.
admittance (Y)
A vector quantity (measured in siemens, S) that
is the reciprocal of impedance. Y  1/Z.
admittance diagram
A two-dimensional diagram on the complex
plane that is used to show all circuit admittances, typically for
parallel ac circuits.
air-core coil/air-core transformer
An air-core coil is a coil
wound on a nonferromagnetic material. An air-core transformer has
air-core coils. Magnetic flux is proportional to current for air-core
coils and transformers.
alternating current
Current that periodically reverses in
direction, commonly called an ac current.
alternating voltage
Voltage that periodically changes in polarity,
commonly called an ac voltage. The most common ac voltage is the
sine wave.
American Wire Gauge (AWG)
An American standard for
classifying wire and cable.
ammeter
An instrument that measures current. Most commonly
met as one of the functions of a DMM.
ampere (A or amp)
The SI unit of electrical current, equal to a
rate of flow of 1 coulomb of charge per second.
ampere-hour (Ah)
A measure of the storage capacity of a battery.
Ampere’s circuital law
States that the algebraic sum of mmfs
around a closed loop is zero.
ampere-turns
See mmf.
amplifier
Any active component such as a transistor that results in
more ac output power applied to a load than input power applied to
the circuit.
amplitude
For a symmetric, periodic waveform such as dealt with
in this book, amplitude is defined as the distance from its average
value to its peak value, thus it is a measure of how big the wave is.
Specifically, for a sine wave v  Vm sin qt, or for a sine wave
superimposed on dc such as v  E  Vm sin qt, Vm is the amplitude.
angular frequency (v)
Frequency of an ac waveform in radians/s
where q  2pf and f is frequency in Hz.
apparent power
The power that apparently flows in an ac circuit.
It is the combination of real power P and reactive power Q. The
magnitude of S is equal to the product of effective voltage times
effective current—that is, S  VI and its unit is the VA (volt-amp).
The relationship between P, Q, and S is represented by the power
triangle—see power triangle.
application software
Software (e.g., Multisim and PSpice) designed
for a specific purpose such as analyzing electrical and electronic circuits.
atom
The basic building block of matter. In the Bohr model, an atom
consists of a nucleus of positively charged protons and uncharged
neutrons, surrounded by negatively charged orbiting electrons. An
atom normally consists of equal numbers of electrons and protons and
is thus uncharged.
attenuation
The amount that a signal decreases as it passes through
a system. The attenuation is usually measured in decibels, dB.
attenuator
Any component (active or passive) that results in less ac
output power applied to the load than input power applied to the circuit.
audio frequency
A frequency in the range of human hearing,
which is typically from about 15 Hz to 20 kHz.
autopolarity
For a voltmeter (or multimeter set to volts), it denotes
a meter that automatically determines and displays the polarity of the
applied voltage. For an ammeter (or multimeter set to current), it
denotes a meter that automatically determines and displays the
direction of measured current. Most DMMs are autopolarity devices.
autoranging
A meter with autoranging automatically determines the
range which yields the most significant digits and sets itself up accord-
ingly. In contrast, for meters without autoranging, the user must select
the desired measuring range manually. Most DMMs are autoranging.
autotransformer
A type of transformer with partially common
primary and secondary windings. Part of its energy is transferred
magnetically and part conductively.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

980
Glossary
average of a waveform
The mean value of a waveform, obtained
by algebraically summing the areas above and below the zero axis
of the waveform, divided by the cycle length of the waveform. It is
equal to the dc value of the waveform as measured by an ammeter
or a voltmeter.
average power
An alternate name for active power—see active
power.
B-H curve
The relationship between magnetic flux density B and
magnetic field intensity H in ferromagnetic materials is usually
shown graphically as a set of curves known as B-H curves. These
curves, obtained by test, are available in handbooks and on the
Internet for important magnetic materials such as cast iron, cast
steel, sheet steel, and a few others.
balanced bridge
When the voltage between midpoints on the
arms of a bridge circuit is zero.
balanced system
A three-phase system where the line and load
impedances for each phase are identical, and the three source
voltage magnitudes are identical, but each is phase displaced from
the other by 120o.
band-pass filter
A circuit that permits signals within a range of
frequencies to pass through a circuit. Signals of all other frequencies
are prevented from passing through the circuit.
band-stop filter (or notch filter)
A circuit designed to prevent
signals within a range of frequencies from passing through a
circuit. Signals of all other frequencies freely pass through the
circuit.
bandwidth (BW)
The difference between the upper and lower
half-power frequencies for any resonant, band-pass, or band-stop
filter. The bandwidth may be expressed in either hertz or radians
per second.
base
In number systems, the base is the number on which the
counting system is built. Our common decimal system uses base 
10 numbers.
battery
The most commonly used dc source. Batteries are used to
power portable electronic devices such as cell phones and
calculators and cordless tools such as drills. They derive their energy
from electrochemical action. Primary batteries cannot be charged
but secondary batteries can.
bel
Named after Alexander Graham Bell, this logarithmic unit
represents a tenfold increase or decrease in power.
block diagram
In a block diagram, major system components
are shown as blocks (usually with a short descriptor describing the
function of each). Blocks are interconnected with lines, and signal
flow is usually from left to right.
Bode plot
(1) A graph of voltage gain (usually given in dB) and
phase shift (in degrees) of a circuit as a function of frequency. (2) A
graph of the transfer function of a circuit.
branch
A portion of a circuit that can be simplified as having two
terminals. The components between the two terminals can be any
combination of resistors, voltage sources, or other elements.
branch current
The current through a branch of a circuit.
branch-current analysis
Circuit analysis that uses determinants
to directly calculate the current in each branch of a circuit.
break frequency
See cutoff frequency.
bridge circuit
A circuit that is used to very accurately measure
the values of unknown components.
bridge networks
See bridge circuit.
capacitance
A measure of charge storage capacity—see capacitor.
Capacitance opposes a change in voltage. Unit is the farad (F).
capacitive impedance
Any circuit having a net (or total) impedance
that is capacitive at the frequency of operation.
capacitive loading
When signals are degraded by stray
capacitance, this is referred to as capacitive loading. (There are other
instances, but this is the only situation considered in the book.) See
also stray capacitance.
capacitive reactance (XC)
The opposition that capacitance
presents to sinusoidal ac current, denoted by XC where XC  VC/IC 
1/qC [ohms].
capacitive transients
Also called RC transients. These are
transients that occur when a circuit containing capacitance is
disturbed. Mathematically, RC transients in dc circuits are always
of the form of et/RC or (1  et/RC).
capacitor
A device built to possess capacitance. It stores electrical
charge on conductive “plates” separated by an insulating material
called a dielectric. The capacitance of most capacitors typically lies
in the range between nFs and a few thousand μF, except see
supercapacitor.
cascade
Two stages of a circuit are said to be in a cascade
connection when the output of one stage is connected to drive the
input of the following stage.
CGS system
A system of units based on centimeters, grams, and
seconds.
charge
(1) The inherent electrical property of electrons and pro-
tons that causes a force to exist between them. Electrons are nega-
tively charged while protons are positively charged. Charge is
denoted by Q and is defined by Coulomb’s law. (2) An excess or
deficiency of electrons on a body. (3) To store electric charge as in
to charge a capacitor or charge a battery.
charged
When used in reference to a capacitor, it means that the
capacitor has a voltage across it—that is, it is charged. See charge.
chassis ground
When the metal chassis of an electronic circuit is
used as the reference point for the circuit. When a circuit is plugged
into commercial as power, the chassis will generally be connected
to the ground connection of the building, which in turn is con-
nected to earth ground.
choke
Another name for an inductor.
circuit
A combination of any number of interconnected compo-
nents such as resistors, capacitors, inductors, and voltages sources
that allows charges to flow (i.e., allows current).
circuit breaker
A resettable circuit protection device that trips a set
of contacts to open the circuit when current reaches a preset value.
circuit common
The reference point in an electrical circuit from
which voltages are measured.
circuit theory
Electric circuit theory is the body of knowledge
that describes (in an organized manner) what we know about elec-
trical circuits. It encompasses the electrical behavior of circuit
components, the mathematical relationships between variables
such as voltage, current, and power, and the methods that we use to
analyze circuits.
circular mil (CM)
A unit used to specify the cross-sectional area
of a conductor such as a cable or wire. The circular mil is defined as
the area contained in a circle having a diameter of 1 mil (0.001 inch).
When expressed in terms of square mils, we have 1 CM  p/4 sq.mil.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Glossary
981
closed loop
Any path within a circuit that starts and ends at the
same point. (See also Kirchhoff’s voltage law.)
coefficient of coupling (k)
A measure of the flux linkage
between circuits such as coils. If k  0, there is no linkage; if k  1,
all of the flux produced by one coil links another. The mutual
inductance M between coils is related to k by the relationship M 
kL1 L2, where L1 and L2 are the self-inductances of the coils.
coil
A term commonly used to denote inductors or windings on
transformers or inductors.
common-mode signal
A signal that appears at both inputs of a
differential amplifier.
complex number
A complex number is a number with a real
part and an imaginary part and may be expressed in rectangular
form as a  j b (where a and b are the real and imaginary parts,
respectively, and j  
1), or in polar form as r ∠v where r is the
magnitude of the number and v is its angle.
conductance (G)
The reciprocal of resistance, namely G  1R.
Unit is the siemens (S).
conductor
A material through which charges move easily. Copper
is the most common metallic conductor.
constant-current source
A source that provides the same cur-
rent to a circuit regardless of the load connected to it (providing the
the load is not an open circuit).
continuity of current
Inductor current cannot change instanta-
neously from one value to another but must be continuous—i.e.,
iL(0)  iL(0). If switching is at time t  t1, this becomes iL(t1) 
iL(t1). (This statement applies to isolated inductors. For coupled
inductors, the statement is incomplete, but that case is beyond the
scope of this textbook.)
continuity of voltage
Capacitor voltage cannot change instanta-
neously from one value to another but must be continuous—i.e.,
vC(0)  vC(0). If switching is at time t  t1, this becomes vC(t1) 
vC(t1).
continuous
In transient analysis, we are concerned about con-
tinuous and discontinuous voltages and currents. A voltage or cur-
rent is continuous if it forms a perfectly smooth curve as a
function of time—that is, it does not change instantaneously from
one value to another. If a voltage or current does change instanta-
neously from one value to another, it is discontinuous. See conti-
nuity of voltage.
conventional current
Current in the direction opposite to the flow
of electrons in a metallic conductor. In a single-source dc circuit,
conventional current emanates from the  terminal of the source.
conversion factor
A multiplying factor that permits you to con-
vert from one unit to another, say from minutes to seconds, with-
out changing the magnitude of the quantity. To achieve this,
conversion factors must have a value of 1.
copper loss
The I 2R power loss in a conductor due to its resis-
tance, such as the power loss in the windings of a transformer.
core
The form or structure around which an inductor or the coils
of a transformer are wound. The core material affects the magnetic
properties of the device.
core loss/iron loss
Power loss in the core of a transformer or
inductor due to hysteresis and eddy currents. See hysteresis loss
and eddy currents.
core/core type
Core refers to the form or structure of a magnetic
circuit such as the core of a transformer. Core type usually refers to
the material from which the core is made. The core material affects
the magnetic properties of the device.
corresponding terminals
See dot convention.
coulomb (C)
The SI unit of electrical charge, equal to the charge
carried by 6.24  1018 electrons.
Coulomb’s law
An experimental law that states that the force (in
Newtons) between charged particles is F  Q1 Q2/4pr2, where
Q1 and Q2 are the charges (in coulombs), r is the distance between
their centers in meters, and is the permittivity of the medium. For
air, o  8.854  1012 F/m. (In modern terminology, o is also
called the electric constant.)
counter EMF (back voltage)
When current changes in a coil, its
changing magnetic field induces a voltage. The polarity of this
voltage is always such as to oppose the change in current, hence the
terminology “counter” voltage.
coupled circuit
A circuit (such as a transformer) in which the
magnetic field due to time varying currents in one circuit induces
voltage in another. (1) Tightly coupled: Refers to circuits where
almost all the flux produced by one circuit links the other. (2)
Loosely coupled: Refers to circuits where only a portion of the flux
produced by one circuit links the other.
coupled impedance
Impedance as “seen” through the windings
of a loosely coupled circuit. Note that capacitive elements on the
secondary side look inductive when viewed from the primary side
and vice versa. (This is quite different than what you see with an
iron-core transformer—see reflected impedance for comparison.)
critical frequency
See cutoff frequency.
critical temperature
The temperature below which a material
becomes a superconductor.
current (I or i)
The rate of flow of electrical charges, measured
in amperes. One amp  1 coulomb per second.
current divider rule
The current through any resistor part of a
group of parallel resistors is given as Ix  (RT/Rx)I T.
current ratio
In an iron-core transformer, Ip/Is  Ns/Np  1/a.
See turns ratio.
current reference arrow
Arrow placed on circuit diagrams to
denote the direction of conventional current. When you solve for
(or measure) current, if its value is positive, it is in the same direc-
tion as the reference. If it is negative, its direction is opposite to the
reference.
current source
A practical current source can be modelled as an
ideal current source in parallel with an internal impedance. See
also constant current source.
cutoff frequency, fc or qc
The frequency at which the output
power of a circuit is reduced to half of the maximum output power.
The cutoff frequency may be measured in either hertz (Hz) or
radians per second (rad/s).
cycle
One complete variation of a periodic, time varying waveform.
damped oscillations
The output of any oscillating circuit will
reduce to zero when the power source is removed from the circuit,
resulting in damped oscillations.
dc
Although dc technically is an abreviation for direct current, by
convention, it is used to denote fixed voltage as well—thus, a car bat-
tery is a 12-V dc source. Standard practice is that dc is not capitalized.
dc current
Direct current—that is, unidirectional current such as
that from a battery.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

982
Glossary
dc resistance
See resistance (R).
– system
A three-phase system with a  generator and a  load.
This is a three-wire system.
decade
As used in circuit theory, a decade is a change in frequency
by a factor of 10, either up or down—for example, from 10 Hz to
100 Hz.
decibel (dB)
A logarithmic unit used to represent an increase (or
decrease) in power levels or sound intensity.
de-energizing transient
The current turn-off transient in an RL
circuit. Such transients may result in huge voltage spikes.
delta  (in mathematics)
A small change (increment or decrement)
in a variable. For example, if current changes a small amount from
i1 to i2, its increment is i  i2  i1, while if time changes a small
amount from t1 to t2, its increment is t  t2  t1.
delta load
A configuration of circuit components connected in
the shape of a  (Greek letter delta). Sometimes called a pi (p) load.
delta-wye conversions
The mathematical method of converting
a delta load into an equivalent wye load.
dependent sources
Voltage or current sources that have values
that are dependent upon some internal or external voltage or cur-
rent. These sources are used primarily to simulate the operation of
active devices such as transistors.
derivative
The instantaneous rate of change of a function. It is
the slope of the tangent to the curve at the point of interest.
dielectric
An insulating material. The term is commonly used with
reference to the insulating material between the plates of a capacitor.
dielectric absorption
Due to the polarization of atoms in a dielec-
tric, you may find that after you discharge a capacitor, considerable
voltage “springs back” within seconds after the discharge resistor is
removed. The cause of this is the residual polarization of the dialec-
tric atoms, and the effect is known as dielectric absorption—see
polarized.
dielectric breakdown
When stressed by high enough voltage,
insulation may break down and conduct as electrons are literally
torn from their orbits. In solids, this is destructive. In air, the result-
ing spark goes away if the voltage is dropped below its critical
value. See dielectric strength.
dielectric constant ()
A former term for relative permittivity,
still used sometimes. See relative permittivity.
dielectric strength
The voltage gradient at which an insulator
breaks down—see dielectric breakdown. The dielectric strength of
air is approximately 3kV/mm.
differentiator circuit
A circuit that performs the mathematical
operation of differentiation—that is, a circuit whose output is the
derivative of its input. (The differentiator circuits of Chapter 11 are
approximate differentiators.)
diode
A two-terminal component made of semiconductor mater-
ial, which permits current in one direction while preventing current
in the opposite direction.
discontinuous
See continuous.
DMM (digital multimeter)
A digital multimeter that displays
results on a numeric readout. In addition to voltage, current, and
resistance, some DMMs measure other quantities such as frequency
and capacitance.
domains
A region within a ferromagnetic material that has uniform
magnetization—that is, it is composed of magnetically aligned atoms.
dot convention
A terminal marking convention that indicates
corresponding terminals on coupled circuits by means of dots.
(Corresponding terminals have the same relative polarity at all
instants of time.) Variations include using letters such as X1, X2,
and so on, instead of dots.
duty cycle
The ratio of ON time to the duration of a pulse
waveform, expressed in percent.
-Y system
A three-phase system with a  generator and a Y
load. This is a three-wire system.
dynamic resistance
Resistance whose I-V plot is not a straight
line—that is, resistance whose value changes as voltage or current
changes. However, at any point on the curve, Ohm’s law applies.
earth ground
When ac power enters a home or a commercial
building, one or more ground rods are placed into the ground to
provide a return path for the electrical service. Additionally, metal
water pipes within the building are electrically bonded to the earth
ground to provide additonal safety for inhabitants of the building.
eddy current
(1) A small circulating current induced in
conductive material when exposed to a time varying magnetic field.
Often refers to the unwanted current that is induced in nearby metal
cases, transformer cores, etc. (2) A small circulating current.
Usually refers to the unwanted current that is induced in the core of
an inductor or transformer by changing core flux.
eddy current loss
Eddy currents result in an i2R power loss in
transformer cores (called eddy current loss, core loss, or iron loss)
where R is the resistance of the path of the current in the iron core.
See also eddy currents.
effective resistance
Resistance defined by R  P/I2. For ac,
effective resistance is larger than dc resistance due to skin effect
and other effects such as eddy current power losses.
effective value
An equivalent dc value of a time varying wave-
form, hence, that value of dc that has the same heating effect as the
given waveform. Also called rms (root mean square) value. For
sinusoidal current, I eff  0.707 Im, where Im is the amplitude of the
ac waveform. Similarly, for sinusoidal voltage Veff  0.707 Vm.
efficiency ()
The ratio of output power to input power, usually
expressed as a percentage. h  Pout/Pin  100%. Can also be
expressed in terms of energy.
electric circuit
Any circuit consisting of any number of sources
and loads connected in any manner that allows charge to flow.
electric constant (o)
The modern name for the absolute
permittivity of free space (i.e., a vacuum). It has a value of 8.8542 
1012 farads/meter.
electric field
A region in space where an electric force is felt,
hence a force field. For example, electric fields exist around elec-
tric charges.
electric field intensity ()
Also called electric field strength. (1)
The force on a unit charge. (2) For the field between parallel
capacitor plates, this becomes y  V/d volts/meter.
electrical charge
See charge.
electrolyte
An ionic conducting fluid used in electrolytic capac-
itors. When a voltage of proper polarity is applied to the capacitor,
the electrolyte reacts chemically to form a very thin insulating coat
(the dielectric) on one of the plates. Since the dielectric is so thin,
capacitance is quite large.
electrolytic capacitor
A type of capacitor that uses an elec-
trolyte—see electrolyte. Electrolytic capacitors are polarized, have
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Glossary
983
relatively low breakdown voltages and other nonideal effects, but
are nonetheless widely used in certain types of applications such as
power supply filtering.
electron
A negatively charged atomic particle. See atom.
energy (W)
(1) The ability to do work. Its SI unit is the joule. 
(2) Although the SI unit of energy is the joule, in practice, it is often
measured in kilowatt-hours (kWh). For example, many of us are
billed for electrical usage in kWh.
engineering notation
A method of representing certain common
powers of 10 via standard prefixes such as milli, micro, or their
symbols m and μ. For example, 0.000125 A may be expressed as
125 μA or 0.125 mA.
equivalent series resistance (ESR)
The sum of all the internal
series resistances of a capacitor.
exponent
Consider n3  n  n  n. Here, 3 is the exponent and
represents how many times the number n is multiplied by itself. In
a more general sense, for ax, x is the exponent.
exponential function (ex)
A mathematical function of the form
ex where e is the base of the natural logarithm. May be evaluated
easily on your calculator using its ex key. Encountered regularly
in transient analysis—see capacitive transients and inductive
transients.
fall time (tf)
The time it takes for a pulse or other abruptly
changing signal to change from its 90% value to its 10% value.
farad (F)
The basic unit of capacitance, named in honor of
Michael Faraday. Farad is an SI unit, but it is a large unit and
capacitors typically have values in the μF range.
Faraday’s law
An experimental law which states that voltage
induced is proportional to the rate of change of flux linkage
producing the voltage. Lenz’s law can be used to determine its
polarity.
ferrite
A ceramic compound made with powdered iron oxide.
Provides a good path for magnetic flux and has low enough eddy
current losses that it is useful as a core material for high-frequency
inductors and transformers.
ferrite core
Some high-frequency transformers use ferrite
cores to provide high inductance while keeping losses low. See
also ferrite.
ferromagnetic
Materials like iron, steel, nickel, cobalt (and a few
others) that are attracted by magnets.
field
A region in space where a force is felt, hence a force field.
For example, magnetic fields exist around magnets and electric
fields exist around electric charges.
field intensity
The strength of a field.
filter circuit
A circuit that passes certain frequencies while
rejecting all other frequencies.
final condition circuit (dc)
In transient analysis, this refers to a
circuit drawn as it looks after all transients have subsided—that is,
the circuit is in steady state. In such a circuit with dc excitation,
ideal capacitors are replaced by open circuits and ideal inductors by
short circuits. (We consider only dc transients in this book.)
fixed resistor
A resistor for which the resistance is essentially
constant at a given temperature.
flux
A way of representing and visualizing force fields by
drawing lines that show the strength and direction of a field at all
points in space. Commonly used to depict electric or magnetic
fields.
flux density (B)
The number of magnetic flux lines per unit area,
measured in the SI system in tesla (T), where 1 T  1 Wb/m2. See
flux lines.
flux lines
Also called lines of force. A conceptual representation
used with both electric and magnetic fields.
flux linkage
(1) For an iron-core coil of N turns with flux f
passing through it, flux linkage  N f. (2) For an air-core coil, flux
linkage is proportional to its current i. Mathematically, flux linkage 
Li where L is the coil’s self-inductance.
forward biased or forward region
A diode is said to be forward
biased when conventional current is in the direction of the arrow. In
its forward region, a diode has very low resistance and is often
approximated as a short circuit.
four-wire system
A three phase system with a neutral conductor
is a four-wire system. Used in Y-Y connections.
Fourier series
Any periodic waveform having a frequency f can
be written as an infinite series of sinusoidal waveforms having
frequencies f, 2f , 3f , 4 f , …..
free electron
An electron that is weakly bound to its parent atom
and is thus easily broken free. For materials like copper, there are
billions of free electrons per cubic centimeter at room temperature.
Since these electrons can break free and wander from atom to atom,
they form the basis of an electric current.
frequency
The number of times that a cycle repeats itself each
second. Its SI unit is the hertz (Hz)—see hertz.
frequency spectrum
A graph showing the relative amplitudes
(in voltage or power) of the various components of a Fourier series.
fringing
Field lines spread out when passing though a non-
ferromagnetic material such as an air gap. This is called fringing.
fundamental frequency
The frequency f of any periodic waveform.
See Fourier series.
fuse
A circuit protection device that utilizes a metallic link that
melts when current exceeds the fuse rating. This opens the circuit. 
gain
The ratio of output voltage, current, or power to the input.
Power gain for an amplifier is defined as the ratio of ac output
power to ac input power, Ap  Pout/Pin. Gain may also be expressed
in decibels. In the case of power gain, Ap (dB)  10 log Pout/Pin.
galvanometer
An instrument that is used to detect very small
currents.
gauss
The unit of magnetic flux density in the CGS system of
units, an obsolete system. However the word gauss is still seen—
for example, meters used to measure magnetic fields may be called
“gaussmeters.”
giga (G)
A prefix with a value of 109.
ground
(1) A circuit common. (2) An electrical connection to
earth. (3) A short to ground, such as a ground fault.
half-power frequencies
The frequencies at which the output
power will be half of the output power that occurs at resonance.
Hall effect
When a strip of current-carrying semiconductor is
placed in a magnetic field, a small voltage transverse to the current
direction is produced. This voltage is proportional to the magnetic
field strength. This effect is used in gaussmeters to measure
magnetic flux density.
harmonic frequency
Integer multiple of the fundamental
frequency f of any periodic waveform. See Fourier series.
harmonics
See harmonic frequency.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

984
Glossary
Hay bridge
A bridge circuit used to measure the inductance and
series resistance of an inductor having a small series resistance.
henry (H)
The SI unit of inductance, named in honor of Joseph
Henry.
hertz (Hz)
The SI unit of frequency, named in honor of Heinrich
Hertz. 1 Hz equals 1 cycle per second.
high-pass filter
A circuit that readily permits frequencies above
the cutoff frequency to pass from the input to the output of the
circuit, while attenuating frequencies below the cutoff frequency.
See cutoff frequency.
horsepower
Horsepower (hp) is a non-SI unit for measuring
power, still used in everyday life but largely superseded in scientific
disciplines. One hp  746 watts.
hysteresis loop
The path traced when you plot magnetic flux
density versus magnetizing force H for ferromagnetic material. The
path forms a loop rather than a straight line because the material
saturates when H becomes large—recall the saturation of the
B-H curve.
hysteresis loss
(1) Power loss in a ferromagnetic material caused
by the reversal of magnetic domains in a time varying magnetic
field. (2) Power loss in a ferromagnetic material such as a
transformer core caused by the reversal of magnetic domains. The
combination of hysteresis and eddy current loss in a transformer is
called core loss—see core loss.
ideal current source
A current source having an infinite shunt
(parallel) impedance. An ideal current source is able to provide the
same current to all loads (except an open circuit). The voltage
across the current source is determined by the value of the load
impedance.
ideal transformer
A transformer having no losses and characterized
by its turns ratio a  Np /Ns. For voltage, Ep/Es  a, while for current
Ip/Is  1/a.
ideal voltage source
A voltage source having zero series
impedance. An ideal voltage source is able to provide the same
voltage across all loads (except a short circuit). The current through
the voltage source is determined by the connected circuit.
impedance (Z)
Total opposition that a circuit element presents to
sinusoidal ac in the phasor domain. Z V/I ohms, where V and I are
voltage and current phasors, respectively. Impedance is a complex
quantity with magnitude and angle. (Although it is a complex number,
impedance is not a phasor.)
impedance diagram
A two-dimensional diagram on the complex
plane that is used to show all circuit impedances, typically for
series ac circuits.
impedance matching
This is the practice of matching the
impedance of a load to the Thévenin impedance of the source so as to
achieve maximum power transfer. For complex source impedances,
make the load impedance equal to the conjugate of the source
impedance. Transformers are sometimes used to achieve impedance
matching.
in phase
If two phasors representing waveforms coincide, their
corresponding waves are in phase. See also phase shift.
independent sources
Voltage or current sources that have values
that are not dependent upon any outside factors.
induced voltage
Voltage produced by changing magnetic flux
linkages. The self-induced voltage of a coil is the voltage created by
its own changing current—thus, self-voltage vL  L di/dt where L
is self-inductance. See also mutually induced voltage and self-
inductance.
inductance (L)
That property of a coil (or other current-carrying
conductor) that opposes a change in current. The SI unit of
inductance is the henry.
inductive impedance
Any circuit having a net (or total)
impedance that is inductive at the frequency of operation.
inductive kick
When current through an inductor is switched off,
a voltage spike (the inductive kick) is induced by its rapidly falling
current. This voltage can be very large, hundreds or even thousands
of volts, depending on how large the inductance is and how fast the
current changes.
inductive reactance (XL)
The opposition that inductance presents to
sinusoidal ac current, denoted by XL where XL  VL/IL  qL [ohms].
inductive transients
Also called RL transients. These are transients
that occur when a circuit containing inductance is disturbed.
Mathematically, RL transients in dc circuits are always of the form
of eRt/L or (1  eRt/L).
inductor
A circuit element designed to possess inductance, for
example, a coil of wire wound to increase its inductance.
inferred absolute temperature
Is also called the temperature
intercept of a material and is the temperature at which the linear
portion of the resistance vs. temperature crosses the temperature axis.
initial condition
See continuity of voltage and initial condition
circuit.
initial condition circuit
In transient analysis, this refers to a
circuit drawn as it looks immediately after a disturbance, for
example, at t  0, with capacitors and inductors replaced by their
t  0 equivalents. In such a circuit, uncharged capacitors are
replaced by short circuits, charged capacitors by voltage sources
with value V0, noncurrent-carrying inductors by open circuits, and
current-carrying inductors by current sources of value I0.
instantaneous power
The product of instantaneous voltage and
instantaneous current, given by p  vi watts. See also instantaneous
value.
instantaneous value
The value of a quantity (such as voltage,
current, or power) at some instant of time. Thus, voltages that vary
with time may be referred to as instantaneous voltages.
insulator
A material such as glass, rubber, or Mylar that does not
conduct electricity.
integrator circuit
A circuit that performs the mathematical
operation of integration—that is, a circuit whose output is the
integral of its input. (The integrator circuits of Chapter 11 are only
approximate integrators.)
internal impedance
The impedance that exists internally in a
device such as a voltage source.
ion
An atom that has become charged. If it has an excess of
electrons, it is a negative ion, while if it has a deficiency, it is a
positive ion.
iron-core coil
Iron core generally denotes a core of any
ferromagnetic material. With iron cores, magnetic flux is not
proportional to current. A coil that uses a ferromagnetic core to
achieve high inductance is called an iron core coil.
iron-core transformer
Iron core generally denotes a core of any
ferromagnetic material. A transformer that uses a ferromagnetic
core to achieve tight coupling between windings is called an iron-
core transformer.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Glossary
985
I-V plot
Denotes a graph of current versus voltage for a circuit
element. For a pure resistance, it is a straight line.
joule (J)
The SI unit of energy, equal to 1 newton-meter.
kick test
Used to determine corresponding terminals of a
transformer. A momentary dc is applied to one winding, and the
direction of deflection of a voltmeter on the other windings
establishes corresponding terminals. See dot convention.
kilo (k)
A prefix with the value of 103.
kilowatt-hour (kWh)
A unit of energy equal to 1000 times 1
watt-hour and commonly used by electrical utilities. It is not an
SI unit.
Kirchhoff’s current law
An experimental law that states that the
sum of the currents entering a junction is equal to the sum leaving. 
Kirchhoff’s voltage law
An experimental law that states that the
algebraic sum of voltages around a closed path in a circuit is zero.
lag
For two phasors representing waveforms, the waveform
corresponding to the lagging phasor is the lagging waveform. See
also phase shift.
lagging load
A load in which current lags voltage (e.g., an
inductive load). Applies to ac circuits only.
lagging power factor
The power factor of an ac circuit in which
the current lags the voltage—namely, an inductive circuit.
laser
A light source that emits very intense monochromatic
(single color) coherent (in phase) light. The term is an acronym for
Light Amplification through Stimulated Emission of Radiation.
lead
For two phasors representing waveforms, the waveform
corresponding to the leading phasor is the leading waveform. See
also phase shift.
leading load
A load in which current leads voltage (e.g., a
capacitive load). Applies to ac circuits only.
leading power factor
The power factor of an ac circuit in which
the current leads the voltage—namely, a capacitive circuit.
leakage current
In dielectrics, the very small current that passes
through the dielectric of a capacitor.
leakage flux
(1) In a magnetic circuit, the small amount of flux
that passes through air instead of through the ferromagnetic
material. (2) For an iron-core transformer, the flux (usually very
small) produced by one coil that does not link the other but instead,
leaks through the air.
Lenz’s law
An experimental law that states that the polarity of
induced voltage is such as to oppose the cause producing it.
line conductor/phase conductor
Line conductors are also called
phase conductors. In a three-phase  system, these are the wires
that connect the source to the load. In a three-phase Y-Y system,
you also have three line conductors, but you may also have a fourth
(neutral) conductor. When you see an overhead transmission line,
the three large wires are line conductors and the fourth, usually
much smaller wire is the neutral.
line current
In a three-phase system, line current refers to the
currents in the lines. For a Y-load (or Y-generator), line current is
the same as phase current. For a delta load, line current Ia  3 Iab
∠30° where Iab is phase current.
line voltage/line-to-line voltage
In a three-phase system, line
voltage refers to the voltage from line to line. For a -load, line
voltage is the same as phase voltage. For a Y-load, line voltage 
Vab  3 Van ∠30°, where Van is phase voltage.
linear bilateral network
Any network that has a linear voltage-
current characteristic and demonstrates the same characteristics
regardless of the direction of current through the network.
linear circuit
A circuit in which relationships are proportional.
In a linear circuit, current is proportional to voltage.
linear resistance
Resistance whose I-V plot is a straight line—
that is, its resistance is constant regardless of voltage or current.
load
(1) The device that is being driven by a circuit. Thus, the
lamp in a flashlight is the load. (2) The current drawn by a load.
load phase impedances
For a Y-load, refers to load impedance
from line to neutral, for example, Zan. For a -load, refers to load
impedance from line to line, for example, Zab.
loaded output
Any circuit having output terminals across which
a load is connected. The circuit could be as simple as a voltage
source or as complex as an amplifier.
loading effect
The degree to which the connection of a load
affects a circuit’s operation.
loading effect (ammeter)
When an ammeter is placed into a
circuit, it places a very small resistance in series with the circuit
under test. The degree to which this series resistance affects the
circuit operation is called the ammeter loading effect.
loading effect (voltmeter)
When a voltmeter is placed into a
circuit, it places a very large resistance in parallel with the circuit
under test. The degree to which this parallel resistance affects the
circuit operation is called the voltmeter loading effect.
loosely coupled
Coupled circuits with a low coefficient of
coupling. See coupled circuit and coefficient of coupling.
low-pass filter
A circuit that permits frequencies below the
cutoff frequency to pass through from the input to the output of the
circuit, while attenuating frequencies above the cutoff frequency.
See cutoff frequency.
magnetic circuit
A ferromagnetic structure containing one or
more loops of ferromagnetic material that guide and shape
magnetic fields for useful purposes. Magnetic circuits are a key part
of motors, generators, recording heads, and transformers.
magnetic field
A region in space where a magnetic force is felt,
hence, a magnetic force field.
magnetic field intensity (H)
Also called magnetizing force. It is
the mmf per unit length of a magnetic circuit.
magnetomotive force (mmf)
The flux producing ability of a
coil. In the SI system, the mmf of a coil of N turns with current I is
NI ampere-turns.
maximum power transfer theorem
For dc circuits, a load
resistance will receive maximum power from a circuit when the
resistance of the load is exactly equal to the Thévenin (or Norton)
resistance looking back at the circuit.
maxwell (Mx)
The CGS unit of magnetic flux .
Maxwell bridge
A bridge circuit is used to determine the
inductance and series resistance of an inductor having a relatively
large series resistance (in comparison to XL  qL).
mega (M)
A prefix with the value of 106.
mesh analysis
Circuit analysis that uses determinants to determine
the current in each loop (or mesh) of a circuit.
meter loading effect
The degree to which the meter affects a
circuit’s operation since all meters use some energy from the circuit
under test, resulting in measurement error.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

986
Glossary
micro ()
A prefix with the value of 106.
milli (m)
A prefix with the value of 103.
Millman’s theorem
Any circuit consisting of a number of
parallel branches with each branch having a voltage source and a
series resistor can be simplified as a single equivalent voltage
source in series with a resistor.
mmf (magnetomotive force)
A measure of the flux producing
ability of a current-carrying coil. mmf    NI ampere-turns.
molded carbon composition resistor
A fixed resistor having a
core composed of carbon mixed with an insulating filler.
multimeter
A multifunction test meter used to measure a variety
of electrical quantities such as voltage, current, and resistance. Its
function is selected by a switch. See also DMM.
Multisim
Electronic schematic capture and circuit simulation
software, widely used for circuit analysis and design. It is a
trademark of the National Instruments Corporation.
mutual conductance
Conductance that occurs between two
nodes when applying nodal analysis.
mutual inductance (M)
The inductance between circuits (such
as coils) measured in henries. The voltage induced in one circuit by
changing current in another circuit is equal to M times the rate of
change of current in the first circuit—see mutually induced voltage.
mutual resistance
Resistance that occurs in a branch that is
common to two loops when applying mesh analysis.
mutually induced voltage
When the changing magnetic flux
created by current in a coil induces voltage in a nearby coil, this
voltage is referred to as mutually induced voltage. For example, the
mutually induced voltage in coil 2 due to changing current in coil 1
is given by v21  Mdi1/dt where M is the mutual inductance.
nano (n)
A prefix with the value of 109.
negative temperature coefficient
See temperature coefficient.
neutral
(1) The common junction point in a three-phase Y-
generator (or Y-load) is called its neutral point. Neutral points are
often grounded to earth for safety reasons. (2) The wire joining the
neutral point of a generator to the neutral point of a load is referred to
as the neutral or neutral conductor. Under balanced conditions, the
current in the neutral is zero.
neutron
An atomic particle with no charge. See atom.
newton
The SI unit of force. It is the force required to accelerate
a mass of 1 kg at the rate of 1 meter per second per second. In more
common terms, it is equal to about 0.2248 pounds of force.
nodal analysis
Circuit analysis that uses determinants to determine
the voltage of each node (relative to a given reference point) of a circuit.
node
A junction where two or more components connect in an
electric circuit.
nonlinear resistance
See dynamic resistance.
non-ohmic device
Any device for which the current-voltage
relation is not linear. See ohmic device.
Norton’s theorem
Any linear bilateral network may be reduced
to a simplified two-terminal circuit consisting of a single current
source and a single shunt resistor.
notch filter
A circuit that removes a narrow range of signals
between the input and output of a circuit.
octave
As used in circuit theory, an octave is a doubling (or
halving) of frequency—for example, from 1 kHz to 2 kHz.
ohm ()
The SI unit of resistance. May be measured using an
ohmmeter. Also used as the unit for reactance and impedance.
ohmic
Refers to a resistive device whose I-V characteristic (plot)
is a straight line.
ohmic device
Any device that has a linear current-voltage
relation. For example, if current through the device doubles, this
implies that voltage across the device will also double.
ohmmeter
A test instrument for measuring resistance, most
commonly implemented as part of a DMM.
Ohm’s law
I  E/R. This is the basic relationship between
current and voltage for resistance and was determined experimentally
by Ohm, circa 1827.
open circuit
A discontinuous circuit, hence, one that does not
provide a continuous (complete) path for current.
open-circuit test
See transformer tests.
oscilloscope
Also called a scope. A test and measurement
instrument that electronically displays voltage waveforms on a
screen. The screen is ruled with a scaled grid to permit you to
visually study waveform characteristics. However, to make
measurements, you should use the scope’s cursors or its automatic
measurement capabilities as these yield better accuracy than
scaling values from the grid. Most modern scopes are digital.
parallel
Elements or branches are said to be in a parallel
connection when they have exactly two nodes in common. The
voltage across all parallel elements or branches is exactly the same.
parallel circuit
Any circuit or branch having exactly two nodes
in common.
parallel resonanant circuit
A circuit in which the inductor is in
parallel with the capacitor. The voltage across the circuit will be
maximum at the resonant frequency.
peak value
The maximum instantaneous value of a waveform.
peak-to-peak
The magnitude of the difference between a
waveform’s peak and trough values.
period (T)
The time T for a waveform to go through one cycle.
T  1/f where f is frequency in Hz.
periodic
Repeating at regular intervals.
periodic waveform
A time varying waveform that repeats
itself at regular intervals, as for example, the 60 Hz voltage at
your wall outlet is a sine wave that repeats its cycle 60 times per
second.
permeability
A measure of how easy it is to magnetize a
material, represented by the Greek letter μ. B  μH, where B is the
resulting flux density and H is the magnetizing force that creates
the flux. For ferromagnetic materials, μ is nonlinear and B-H curves
obtained by test are usually required to relate B to H.
permittivity ()
A measure of how easily a dielectric material
permits the establishment of an electric field. See also relative
permittivity and electric constant.
phase current
Current in the phase of a three-phase load or
generator. See also line current.
phase difference
See phase shift.
phase sequence
Refers to the order in which three-phase voltages
reach their respective peak values. Positive phase sequence is ABC,
while negative phase sequence is ACB. Electric power systems are
based on the ABC sequence.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Glossary
987
phase shift
(1) The angular difference between two waveforms
of the same frequency—that is, the angular difference by which one
waveform leads or lags another, hence the relative displacement
between time varying waveforms. (2) Mathematically, consider a
voltage v  Vm sin (qt 	 v) relative to a reference vref  Vref sin qt.
If v  0o, the waveforms are in phase; for the case of v, v leads;
for the case v, v lags.
phase voltage
For a Y-load or generator, refers to the line to
neutral voltage. For a  load (or generator), phase voltage is the
same as line voltage. See also line voltage.
phasor
A way of representing the magnitude and angle of a sine
wave by a complex number. The magnitude of the phasor
represents the rms value of the ac quantity, and its angle represents
the waveform’s phase.
phasor domain
Quantities expressed as phasors are said to be in
the phasor domain.
photocell or photoconductive cell
A two-terminal transducer
whose resistance is determined by the amount of light falling on
the cell.
pico (p)
A prefix with the value of 1012.
pictorial diagram
A pictorial diagram shows an image of a
circuit component as it actually looks physically.
point source
A voltage source that has only one subscript
indicates that this is the potential at that point with respect to the
circuit reference (or ground) point. For example, Va implies that
this is the voltage at point a with respect to ground in the circuit.
polar form
See complex number.
polarity
Polarity can be defined with reference to a battery. For a
battery, one terminal is always positive with respect to the other,
and we define this terminal as having a positive polarity and mark
it with a plus () sign. We then define the other terminal as having
a negative polarity and mark it with a minus () sign. This gives us
our interpretation of polarity. For voltage drops across components,
we use the same ,  marking scheme.
polarized
When voltage is applied to a capacitor, electron orbits
in dielectrics become distorted, making atoms appear to have 
and  ends. This is referred to as polarization. When voltage is
removed, the orbits relax, that is, return to their originally shaped
orbits. If the relaxation takes too long, a condition referred to as
dielectric absorption remains.
positive temperature coefficient
See temperature coefficient.
potential difference
This is an alternate name for voltage difference.
potentiometer
A three-terminal resistor consisting of a fixed
resistance between two end terminals and a third terminal that is
connected to a movable wiper arm. When the end terminals are
connected to a voltage source, the voltage between the wiper and
either of the other terminals is adjustable.
power (P, p)
(1) The rate of doing work, with units of watts, where
1 watt equals 1 joule per second. Also called real or active power.
(2) In a purely resistive circuit, power to a resistor is given by P 
VI  I 2R  V 2/R watts. (3) In a circuit with time varying voltage
and current, the instantaneous value of power is given by p  vi.
The average value of this is P. P may be measured using a
wattmeter.
power factor
The ratio of active power P to apparent power S.
Maximum power factor is one (also referred to as unity). Note that
Fp  cos v where v is the angle between voltage and current.
power factor correction
The larger the power factor, the more
of the source power that is transferred to the load. Since most prac-
tical power system loads are inductive, power factor correction
generally consists of adding capacitors in parallel to bring load
power factor closer to unity.
power gain
The ratio of output power to input power, usually for
an amplifier or attenuator.
power measurement (three phase)
Wattmeters are used to mea-
sure power in three-phase systems. Many power measurement
instruments in use today are multifunction power/energy meters
that combine many functions in one. With these, you can measure
total power, power to individual phases, reactive power, apparent
power, and power factor. In older setups, two wattmeters were used
to measure power using the “two-wattmeter method.”
power of ten notation
A notation that expresses numbers as a
multiple of a power of 10. Thus, the number 3251 may be written
as the power of ten number 3.251  103.
power triangle
A useful computational and visualization tool.
The relationship between power P, reactive power Q, and apparent
power S, given by S2  P2  Q2, is shown on the power triangle
with S the hypotenuse and P and Q its two sides.
prefixes
A prefix used to denote a power of ten—for example,
the prefix name for 103 is kilo.
primary
The winding of a transformer to which we connect the
source.
primary battery
See battery.
proton
A positively charged atomic particle. See atom.
PSpice
Electronic schematic capture and circuit simulation
software, widely used for circuit analysis and design. It is a
trademark of Cadence Design Systems, Inc.
pulse
A short duration voltage or current that abruptly changes
from one value to another, then back again.
pulse repetition rate (PRR)
The number of pulses per second.
Also called pulse repetition frequency.
pulse train
A repetitive stream of pulses.
pulse width
The duration of a pulse. For nonideal pulses, it is
measured at the 50% amplitude point.
quality factor (Q)
(1) A figure of merit. Q for a coil is the ratio of
its reactive power to its real power. The higher the Q, the more
closely the coil approaches the ideal. (2) A measure of the
selectivity of a resonant circuit. The higher the Q, the narrower the
bandwidth.
radian frequency (v)
See angular frequency.
reactance (X)
The opposition that a reactive element (capacitance
or inductance) presents to sinusoidal ac, measured in ohms.
reactive power
In an ac system that contains a reactive element L
or C, energy gets stored, then released from the magnetic field of L
or the electric field of C back into the system. This power is termed
reactive power. Since reactive power shuttles back and forth in a
system, it contributes nothing to the average flow of power from the
source to the load. Symbol is Q. For inductance, QL  VLIL 
I2XL. For capacitance, QC  VCIC  I2XC. Unit is the VAR.
reactor
Another name for an inductor.
real power
Another name for active power. See active power.
reciprocity theorem
A voltage source causing a current I in any
branch of a circuit may be removed from the original location and
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

988
Glossary
placed into that branch having the current I. The voltage source in
the new location will produce a current in the original source loca-
tion that is exactly equal to the originally calculated current, I.
rectangular form
See complex number.
rectifier
A circuit, generally consisting of a least one diode, which
permits current in only one direction.
reflected impedance
Impedance as “seen” through the windings
of a tightly coupled transformer. It has a value of a2ZL where a is
the turns ratio. Note that an inductive load still looks inductive
from the primary, and a capacitive load looks capacitive.
relative maximum power
In those circuits where it is not possible
to adjust the value of the reactive component contained in a load, 
the relative maximum power occurs when 
.
relative permittivity
The relative permittivity of a material is its
actual permittivity relative to that of a vacuum. For example, the
relative permittivity of Mylar is 3. See also permittivity.
relay
A switching device that is opened or closed by an electri-
cal signal. May be electromechanical or electronic.
reluctance ()
The opposition of a magnetic circuit to the estab-
lishment of flux.
residual magnetism
Magnetism remaining in ferromagnetic mate-
rial after its magnetizing current has been turned off.
resistance (R)
(1) The opposition to current presented by a resis-
tor—see Ohm’s law. Current through resistance results in a power
loss. (2) The definition of resistance as R  V/I is inadequate for ac
circuits. For ac circuits, we define resistance in terms of power dis-
sipation as R  P/I2 ohms. See effective resistance.
resistive circuit
Any ac circuit having a net impedance that has
only a real (resistive) component at the frequency of operation.
resistivity, r
A physical property of a material that is used to cal-
culate the resistance of a sample. In the SI system, r is normally
measured at 20° C and is given in W  m. Resistivity can also be
measured in CM  W/ft.
resistor
A circuit component designed to possess resistance.
resonance, resonant frequency
The frequency at which the output
power of an L-R-C circuit is at a maximum. 
.
resonant circuit
In its simplest form, a resonant circuit consists
of an inductor and capacitor and either a voltage or current source.
At some frequency, called the resonant frequency, the output volt-
age or current will be at a maximum.
reverse biased or reverse region
A diode is said to be reverse
biased when conventional current is opposite to the direction of the
arrow. In its reverse region, a diode has very high resistance and is
often approximated as an open circuit.
rheostat
A variable resistor connected so that current through the
circuit is controlled by the position of the wiper.
rise time (tr)
The time that it takes for a pulse or or other abruptly
changing signal to change from its 10% value to its 90% value.
rms value
The root mean square value of a time varying wave-
form. See also effective value.
saturation
The condition of a ferromagnetic material where it is
fully magnetized. At saturation, if the magnetizing force (current in
a coil for example) is increased, no significant increase in flux
results.
f
LC

1
2π
R
R
X
X
L 


Th
Th
2
2
(
)
schematic capture
The process of drawing a schematic diagram on
a computer screen using schematic editor software such as Multisim.
schematic diagram
A circuit diagram that uses symbols to rep-
resent physical circuit components.
Schering bridge
A bridge circuit used to determine the value of
an unknown capacitance.
secondary battery
See battery.
secondary winding
The output winding of a transformer.
selectivity
The ability of a filter circuit to pass a particular fre-
quency, while rejecting all other frequency components.
selectivity curve
A graph of power as a function of frequency for
a resonant circuit. The curve will generally show the half-power
frequencies and the bandwidth.
self-induced voltage
See induced voltage.
self-inductance (L)
Self-inductance of a coil is the property of a
coil that causes it to oppose change in its own current. Self-inductance
is denoted by the symbol L. See also induced voltage and flux linkage.
semiconductor
A material such as silicon from which transis-
tors, diodes, and the like, are made.
series circuit
A closed loop of elements where two elements have
no more than one common terminal. In a series circuit, there is only
one current path, and all series elements have the same current.
series connection
Any branch or circuit that is connected so that
the components are in series.
series resonant circuit
A circuit in which the inductor is in
series with the capacitor. The current through the circuit will be
maximum at the resonant frequency.
series-parallel connection
A circuit that consists of components
in series and in parallel.
short circuit
A short circuit occurs when two terminals of an ele-
ment or branch are connected by a low-resistance conductor. When
a short circuit occurs, very large currents may result in sparks or a
fire, particularly when the circuit is not protected by a fuse or cir-
cuit breaker.
short-circuit test
See transformer tests.
SI system
The international system of units used in science and
engineering. It is an extended metric system and includes the standard
units for length, mass, and time (e.g., meters, kilograms, and sec-
onds), plus the electrical units (e.g., volts, amperes, ohms, and so on).
siemens (S)
A unit of measure for conductance, admittance, and
susceptance. The siemens is the reciprocal of ohm.
sine wave
A periodic waveform that is described by the trigono-
metric sine function. It is the principal waveform used in ac systems.
single-phase equivalent
A representation used to greatly sim-
plify the analysis of a balanced three-phase system by considering
only one of its phases. It is the standard method used in practice for
manually analyzing three-phase systems.
skin effect
At high frequencies, the tendency of current to travel
in a thin layer near the surface of a conductor. The attendant reduc-
tion in conduction area results in an increase in resistance.
spectrum analyzer
An instrument that displays the amplitude of
a signal as the function of frequency.
square mil (sq. mil)
A unit of measurement used to specify the
cross-sectional area of a solid conductor. One square mil is defined
as the area contained in a square having sides of length 1 mil. When
expressed in terms of circular mils, we have 1 sq. mil  4/π CM.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Glossary
989
square wave
A rectangular waveform whose high time and low
time durations are the same.
stacking factor
In a laminated core, the ratio of net ferromagnetic
cross-sectional area to the physical cross-sectional area.
steady state
The condition of operation of a circuit after all tran-
sients have subsided.
step
An abrupt change in voltage or current, as for example, when
a switch is closed to connect a battery to a resistor.
step up/step down
A step-up transformer is one in which the
secondary voltage is larger than the primary. A step-down trans-
former is the converse. For a step up, a < 1. For a step down, a > 1.
a  1 is unity turns ratio. See turns ratio.
stray (parasitic) capacitance
The (usually unwanted) capaci-
tance that exists between conductive parts of an electronic circuit
such as that between traces on a printed circuit board or between
coil turns on an inductor. In high-speed circuits, this capacitance
can cause degradation of signals.
stray inductance
Because all current-carrying conductors create
small magnetic fields, they all have small amounts of inductance.
This inductance is referred to as stray inductance.
substitution theorem
Any branch within a circuit may be
replaced by an equivalent branch, provided the replacement branch
has the same current through it and voltage across it as the original
branch.
supercapacitor
Also called ultracapacitors or double-layer
capacitors, these devices have enormously large capacitances,
reaching up into the hundreds of farads (compared to a few thou-
sand 
F for the largest electrolytic capacitors), with packages no
larger than ordinary capacitors. However, their working voltage is
quite low.
superconductor
A conductor that has no internal resistance.
Current will continue unimpeded through a superconductor even
though there is no externally applied voltage or current source.
superposition theorem
The total current through or voltage
across a resistor or branch may be determined by summing the
effects due to each independent source.
surface mount device (SMD)
A circuit component that is
mounted directly onto the surface of a printed circuit board. SMDs
(which have either very short leads or no leads at all) mount
directly on solder pads, and assembly is generally done by auto-
mated machine. SMD components are usually smaller than tradi-
tional components.
susceptance
The reciprocal of reactance. Unit is the siemens.
tank circuit
A circuit consisting of an inductor and capacitor
connected in parallel. Such an L-C circuit is used in oscillators and
receivers to provide maximum signal at the resonant frequency.
See selectivity.
temperature coefficient
The rate at which the properties of a
component change with temperature. (1) A resistor has a positive
temperature coefficient if its resistance increases with an
increase in temperature. Conversely, a negative temperature
coefficient means that resistance decreases as temperature is
increased. (2) A capacitor has a positive temperature coefficient
if its capacitance increases with an increase in temperature and a
negative coefficient if its capacitance decreases. The change in
capacitance is due to changes in the characteristics of its dielec-
tric with temperature.
temperature intercept
Is also called the inferred absolute temper-
ature of a material and is the temperature at which the linear portion
of the resistance versus temperature crosses the temperature axis.
terminal voltage
The voltage that appears across the terminals
of a voltage source. If a load is connected across a voltage source,
the terminal voltage is dependent on both the internal resistance of
the voltage source and the load resistance.
tesla (T)
The SI unit of magnetic flux density. One tesla  one
Wb/m2.
thermistor
A two-terminal transducer in which resistance
changes significantly with changes in temperature.
Thévenin’s theorem
Any linear bilateral network may be
reduced to a simplified two-terminal circuit consisting of a single
voltage source in series with a single resistor.
three-wire Y-Y system
A three-phase configuration that uses
three phase conductors. All  systems are three-wire, but Y sys-
tems are usually four-wire.
three-phase generators (3)
Three-phase generators have three
sets of windings that produce balanced voltages—that is, voltages
that are equal in magnitude and phase displaced from each other
by 120 degrees.
three-phase system
This is the basis of the modern ac electrical
utility system. Voltage is generated and transmitted as three phase,
but is usually distributed as single phase to residential and business
customers. Some industries require three phase for running large
motors. See also three-phase generators.
tightly coupled
Coupled circuits with a high coefficient of cou-
pling. See coupled circuit and coefficient of coupling.
time constant
A measure of how fast a transient changes. For
example, capacitor voltage (and inductor current) change by 63.2%
in the first time constant, and if t 1 ms, this means the change has
occurred in 1 ms. In contrast, if t  1s, the change would take
1 second to accomplish, a 1000-fold difference. For an RC circuit,
t  RC seconds. For an RL circuit, t  L/R seconds. See also tran-
sient duration.
time domain
Quantities expressed as functions of time are said
to be in the time domain.
total conductance
When several resistors are connected in par-
allel, the total conductance is given as GT  G1  G2  G3  … .
total equivalent resistance
Any combination of series and par-
allel resistors can be replaced with a single equivalent resistance,
often designated as RT.
transducer
Any device or component that causes an electrical
change due to a physical change.
transfer function
A vector quantity that is expressed as the ratio
of output voltage to input voltage.
transformer
A device with two or more coils in which energy is
transferred from one winding to the other by electromagnetic action—
that is, a coupled circuit. Transformers generally provide energy trans-
fer with no direct conductive connection between the two sides.
transformer tests
Refers to the open-circuit test and the short-
circuit test. These are a pair of standardized tests used to determine the
parameters of a transformer. Generally used with power transformers.
transient
A temporary or transitional voltage or current—it is
here, then it is gone!
transient duration
The length of time a transient lasts. For
practical purposes, transients are considered to last five time constants.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

990
Glossary
transistor
A three-terminal active device that results in signal
amplification.
transistor bias
The connection of a dc source(s) that enables a
transistor to operate as an amplifier.
transistor model
An electric circuit that simulates the operation
of a transistor amplifier.
trough value
A minimum point in a waveform. For example, for
a sine wave, the point where it reaches its most negative value.
turns ratio (a)
Also called transformation ratio. The ratio of pri-
mary turns to secondary turns; a  Np/Ns. (Some authors use the
inverse definition.)
two-wattmeter method
A connection whereby two wattmeters
may be used to measure total power to a three-wire, three-phase
(balanced or unbalanced) load.
unbalanced bridge
When the voltage between midpoints on the
arms of a bridge circuit is not zero. In such cases, there will be a
current through any component or instrument connected between
these nodes.
unbalanced load
A load in which the impedances of each phase
are not identical. This results in unbalanced currents and for Y-
loads, unbalanced phase voltages at the load.
unbalanced system
In the context of this book, refers to a
system with an unbalanced load, since, under normal operating
conditions, the generator and lines will always be balanced. (The
only time that generators or lines become unbalanced in practice is
when a fault occurs such as a line being broken by a falling tree.)
universal bias
The most common trasnsistor bias circuit. See
transistor bias.
universal time constant curve
A graphical plot showing percent
transient rise and fall times versus time constants. May be used to
solve problems involving exponential functions, although, with
modern calculators, it is recommended that you use your calcula-
tor instead because it yields better accuracy.
unloaded output
See loaded output.
valence electrons and valence shells
The outermost (last occu-
pied) shell of an atom is called its valence shell, and electrons in
this shell are called valence electrons.
VAR (volt-amps reactive)
The SI unit of reactive power. See
reactive power.
varactor diode (or varicap, epicap, and tuning diode)
A diode
that behaves as a voltage-variable capacitor.
varistor
A two-terminal device that has very high resistance
when the voltage applied to the device is below the breakdown
value. When the applied voltage is increased beyond the break-
down value, the resistance drops to almost zero, allowing a large
current through the varistor.
volt (V)
The unit of voltage in the SI system.
voltage (V, v, E, e)
Potential difference created when charges
are separated, as for example by chemical means in a battery. If 
1 joule of work is required to move a charge of 1 coulomb from
one point to another, the potential difference between the points is
1 volt.
voltage divider rule
The voltage dropped across any resistor that
is part of a group of series resistors is given as Vx  (Rx/RT)E.
voltage gain
The ratio of output voltage to input voltage, usually
for an amplifier or attenuator.
voltage ratio
In an iron-core transformer, Vp/Vs  Np/Ns  a. See
turns ratio.
voltage reference convention
The practice of placing the  sign
for the voltage drop across a component at the tail of the current
reference arrow.
voltage regulator
A device that maintains constant output voltage
to a load regardless of the input voltage or the amount of output current.
voltage source
A practical voltage source can be modelled as an
ideal voltage source in series with an internal impedance.
voltage subscripts
Voltage subscripts are used to indicate the
voltage at one point in a circuit with respect to a second point. For
example, Vab implies that this is the voltage at point a with respect
to point b in the circuit.
volt-ampere (VA)
The SI unit of apparent power. See apparent
power.
watt (W)
The SI unit of active power. Power is the rate at which
work is done; 1 watt equals 1 joule/s.
watthour (Wh)
A unit of energy, equal to 1 watt times 1 hour. 
One Wh  3600 joules. Watthour is not an SI unit.
wattmeter
An instrument for measuring power P, normally used
in ac circuits.
waveform
The variation versus time of a time varying signal,
hence, the shape of the signal.
weber (Wb)
The SI unit of magnetic flux.
work (W)
The product of force times distance, measured in
joules in the SI system, where 1 joule equals 1 newton-meter.
working voltage
Term used with capacitors. Represents the
maximum dc voltage that you should apply for continuous operation
at rated temperature.
wye load
A configuration of circuit components connected in the
shape of a Y. Sometimes called a star or T load.
wye-delta conversions
The mathematical method of converting
a wye load into an equivalent delta load.
Y- system
A three-phase system with a Y generator and a  load.
This is a three-wire system.
Y-Y system
A three-phase system with a Y generator and a Y
load. In theory, this may be a three-wire system, but in practice, it
is usually a four-wire system.
zener diode
A diode that normally operates in its reverse region
and is used to maintain a constant output voltage.
zero-impedance conductor
A hypothetical conductor of zero
impedance needed to create the single-phase equivalent of a bal-
anced three-phase system.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
991
Absolute maximum power, 721, 722
ac. See Alternating current
ac adapter, 44
ac analysis. See ac circuit analysis
ac circuits. See also ac foundation concepts; ac parallel circuits; 
ac series circuits; Power in ac circuits
applications, 635–638, 653–654
dc circuits and, 128
in-process learning checks, 609, 618, 626, 634, 638, 655
Kirchhoff’s current law, current divider rule, and, 624–626, 650–651
Kirchhoff’s voltage law, voltage divider rule, and, 616–618,
647–648
Ohm’s law for, 604–610, 644–645
problems, 644–655
ac circuit analysis
calculators for, 540–542
complex numbers in, 542–548, 564–566
overview, 536
ac circuit analysis methods, for complex circuits and networks
bridge networks, 677–682, 691–692
circuit analysis using computers, 682–685, 693
delta-to-wye and wye-to-delta conversions, 674–677, 690–691
dependent sources, 658–659, 686–687
in-process learning checks, 663, 668, 674, 677, 693
mesh (loop) analysis, 663–668, 688–689
nodal analysis, 668–674, 689–690
overview, 656–657
problems, 686–693
source conversion, 660–663, 687–688
ac circuit analysis using computers, 559–563, 639–643
ac network theorems, 723–728, 735
for complex circuits and networks, 682–685, 693
power in ac circuits, 592–595, 599–600
practice problems, 728
problems, 568–569, 599–600, 654–655, 693, 735
ac current. See also Alternating current; speciﬁc ac topics
as alternating current, 485
overview, 485
sinusoidal, 487
ac foundation concepts
ac fundamentals, 484–533
overview, 483
power in ac circuits, 570–600
R, L, and C elements and the impedance concept, 534–569
ac fundamentals
ac voltage and current measurement, 522–524, 531
ac waveforms and average value, 512–516, 529–530
angular and graphic relationships for sine waves, 496–500, 527
circuit analysis using computers, 524–526, 532
effective (rms) values, 517–521, 530–531
frequency, periods, amplitude, and peak value, 492–494,
526–527
generating ac voltages, 487–490, 526
in-process learning checks, 495, 511, 532–533
introduction, 486–487
overview, 484–485
phasors, 504–511, 529
problems, 526–532
rate of change (derivative) of sine wave, 522
voltage and current conventions for ac, 490–492, 526
voltages and currents as functions of time, 500–504, 527–529
ac meters
average responding meters, 522
frequency considerations, 523–524
true rms meters, 522
voltage and current measurements, 522–524
ac network theorems
circuit analysis using computers, 723–728, 735
in-process learning checks, 699, 705, 710, 723, 735
maximum power transfer theorem, 719–723, 734
Norton’s theorem for independent sources, 706–710, 733
overview, 694–695
problems, 729–735
superposition theorem for dependent sources, 700–701, 730–732
superposition theorem for independent sources, 696–699,
729–730
Thévenin’s and Norton’s theorems for dependent sources,
711–719, 733
Thévenin’s theorem for independent sources, 702–706, 732–733
ac parallel circuits. See also ac series-parallel circuits
overview, 619–621
problems, 648–650
three impedances in parallel, 622–623
two impedances in parallel, 621–622
ac power. See also Power in ac circuits
systems and transformers, 842–843
ac resistance, 111. See also Effective resistance
as effective resistance, 590
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

992
Index
ac series circuits
overview, 610–616
problems, 645–647
ac series-parallel circuits
overview, 602–603, 626–630
problems, 651–653
ac sources
overview, 486
symbol, 487
ac voltage. See also Sinusoidal ac voltage
alternating voltage as, 485
ac voltage and current measurement
ac meter connection, 523
meter frequency considerations, 523–524
with multimeters (ac meters), 522–524
with oscilloscopes, 522, 523, 524
overview, 522
problems, 531
ac voltages and currents. See also Ohm’s law, for ac circuits
conventions, 490–492, 526
representation by complex numbers, 542–543
summing, 543–545
symbols and notations for three-phase, 880, 881
ac voltage generation. See also Three-phase voltage generation
electronic function generators, 490
instantaneous value, 489
overview, 487–490, 526
problems, 526
time scales, 489
ac voltage generators. See also Three-phase voltage generators
basic single-phase, 876
ac voltage sources. See ac sources
ac waveforms and average value
of area under curve, 512–514
numerical methods, 514–515
overview, 512
problems, 529–530
sine wave averages, 514
superimposed ac and dc, 516
Active power (P, p) (real power), 571, 573. See also Real power
to balanced wye load, 893
Additive and subtractive voltages, 856–857
Admittance (Y), 619
diagram, 619
Air-core coils, 439
voltages in, 855–856
Air-core inductors, 439–440
Air-core transformers, 831, 832
loosely coupled circuits and, 855–856
overview, 831
voltages in air-core coils, 855–856
Alkaline battery, 40
Alternating current (ac), 38–39, 128, 483. See also ac current;
speciﬁc ac topics
ac current as, 485
overview, 485
superimposed dc and, 516
war of currents between dc and, 486, 830, 876
Alternating voltage. See also Sinusoidal ac voltage
ac voltage as, 485
American Wire Gauge (AWG), 59
Ammeters, 38, 45, 46, 47, 116
loading effects, 148–150, 162
Ampere, 37–38, 290
Ampère, André Marie, 1, 290, 406
Ampere-hour, 41
Ampere’s circuital law, 418–419, 431
Ampere-turns (NI), 415
Ampliﬁer, 783
Amplitude, 494
Angular velocity (), 497–498
relationship between period, frequency and, 500
Apparent power (S), 571, 580
in balanced systems, 894
power triangle relationship between real, reactive and, 581–583, 597
Armstrong, Edwin Howard, 739
Atoms
overview, 29–30
polarized, 344
Atomic theory
conductors, insulators and semiconductors, 31–32
Coulomb’s law, 31
electrical charge, 30–31
free electrons, 31
in-process learning check, 32
ions, 31
overview, 28, 29–30
problems, 49
Attenuator, 783, 792
Autopolarity, 46
Autotransformers, 846–847
Average power
overview, 574
quality factor, reactive power and, 741
Average value
ac waveforms and, 512–516, 529–530
overview, 512
AWG. See American Wire Gauge
B. See Flux density
Back voltage (counter EMF), 438
Balanced bridges, 271
Balanced loads. See also Unbalanced loads
active power to balanced wye load, 893
power to balanced delta load, 895–896
reactive power to balanced wye load, 894
Balanced systems
overview, 875
power in, 893–897, 910–912
problems, 910–912
Band (half-power) frequencies, 746
Band-pass ﬁlters
Bode plot, 811–813
examples, 811–813
overview, 781, 811
practice problems, 813–814, 818–819
problems, 824–825
transfer function, 811–813
Band-reject ﬁlters
notch ﬁlters, 815
overview, 781, 814–815
problems, 825–826
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
993
Bandwidth (BW)
overview, 746
series resonant circuit’s power, selectivity and, 745–751,
773–774
Base, 10
Batteries
capacity, 41
cells in series and parallel, 42
other characteristics, 42
overview, 34, 39
primary and secondary, 39–40
symbol, 36
Battery types and applications
alkaline, 40
lead-acid, 41
lithium, 40
nickel-cadmium, 41
nickel-metal hybrid, 41
overview, 40
Bel, 783
Bell, Alexander Graham, 782, 783
B-H curves, 417
Bilateral networks, 239, 294. See also Linear bilateral 
networks
Bleeder resistor, 337
Block circuit diagrams, 15–16
Bode plots
band-pass ﬁlters, 811–813
examples, 803–804, 809–810
ﬁlters and, 781, 792–813
high-pass ﬁlter circuits, 808–810
low-pass ﬁlter circuits, 801–802
overview, 781, 792
sketching of RL and RC transfer functions, 792–800, 801–802,
808–810
Branch-current analysis
mesh analysis compared to, 252–253
overview, 247–251
problems, 283–284
of simultaneous linear equations, 247–249, 251
useful technique, 248
Branch currents, 209
Branches
overview, 204
parallel, 207
Break (cutoff, critical) frequency, 794
Bridges
balanced, 271
circuit, 211
Hay, 681
Maxwell, 679–680
Schering, 681
unbalanced, 271
Bridge networks, 240, 682
ac, 677–682, 691–692
Hay bridge, 681
Maxwell bridge, 679–680
overview, 270–276, 677–679
problems, 286–287, 691–692
Schering bridge, 681
BW. See Bandwidth
C. See Capacitance
Cables, 59. See also Wires
Calculators
ac circuit analysis using, 540–542
circuit analysis using, 17, 19
mathematics in circuit analysis, and, 956–958, 962–963
solving for resistors in parallel using, 173
solving for simultaneous linear equations using, 249
solving simultaneous equations using, 962–963
Calculus, 355
Capacitance (C). See also Capacitors; RLC circuits
ac energy relationships and, 592
area effect, 338
deﬁnition, 337
dielectric effect, 339
factors affecting, 338–341, 359
farad as unit of, 7, 336, 337
impedance concept and, 558–559
inductance as dual of, 458
overview, 333, 334–335, 337
permittivity, 339–340
spacing effects, 338–339
stray, 390, 446, 447
symbol, 7
Capacitance, and sinusoidal ac
capacitive reactance, 554–556
phase lead in capacitive circuit, 553–554
variation of capacitive reactance with frequency, 556
Capacitive circuits
phase lead in, 553–554
transients in, 365, 366
Capacitive impedance, 611
Capacitive load
capacitive loading, 390
power to, 576–577
Capacitive reactance
overview, 554–556
variation with frequency, 556
Capacitive transients, 364
Capacitors. See also Capacitance
charged, 337
after charging, 337
during charging, 337
energy stored by, 357, 362–363
failures and troubleshooting, 357–358, 363
ohmmeter testing of, 358
Ohm’s law for ac circuits, and, 608–609
overview, 333, 334–335, 336–337
parallel-plate, 336, 339, 342–343
testers, 358
voltage and charge relationship for, 355–357
voltage and current during charging, 354–357, 362
voltage rating, 345
Capacitors and capacitance. See also Dielectrics
electric ﬁelds and, 341–343, 359
examples, 338, 340, 343, 351, 352–353, 356–357
in-process learning checks, 341, 363
overview, 333, 334–335, 336–337
practice problems, 343, 345, 350, 351, 354
problems, 359–363
temperature coefﬁcient and, 346
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

994
Index
Capacitor charging
capacitor with initial voltage, 375–376
overview, 364–365, 366–368
steady state conditions, 367–368
Capacitor charging and discharging
complex circuits, 378–384, 398–400
examples, 368–369, 376, 378–379, 381–384
in-process learning checks, 375, 386, 403
practice problems, 370, 376, 380, 384
problems, 396–402
RC circuits in steady state dc, 383–384
Capacitor charging equations
examples, 371, 372–373, 374
overview, 370–373
practice problems, 372
problems, 397
time constant, 373
transient duration, 373–374
universal time constant curves, 374
Capacitor discharging. See also Capacitor charging 
and discharging
overview, 364–365, 366, 368–369
Capacitor discharging equations
examples, 377
overview, 376–377
problems, 398
Capacitor nonideal effects
dielectric absorption, 345–346
equivalent series resistance, 345
leakage current, 345
problems, 360
temperature coefﬁcient, 346
Capacitors in parallel
formula for resistors in series and, 351
overview, 350–351
problems, 360–362
Capacitors in series
formula for resistors in parallel and, 351
overview, 351–353
problems, 360–362
voltage divider rule for, 353–354
Capacitor types
ceramic, 347
electrolytic, 347–348
ﬁxed, 346–347
mica, 347
overview, 346
plastic ﬁlm, 347
standard values of, 349
supercapacitors, 349–350
surface mount, 348–349
variable, 349
Capacitor with initial voltage
overview, 375–376
problems, 397
transient analysis using Multisim, 391–392
Carrier frequency, 737
Cavendish, Henry, 572
CDR. See Current divider rule
Cells, 34
in series and parallel, 42
solar, 43–44
Thévenin equivalent circuit representation of simple 
battery, 323
Ceramic capacitors, 347
Charge, 30–31. See also Electrical charge
capacitor relationship between voltage and, 355–357
Charged, 337
Chassis ground, 141
Chokes (reactors), 435. See also Inductors
Circuits. See also ac circuits; Capacitive circuits; Coupled circuits;
dc circuits; Delta circuits; Equivalent circuit; Filter circuits;
Inductive circuits; Magnetic circuits; RC circuits; Resonant
circuits; Series circuits; Wye circuits
basic electric, 27
black-box technique, 782–783
bridge, 211
capacitor charging and discharging for complex, 378–384,
398–400
drawing orientations, 93–95
drawing portions, 97
electric, 128
ﬁnal condition, 367
initial condition, 460
open, 77, 97
overview, 1, 3
pi, 265
resistive, 92, 99, 612
schematic diagram symbols, 16–17
short, 76–77, 450
tee, 265
transients in capacitive, 365, 366
transients in inductive, 365, 366
universal bias, 216
voltages and current buildup transients, 462–463
Circuit analysis. See also ac circuit analysis; Circuit theory; 
dc circuit analysis; speciﬁc ac and dc circuit topics
electric compared to magnetic, 420
problem-solving hints, 4
simple transformer, 838–840
using calculators, 17, 19
Circuit analysis methods, for complex networks. See also
ac circuit analysis methods, for complex circuits 
and networks
branch-current analysis, 247–251, 283–284
bridge networks, 270–276, 286–287
circuit analysis using computers, 277–279, 287
constant-current sources and, 240–242, 280–281
current sources in parallel and series, and, 245–247, 282
delta-wye (pi-tee) conversion and, 264–270, 285–286
in-process learning checks, 247, 276, 287
mesh (loop) analysis, 251–258, 284
nodal analysis, 258–264, 285
overview, 238–240
problems, 280–287
source conversions and, 242–245, 281–282
Circuit analysis software. See also Circuit simulation 
software
numerical analysis software, 17, 18–19
overview, 17
prepackaged math, 18–19
problems, 123–124
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
995
Circuit analysis using computers, 17–19, 111–117. See also
ac circuit analysis using computers
ac waveforms and phase relationships, 524–526, 532
complex networks, 277–279, 287
coupled circuits, 864–866, 872
ﬁlters, 815–818, 826–827
network theorems, 318–323, 331
nonsinusoidal waveforms, 940–942, 948
parallel circuits, 186–189, 201
problems, 123–124, 162–163, 201, 236, 331, 532, 778–779,
826–827, 872, 915, 948
resonant circuits, 767–769, 778–779
series circuits, 150–153, 162–163
series-parallel circuits, 223–229, 236
three-phase systems, 904–906, 915
Circuit breakers
overview, 47–48
problems, 53
Circuit diagrams, 15
block diagrams, 15–16
pictorial diagrams, 16
problems, 24–25
schematic diagrams, 16–17
Circuit ground. See Ground
CircuitSim 02–1, 27
Circuit simulation software, 17, 18, 111–117. See also Circuit
analysis using computers; Multisim; PSpice
Circuit theory. See also Circuit analysis
circuit analysis using computers and calculators, 17–19
circuit diagrams, 15–17, 24–25
converting units, 7, 8–10, 19–20
in-process learning checks, 15, 25
introduction, 2–6
Ohm’s law, power and energy, 90–124
overview, 1, 3
power of ten notation, 10–12, 20–22
preﬁxes, engineering notation and numerical results,
12–15, 22–24
problems, 19–25
resistance, 54–89
SI system of units, 6–8
voltage and current, 26–53
Circuit theory equations and formulas, 28
deﬁned formulas, 28
derived formulas, 28
experimental formulas, 28
Circular mil (CM)
overview, 62–66
problems, 86
Closed loop, 131
CM. See Circular mil
Coefﬁcient of coupling, 858
Coils
air-core, 439, 855–856
ferromagnetic materials and, 439, 440
ﬂux linkage of, 439, 440
inductance, inductors and, 439, 440, 442, 446–447, 450
inductance, inductors and coil resistance, 446–447
iron-core, 439, 442
open, 450
Color coding, of resistors
overview, 73–74
problems, 88
Complex numbers
addition and subtraction of, 538–539
calculators for ac circuit analysis, 540–542
complex conjugates, 540
conversion between rectangular and polar forms,
537–538
geometrical representation, 536
imaginary component ( j), 536
imaginary part (b), 536
multiplication and division of, 539–540
overview, 536
polar form, 537–538, 540
powers of j, 538
problems, 563–566
real part (a), 536
reciprocals, 540
rectangular form, 536, 537–538
review, 536–542, 563–564
symbol, 536
Complex numbers, in ac circuit analysis
circuit relationships in phasor domain, 543
problems, 564–566
representing ac voltages and currents by complex numbers,
542–543
representing phasors as rms values, 545–547
summing ac voltages and currents, 543–545
Composite waveforms
Fourier series of components of, 929–931
overview, 919–920
problems, 943–944
Computers. See also Circuit analysis using computers; Software,
technical; Transient analysis using computers
RL transients using, 474–478, 482
Conductance
mutual, 262
overview, 82–83
problems, 89
total, 172
Conductors, 31, 32
electron ﬂow in, 37
line, 879
resistance of, 56–59, 84–85
resistance problems, 84–85
resistivity of, 65
zero-impedance, 886
Conjugates, complex, 540
Constant-current sources
overview, 240–242
problems, 280–281
symbol for, 240
Continuity of current, 458
for inductance, 458
Continuous, 367
Conventional current, 38, 39
Conversions. See also Delta-wye (pi-tee) conversions; 
Source conversions; Unit conversions
factors, 9
series-to-parallel RL and RC, 753–757, 774–776
Copper loss, 849, 852, 854
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

996
Index
Cores
core (iron) loss, 849
inductor, 439–440, 442, 445–446
magnetic circuits and laminated, 413–414, 431
Corner (cutoff) frequency, 630–631, 632, 633
Corresponding terminals, 837. See also Dotted terminals
Cosine wave, 509
Coulomb, 31
overview, 33
problems, 50
Coulomb, Charles, 31
Coulomb’s law, 31, 33
Counter EMF (back voltage), 438
Coupled circuits. See also Transformers and coupled 
circuits
circuit analysis using computers, 864–866, 872
dot convention, 836–837, 856
loosely coupled, 833, 855–860, 870–871
overview, 828–834
sinusoidal excitation in magnetically, 860–862, 871
tightly coupled, 833
Coupled impedance, 862–863, 872
Coupling
coefﬁcient of, 858
inductors with mutual, 858–860
Critical (cutoff, break) frequency, 794
Currents (i, I), 1. See also Alternating current; Direct current; 
Line currents; Phase currents; Voltages and currents
alternating current, 38–39
ampere, 37–38
branch, 209
continuity of, 458
conventional current, 38, 39
current direction, 38
direction and voltage polarity, 98–100, 119
inductor, 458
interruption in inductive circuit, 465–467
leakage, 345
loop, 252–258
magnetizing, 850
measuring, 44–47, 51–52
overview, 26–28, 37
problems, 50–51, 281–282
ratio, 836
representation, 100
symbols, 7
Current buildup transients
circuit voltages, 462–463
overview, 461–462
problems, 479–480
time constant, 463–465
Current divider rule (CDR)
overview, 177–181, 624–626
problems, 196–197, 650–651
Current sources
constant-current sources, 240–242, 280–281
conversions, 242–245, 281–282
overview, 240
in parallel and series, 245–247, 282
reciprocity theorem on, 316
shunt resistance and, 242
Cutoff frequency, 811
corner or, 630–631, 632, 633
critical, break or, 794
half-power or, 746
Cycle, 487
Damped oscillations, 738
DB. See Decibels
dc. See Direct current
dc circuits. See also dc foundation concepts
ac circuits and, 128
simple and complicated, 128–129
dc circuit analysis
methods, 238–287
network theorems, 288–331
overview, 125–126
parallel circuits, 164–201
series circuits, 127–163
series-parallel circuits, 202–237
dc foundation concepts. See also Circuit theory
introduction, 2–25
Ohm’s law, power and energy, 90–124
overview, 1
resistance, 54–89
voltage and current, 26–53
dc resistance, 110
dc sources
ac adapter, 44
batteries, 39–42
electronic power supplies, 43
overview, 36–37, 486
practical, 39–44, 51
problems, 51
solar cells, 43–44
symbols, 36–37
dc voltage, 1. See also Voltages
dc voltage sources. See dc sources
Decade, 793, 800
Decibels (dB)
applications of, 787–788
Bell and, 782
examples, 784, 785, 786–787, 788
intensity levels of common sounds, and, 787
overview, 782–784, 786
practice problems, 786, 788
problems, 819–821
voltage gain in, 784
voltmeter scale in, 788
De-energizing transients, 467–469, 480
Delta (), 240
Delta circuits, 265
line currents, 885
phase currents, 885
power formulas summary for, 895
Delta-connected generators, 879
Delta loads
power to balanced, 895–896
unbalanced, 902–904
Delta-wye (pi-tee) conversions
ac, 674–677, 690–691
delta-wye conversion, 264–267, 674–677, 690–691
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
997
problems, 285–286, 690–691
wye-delta conversion, 267–270, 674–677
Demagnetization process, 429
Dependent sources
overview, 658–659
problems, 686–687, 730–732, 733
superposition theorem for, 700–701, 730–732
symbols, 659
Thévenin’s and Norton’s theorems for, 711–719, 733
Dielectrics
absorption, 345–346
breakdown, 344–345
constant, 339
effect on capacitance, 339
overview, 336, 344
problems, 360
strength, 344
Digital multimeter (DMM)
function selection, 46
as learning tools, 45
overview, 44
rms, 522
terminal designations, 45
Diode
overview, 79–81
zener, 216
Direct current (dc), 36, 128. See also speciﬁc dc topics
excitation in magnetic circuits, 415–416
superimposed ac and, 516
war of currents between ac and, 486, 830, 876
Discontinuous, 367
DMM. See Digital multimeter
Domains, 428
Dot convention
additive and subtractive voltages, and, 856
overview, 836–837
Dot rule, 857
Dotted terminals
loosely coupled circuits and, 856, 857
overview, 837
Duality principle, 458
Duty cycle, 387
Dynamic resistance
overview, 110, 111
problems, 122–123
Earth ground, 141
Eddy currents, 590
core loss and, 849
Edison, Thomas Alva, 486, 830, 876
Effective resistance. See also ac resistance
ac resistance as, 590
eddy currents and hysteresis, 590
overview, 590
problems, 599
radiation resistance, 591
skin effect, 590–591
Effective values. See also RMS values
dropping the eff and rms notation, 521
general equation for, 519–520
overview, 517
problems, 530–531
rms values as, 517, 520–521
for sine waves, 517–519
Efﬁciency
overview, 107–109
problems, 121–122
transformer, 852
Electrical and electronic circuits. See Circuits
Electrical charge, 30–31, 50
Electrical units, 7
Electrical wire tables
overview, 59–62
problems, 85–86
Electric circuits, 128. See also Circuits
magnetic circuits and, 415
Electric constant, 339
Electric currents. See Currents
Electric ﬁelds, 336
electric ﬂux, 341–342
electric ﬂux density, 342
intensity, 342
parallel-plate capacitor, 342–343
problems, 359
strength, 341, 342
symbols, 342
Electric ﬂux
density, 342
overview, 341–342
Electricity ﬁeld development, 572, 876
Electrodynamics, 658
Electrolytic capacitors
aluminum, 347–348
overview, 347–348
symbol, 348
tantalum, 347, 348
Electromagnetic induction, 436, 437–438. See also Induction
Electromagnetic waves, 604
Electromagnetism, 406, 408–409
Electromagnets
force due to, 427–428, 433
overview, 427–428
problems, 433
in relays, 427–428
Electronic function generators, 490
Electronic power supplies, 43
Electrons
electron ﬂow direction, 38, 39
ﬂow in conductor, 37
free, 31
overview, 29–30
valence, 39
Energy
capacitor storage of, 357, 362–363
conversion, 101
law of conservation of, 107
overview, 105–106
potential, 35
problems, 121
relationships for ac, 591–592
stored by inductors and inductance, 449–450, 454
watthour meter measurement of, 106–107
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

998
Index
Engineering notation
overview, 12
preﬁxes, 12–13
problems, 22–24
Equations. See also Formulas
capacitor charging, 370–374
capacitor discharging, 376–377, 398
circuit theory, 28
for effective values, 519–520
simultaneous linear, 247–249, 251
sine wave basic, 496
Equations, solving simultaneous
calculator approach, 962–963
determinant approach, 959–962
overview, 959
Equivalent circuit
iron-core transformer, 850, 851
Norton, 301, 302, 304, 305, 306, 310, 318, 321
Thévenin, 295, 296, 297, 298, 300, 301, 308, 310, 321
Equivalent series resistance (ESR), 345
Exponent, 10
Exponentials
functions, 369–370
table of, 370
Farad, 7, 336, 337
Faraday, Michael, 336, 341–342, 406, 436, 437
Faraday’s law, 438, 833–834
Ferrite-core transformers, 832
Ferromagnetic materials, 407–408
coils and, 439, 440
domains in, 428
Field concept, 336
Filters
band-pass, 781, 811–814, 824–825
band-reject, 781, 814–815, 825–826
Bode plots and, 781, 792–813
circuit analysis using computers, 815–818, 826–827
decibels and, 782–788, 819–821
high-pass, 781, 806–810, 823–824
in-process learning checks, 791, 806, 811, 814, 827
low-pass, 781, 800–806, 823
multistage systems and, 789–791, 821–822
notch, 815
overview, 780–781
problems, 819–827
simple RC and RL transfer functions, and, 791–800, 822
Filter circuits. See also Filters; High-pass ﬁlter circuits; 
Low-pass ﬁlter circuits
overview, 780–781
problems, 947–948
response to nonsinusoidal waveforms, 936–940,
947–948
Filter frequency response graphs. See Bode plots
Final condition circuit, 367
Fixed capacitors, 346–347
Fixed resistors, 69–71
Flux, 341–342. See also Magnetic ﬂux
leakage, 848
lines, 336
linkage, 439, 440
symbols, 437
weber as unit of, 410
Flux density (B)
B-H curves, 417
electric, 342
magnetic ﬁeld intensity relationship to, 416–417
magnetic ﬂux and, 410–411, 430, 876
overview, 342, 410
problems, 342
symbol, 410
tesla as unit of, 410
De Forest, Lee, 739
Formulas. See also Equations
circuit theory, 28
delta and wye circuits summary of power, 895
inductance, 441
Fourier, Jean Baptiste Joseph, 919, 921
Fourier series
of components of composite waveform, 929–931
equivalents of common waveforms, 926–929
overview, 921–925
problems, 944–947
Fourier’s theorem, 919
Four-wire system, 878–879
Franklin, Benjamin, 204
Free electrons, 31
Frequency ( f). See also Cutoff frequency
carrier, 737
considerations with ac meters, 523–524
fundamental, 921
half-power (cutoff, band) frequencies, 746
harmonic, 921
hertz as unit of, 492
high-pass ﬁlter circuits and, 806–810
low-pass ﬁlter circuits and, 800–806
overview, 492
phase shift as function of, 792
problems, 526–527
relationship between angular velocity, period and, 500
resonant circuits and, 737–738
series resonant circuits and, 744–751
superheterodyning, 739
voltage gain as function of, 792
Frequency effects
iron-core transformers, 854, 855
overview, 630
problems, 653
RC circuits, 630–632
RLC circuits, 634
RL circuits, 632–633
Frequency response curve
audio transformer, 855
ideal, 737, 738
resonant circuit actual, 737, 738
Frequency response to ﬁlters. See Bode plots
Frequency spectrum
measurement with spectrum analyzer, 934–936
nonsinusoidal waveforms, 931–936, 947
overview, 931–932
problems, 947
pulse waveform, 931–933
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
999
Fundamental frequency, 921
Fuses
overview, 47–48
problems, 53
Gain, 726
power, 783
voltage, 783, 784
Galvani, Luigi, 166
Galvanometer, 166
Gauges. See also American Wire Gauge
strain, 279
Ground
chassis ground, 141
earth ground, 141–142
overview, 141
symbol, 141
H. See Magnetic ﬁeld intensity
Half-power (cut-off, band) frequencies, 746
Half-wave symmetry waveforms, 924–925
Hall, E. H., 430
Hall effect, 430
Harmonic frequency, 921
Hay bridge, 681
Heat transfer, 919
Helmholtz, Herman Ludwig Ferdinand von, 658
Henry (H), 7, 435, 436, 440
Henry, Joseph, 436, 437, 782
Hertz (Hz), 492
Hertz, Heinrich Rudolph, 406, 492, 604
High-pass ﬁlter circuits, 781
Bode plots, 808–810
example, 809–810
frequency and, 806–810
practice problem, 810
problems, 823–824
RC, 806–808
RL, 809–810
transfer functions, 807–810
Home theater system, 4–5
Horsepower (hp), 8
Hysteresis, 590
core loss and, 849
loop, 429
Hz. See Hertz
I, i. See Currents
ICs. See Integrated circuits
Ideal transformer, 836, 846, 848, 849, 850. See also
Iron-core transformers
circuit analysis using computers, 864, 866
current ratio, 836
overview, 834
problems, 867–868
voltage ratio, 834–835
Impedance (Z)
capacitive, 611
coupled, 862–863, 872
diagram, 609
inductive, 611
load phase, 881
matching, 844–845
overview, 536, 557
problems, 773, 868, 872
reﬂected, 840–842, 868
of series resonant circuits, 744–745, 773
symbol, 557
Impedance concept
capacitance, 558–559
inductance, 557–558
overview, 557
problems, 567–568
resistance, 557
Impedance networks
ac network theorems, 694–735
ac series-parallel circuits, 602–655
ﬁlters and Bode plot, 780–827
methods of ac analysis, 656–693
nonsinusoidal waveforms, 916–948
overview, 601
resonance, 736–779
three-phase systems, 874–915
transformers and coupled circuits, 828–873
Independent sources
Norton’s theorem for, 706–710, 733
overview, 658–659
problems, 729–730, 732–733
superposition theorem for, 696–699, 729–730
symbols, 659
Thévenin’s theorem for, 702–706, 732–733
Induced voltage, 829
computing, 442–444, 451–452
counter EMF or back voltage, 438
inductance and, 437, 438–440, 442–444, 450–452
mutually, 856
polarity of iron-core transformers, 836–838
problems, 451
self-induced, 855–856
Inductance (L). See also RLC circuits
ac energy relationships and, 591
continuity of current for, 458
as dual of capacitance, 458
electromagnetic induction, 436, 437–438
formulas, 441
henry as unit of, 7, 435, 436, 440
impedance concept and, 557–558
in-process learning checks, 440, 442, 444, 455
magnetic ﬁelds and, 435, 436, 442
mutual, 856
open-circuit equivalent of, 459–460
overview, 333, 434–436
self-inductance, 435, 436, 440–442, 451
in series and parallel, 444–445, 452–454
stray, 447
symbols, 7, 435, 436, 440
transients and, 458, 459
Inductance and inductors
coil resistance and, 446–447
coils and, 439, 440, 442, 446–447, 450
energy stored, 449–450, 454
induced voltage and inductance, 437, 438–440, 442–444, 450–452
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1000
Index
Inductance and inductors (continued)
overview, 333, 434–436
practical considerations, 445–447
problems, 450–455
steady state dc and, 447–449, 454
Inductance and sinusoidal ac
inductive reactance, 551–552
phase lag in inductive circuit, 550–551
variation of inductive reactance with frequency,
552–553
Induction, electromagnetic
discovery of, 436
overview, 436, 437–438
Inductive circuits, 458. See also Inductive transients
current interruption in, 465–467
phase lag in, 550–551
transients in, 365, 366, 457
Inductive impedance, 611
Inductive kick, 465
Inductive load, power to, 574–576
Inductive reactance
overview, 551–552
variation with frequency, 552–553
Inductive transients
current buildup transients, 461–465, 479–480
current interruption in inductive circuit, 465–467
de-energizing transients, 467–469, 480
in-process learning checks, 465, 482
more complex circuits, 469–474, 481–482
overview, 365, 366, 456–461
problems, 478–482
RL transients using computers, 474–478, 482
Inductors. See also Inductance and inductors
chokes or reactors as, 435
cores, 439–440, 442, 445–446
current, 458
equivalent at switching, 467
iron-core and air-core inductors, 439–440
with mutual coupling, 858–860
Ohm’s law for ac circuits, and, 607
with open coils, 450
overview, 333, 434–436
with shorts, 450
stray capacitance, 446, 447
symbols, 446
troubleshooting hints, 450, 454–455
variable, 446
voltage, 459
Initial conditions
circuits, 460
in Multisim, 391–392
overview, 375
Instantaneous power (p), 572, 573
Instantaneous quantities, 355
Instantaneous value, 489
Instrument loading effects
overview, 219–222
problems, 235–236
Insulators, 31, 32
Integrated circuits (ICs), 70–71
Ions, 31
Iron, 832
loss, 849
Iron-core
coils, 439, 442
inductors, 439–440
Iron-core transformers
basic, 830–831
core loss, 849
core type, 832
current ratio, 836
distribution transformer, 831
on electric range control boards, 831
equivalent circuit, 850, 851
frequency effects, 854, 855
full equivalent, 850
ideal transformer, 834, 836, 846, 848, 849, 850, 864,
866, 867–868
induced voltage polarity (dot convention), 836–837
leakage ﬂux, 848
magnetizing current, 850
overview, 831–832, 834
practical, 848–852, 869–870
problems, 867–868, 869–870
shell type, 832
simple transformer circuit analysis, 838–840
step-up and step-down transformers, 835
stray capacitances, 850
transformer efﬁciency, 852
two basic types, 832
voltage effects, 854
voltage ratio, 834–835
voltage regulation, 850–851
winding resistance, 849
Joule, 8
Kick
inductive, 465
test, 836
Kilowatthours (kWh), 106
Kirchhoff, Gustav Robert, 128
Kirchhoff’s current law (KCL), 128, 543, 625–626
overview, 167–171, 624
problems, 191–192, 650–651
Kirchhoff’s voltage law (KVL), 128, 543, 617–618
overview, 131–132, 616
problems, 154–155, 647–648
KWh. See Kilowatthours
L. See Inductance
Lag, 507–508
Lagging power factor, 584, 614
Lead, 507–508
Lead-acid battery, 41
Leading power factor, 584, 614
Leakage, 345
current, 345
ﬂux, 848
Lenz, Heinrich, 438
Lenz’s law, 438
Light-emitting diodes (LEDs), 135
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
1001
Linear bilateral networks
mesh analysis of, 252, 255
Norton’s theorem on, 300
overview, 239
Thévenin’s theorem on, 294
Linear networks, 239, 294
Linear resistance, 110
Line conductors, 879
Line currents, 881
delta circuit, 885
Line voltage
line-to-line voltages, 880
line-to-neutral voltage, 879
wye circuit, 881-882
Lithium battery, 40
Loads, 16. See also Balanced loads
phase impedances, 881
power to capacitive, 576–577
power to inductive, 574–576
power to resistive, 573–574
three-phase power system, 904
Loaded output, 218
Loading, capacitive, 390
Loading effects, 148
ammeter, 148–150, 162
of instruments, 219–222, 235–236
problems, 162, 200, 235–236
voltmeter, 184–186, 200
Loop
closed, 131
currents, 252–258
hysteresis, 429
Loop analysis. See Mesh analysis
Loosely coupled, 833
Loosely coupled circuits
additive and subtractive voltages, 856–857
air-core transformers and, 855
coefﬁcient of coupling, 858
coupled impedance, 862–863, 872
dot rule, 857
dotted terminals and, 856, 857
inductors with mutual coupling, 858–860
mutual voltages, 856, 857
overview, 833, 855
problems, 870–871
voltages in air-core coils, 855–856
Low-pass ﬁlter circuits, 781
Bode plots, 801–802
examples, 803–805
frequency and, 800–806
practice problem, 806
problems, 823
RC, 800–802
RL, 802–803
sinusoidal ac waveforms and, 917–918
transfer functions, 801–806, 807
Magnetic circuits
air gaps, fringing, and laminated cores, 413–414, 431
Ampere’s circuital law, 418–419, 431
with dc excitation, 415–416
electric circuits and, 415
electromagnet force, 427–428, 433
examples, 413, 415, 418, 420–428
in-process learning checks, 414, 419, 433
magnetic ﬁeld intensity and magnetization curves, 416–418, 431
Ohm’s law for, 415
overview and applications, 404–405, 411–413
practice problems, 414, 417, 418, 425
problems, 431–432, 433, 871
series elements and parallel elements, 414, 431
series magnetic circuits, 414, 420–423, 425–427, 431–432, 433
series-parallel magnetic circuits, 424–425, 433
sinusoidal excitation in magnetically coupled circuits,
860–862, 871
Magnetic ﬁelds
ferromagnetic materials, 407–408
inductance and, 435, 436, 442
magnetic ﬂux, 406–407
overview, 406
problems, 433
sensing and measuring, 430, 433
Magnetic ﬁeld intensity (H)
B-H curves, 417
ﬂux density relationship to, 416–417
magnetization curves and, 416–418, 431
overview, 416
problems, 431
symbol, 416
Magnetic ﬂux
ﬂux density and, 410–411, 430, 876
magnetomotive force as source of, 415
overview, 406–407
problems, 430
reluctance as opposition to, 415
symbol, 410
Magnetic materials
B-H curves for selected, 417
ferromagnetic materials, 407–408
Magnetic materials properties
demagnetization process, 429
hysteresis, 429
overview, 428
specimen magnetization, 428–429
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 5
Magnetism
development of ﬁeld of, 876
electromagnetism, 406, 408–409
examples, 410, 418
in-process learning checks, 411, 433
magnetic ﬁeld nature, 406–408
magnetic ﬁeld sensing and measuring, 430, 433
magnetic ﬂux and ﬂux density, 410–411, 430, 876
magnetic materials properties, 428–429
overview, 404–405, 406
practice problems, 410, 417, 418
problems, 430, 433
residual, 429
Magnetism curves (B-H curves)
magnetic ﬁeld intensity and, 416–418
overview, 417
for selected materials, 417
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1002
Index
Magnetization
curves and magnetic ﬁeld intensity, 416–418, 431
of nonmagnetized specimens, 428–429
Magnetizing current, 850, 854
Magnetizing force, 416. See also Magnetic ﬁeld intensity
Magnetomotive force (MMF), 415
Mathcad, 17, 18
Mathematics in circuit analysis
basic mathematics and calculator ideas, 956–958
logarithms, natural logs, and exponential functions, 958–959
overview, 956
solving simultaneous equations, 959–963
Math prepackaged software, 18–19
Matlab, 17, 18
Maximum power
absolute, 721, 722
relative, 721, 722
Maximum power transfer theorem
ac applications, 719–723, 734
examples, 309–310, 311–312, 720–722
Norton’s theorem and, 308
overview, 308–311, 719–721, 964–966
practice problems, 312, 721, 722–723
problems, 328–329, 734
Thévenin equivalent circuit proof of, 308
Thévenin’s theorem and, 308
Maxwell, James Clerk, 406, 604
Maxwell bridge, 679–680
MCM (1000 CM), 64
Megajoule (MJ), 106
Meissner effect, 83
Mesh (loop) analysis
ac, 663–668, 688–689
branch-current analysis compared to, 252–253
format approach for, 255–257
of linear bilateral networks, 252, 255
of loop currents, 258
overview, 251–255, 663–668
problems, 284, 688–689
steps, 252
Meters. See also Ammeters; Multimeters; Ohmmeter
ac, 522–524
symbols, 47
voltmeters, 45, 46, 47, 116, 153
wattmeters, 104
Meters, kilograms, seconds (MKS), 3. See also speciﬁc 
MKS topics
Meter loading, 148
Mica capacitors, 347
Millman’s theorem
example, 315–316
overview, 314–315
problems, 330
MJ. See Megajoule
MKS. See Meters, kilograms, seconds
MMF. See Magnetomotive force
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging
Multimeters, 44. See also Digital multimeter
ac voltage and current measurement with, 522–524
analog, 45
terminal designations, 45
Multisim, 3, 17, 18, 91
ac circuit analysis using, 559–561, 568, 639–641, 654
ac network theorems analysis using, 723, 727–728, 735
ac waveform analysis using, 524–525, 532
adding expressions to graphic displays, 951–952
circuit creation, 113–114
cleaning up grapher view displays, 951
for complex circuits and networks, 683–684, 693
complex networks analysis using, 277, 278, 287
component orientation, 951
coupled circuit analysis using, 864–866, 872
cursor usage, 953
displaying multiple traces, 952
ﬁlter analysis using, 816, 817–818, 826–827
initial conditions in, 391–392
key points, 950
network theorems veriﬁcation using, 318–321, 331
operational notes, 112, 391, 476, 560, 864, 866, 950
oscilloscope, 475–476
overview, 111–113, 949, 950
parallel circuit analysis using, 186–187, 201
power in ac circuits analysis using, 592–595, 599–600
problems, 123, 236, 287, 331, 402, 482, 532, 568, 599–600,
654, 693, 735, 826–827, 872, 915
RL transients using, 474–476, 482
series circuit analysis using, 150–151
series-parallel circuit analysis using, 223–225, 236
setting phase angle for ac, 953
simulation ﬁles organization, 949
three-phase system analysis using, 904–905, 915
transient analysis using, 390–393, 402
Multistage systems
examples, 790
overview, 789
power gain, 789
practice problems, 791
problems, 821–822
voltage gain, 789
Mutual conductance, 262
Mutual coupling, in inductors, 858–860
Mutual inductance, 856
Mutual voltages
loosely coupled circuits, 856, 857
mutually induced voltage, 856
Networks. See also Circuit analysis methods, for complex
networks; Circuits; Impedance networks
bilateral, 239, 294
linear, 239, 294
series-parallel, 204–205, 229–230
series-to-parallel RL and RC conversion, 753–757, 774–776
Network theorems
circuit analysis using computers, 318–323, 331
in-process learning checks, 293, 300, 307, 312, 331
maximum power transfer theorem, 308–312, 328–329
Millman’s theorem, 314–316, 330
Norton’s theorem, 300, 328
overview, 288–289
problems, 324–331
putting into practice, 323
reciprocity theorem, 316–318, 330–331
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
1003
substitution theorem, 313–314, 329
superposition theorem, 290–293, 324
Thévenin’s theorem, 293–300, 324–328
Neutral, 878
neutral-neutral voltage, in wye-wye circuit, 880
Newton, 8
NI. See Ampere-turns
Nickel-cadmium (Ni-Cad) battery, 41
Nickel-metal hybrid (NiMH) battery, 41
Nodal analysis
ac, 668–674, 689–690
format approach, 262–264
overview, 258–261, 668–674
problems, 285, 689–690
steps, 258–260
Nodes, 166
Nominal voltages, 882–883
Nonlinear resistance
overview, 79–81, 110–111
problems, 122–123
Nonohmic devices, 79
diode, 79–81
varsistors, 81
Nonsinusoidal waveforms
circuit analysis using computers, 940–942, 948
circuit ﬁlter response to, 936–940, 947–948
composite waveforms, 919–920, 943–944
Fourier series, 921–925, 944
Fourier series of common waveforms, 926–931, 945–947
frequency spectrum, 931–936, 947
in-process learning checks, 925, 931, 948
overview, 916–918
problems, 943–948
Norton equivalent circuit, 301, 302, 304, 305, 306, 310,
318, 321
Norton’s theorem
circuit conversion steps, 300–301
examples, 301–306
linear bilateral networks in, 300
maximum power transfer theorem and, 308
overview, 300–301
practice problems, 301–306
problems, 328
Thévenin’s theorem and, 300
Norton’s theorem, for dependent sources
examples, 711–718
overview, 711–712, 715
practice problems, 715, 719
problems, 733
Norton’s theorem, for independent sources
examples, 707–710
overview, 706–707
practice problems, 710
problems, 733
Notch ﬁlters, 815
Numerical results
overview, 14
problems, 22–24
Octave, 793
Odd symmetry waveforms, 924
Oersted, Hans Christian, 406
Ohm, Georg Simon, 1, 56, 92
Ohmic device, 79. See also Nonohmic devices
Ohmic resistance, 110
Ohmmeter
capacitor basic testing with, 358
determining diode terminals with, 80–81
measuring of resistance, 75–77, 88
overview, 75–77
problems, 88
Ohm’s law, 1, 56
in graphical form, 96
in-process learning check, 99, 124
for magnetic circuits, 415
overview, 92–97
plotting using PSpice, 116–117
problems, 118–119
Ohm’s law, for ac circuits
capacitors, 608–609
inductors, 607
overview, 604
problems, 644–645
resistors, 604–606
Onnes, Heike Kamerlingh, 83
Open circuits, 77, 97
open-circuit equivalent of inductance, 459–460
Open-circuit test, 852, 853–854
Oscillations, damped, 738
Oscilloscopes
ac voltage and current measurement with, 522, 523, 524
Multisim, 475–476
overview, 523
P. See Active power; Real power
Parallel branches, 207
Parallel circuits. See also ac parallel circuits; Series-parallel
circuits
analysis of, 182–184, 198–200
computer analysis, 186–189, 201
current divider rule, 177–181, 196–197
in-process learning checks, 176, 182, 186, 201
Kirchhoff’s current law, 167–171, 191–192
overview, 164–167
problems, 190–201
resistors in parallel, 171–176, 192–195
series circuits differences with, 165
simple, 165
voltage sources in parallel, 176–177, 195–196
voltmeter loading effects, 184–186, 200
Parallel elements, 166–167
Parallel magnetic circuits
overview, 414, 431
problems, 431
series-parallel magnetic circuits, 424–425, 433
Parallel-plate capacitor
capacitance of, 339
electric ﬁeld of, 342–343
overview, 336
Parallel resonance
overview, 758–766
problems, 776–778
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1004
Index
Parallel resonant circuits, 738
examples, 754–756, 761–765
overview, 758–760
practice problems, 756–757, 766
problems, 774–778
series-to-parallel RL and RC conversion, 753–757, 774–776
Peak-to-peak value, 494
Peak-to-peak voltage, 494
Peak value, 494
Period (T)
overview, 387, 492–494
problems, 526–527
relationship between angular velocity, frequency 
and, 500
Periodic waveforms
amplitude and peak-to-peak value, 494
attributes, 492–494
composed of sinusoidal ac waveforms, 918, 919, 921
frequency, 492
overview, 487, 492
peak value, 494
period, 492–494
Permeability (), 415
Permittivity
overview, 339–340
relative, 339
symbols, 339–340
Phase
conductors, 879
difference, 507–511
lag in inductive circuit, 550–551
lead in capacitive circuit, 553–554
load phase impedances, 881
sequence, 880
Phase currents, 881
delta circuit, 885
Phase shifts
as function of frequency, 792
transfer functions, 791, 792, 793, 794, 795, 796, 797
voltage and current with, 502–504
winding directions and, 833
Phase voltage, 880
wye circuit, 881–882
Phasors
domain, 543
lead and lag, 507–508
overview, 504–511, 536
phase difference, 507–511
problems, 529
representation as rms values, 545–547
shifted sine waves and, 506–507
sinusoidal ac waveforms and, 505
voltage and current as, 536
Photoconductive cells or photocells
overview, 78–79
problems, 88
Pi circuit, 265. See also Delta-wye (pi-tee) conversions
Pictorial circuit diagrams, 16
Planar transformers, 832–833
Plastic ﬁlm capacitors, 347
Point sources, 146
Polar form, 540
conversion between rectangular form and, 537–538
Polarity, 36
Polarized, 344
Polarized atoms, 344
Potential difference, 34, 36
Potential energy, 35
Potentiometers
overview, 217–219
problems, 234–235
Power. See also ac power; Apparent power; Reactive power; 
Real power
active, 571, 573
average, 574, 741
in electrical and electronic systems, 101–103
instantaneous, 572, 573
overview, 100–101
problems, 120–121
rating of resistors, 103–104
reference convention for, 104
series resonant circuit’s bandwidth, selectivity and, 745–751,
773–774
superposition theorem and, 290
systems and transformers, 842–844
wattless, 571
Power direction convention
overview, 104–105
problems, 120–121
Power factor (Fp)
correction, 585–587
equipment rated in VA, and, 584–585
lagging, 584, 614
leading, 584, 614
overview, 584
problems, 598
unity, lagging, and leading, 584
Power gain
multistage systems, 789
overview, 783
Power in ac circuits
ac power measurement, 588–590, 598–599
apparent power, 571, 577, 580
circuit analysis using computers, 592–595, 599–600
effective resistance, 590–591, 599
energy relationships for ac, 591–592
in-process learning checks, 587, 600
introduction, 572–573
overview, 570–572
power factor, 584–587, 598
power in more complex circuits, 577–580
power to capacitive load, 576–577
power to inductive load, 574–576
power to resistive load, 573–574
power triangle relationship between real, reactive and apparent
power, 581–583, 597
problems, 595–600
Power in balanced systems
active power to balanced wye load, 893
apparent power, 894
overview, 893–897, 910–912
power and single-phase equivalent, 896–897
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
1005
power factor, 894–895
power to a balanced delta load, 895–896
problems, 910–912
reactive power to balanced wye load, 894
Power measurement, 104
in ac circuits, 588–590, 598–599
in three-phase circuits, 897–900, 912–914
Power of ten notation
addition and subtraction using, 11
common multipliers, 10
multiplication and division using, 10–11
overview, 10
powers, 11–12
preﬁxes and, 12–13
problems, 20–22
Power transformers
power supply transformers, 842, 843
problems, 869
ratings, 842, 869
Power triangle
overview, 581–583
problems, 597
Preﬁxes
engineering, 12–13
power of ten notation and, 12–13
problems, 22–24
symbols of, 12
Primary (winding), 830, 831
Primary batteries, 39–40
Protons, 29
PSpice, 3, 17, 18, 111
ac circuit analysis using, 561–563, 569, 641–643, 654–655
ac network theorems analysis using, 723–727, 735
ac waveform analysis using, 524, 525, 532
circuit building, 115–116
for complex circuits and networks, 683, 684–685, 693
complex networks analysis using, 278, 279, 287
component orientation, 954
coupled circuit analysis using, 864–866, 872
cursor usage, 955
displaying multiple traces, 954–955
ﬁlter analysis using, 815–817, 826
key points, 953–954
labelling graph traces and naming axes, 954
network theorems veriﬁcation using, 321–323, 331
nonsinusoidal waveform analysis using, 940–942, 948
Ohm’s law plotting, 116–117
operational notes, 115, 393, 476, 864, 866, 953
overview, 114, 949, 953
parallel circuit analysis using, 188–189, 201
phasor analysis using, 562–563
power in ac circuits analysis using, 592–595, 599–600
problems, 123–124, 236, 287, 331, 402, 482, 532, 569, 599–600,
654–655, 693, 735, 778–779, 826, 872, 915, 948
resonant circuit analysis using, 767–769, 778–779
RL transients using, 476–478, 482
series circuit analysis using, 151–152
series-parallel circuit analysis using, 225–228, 236
simulation ﬁles organization, 949
standard preﬁxes used by, 954
three-phase system analysis using, 904–906, 915
transient analysis using, 390, 393–396, 402
unidentiﬁed subcircuit error message, 955
voltmeters and ammeters, 116
Pulse. See also Waveforms
basics, 387–388
duty cycle, 387
overview, 387
Pulse repetition frequency (PRF), 387
Pulse repetition rate (PRR), 387
Pulse response of RC circuits
examples, 388
overview, 386–387
practice problems, 390
problems, 401
pulse basics, 387–388
pulse width, 388–389
pulse width effect, 388
Pulse train
overview, 387
period, 387
square wave, 387
Pulse waveforms
frequency spectrum, 931–933
ideal, 387
practical, 387
RC circuit effects on, 386
viewed on oscilloscope, 387
Pulse width
effect of, 388–389
overview, 387
Q. See Quality factor; Reactive power
Quality factor (Q)
example, 742–743
overview, 741–742
practice problems, 743
problems, 772
reactive power, average power and, 741
R. See Resistance
Radian frequency, 500
Radian measure, 498–499
Radiation resistance, 591
Radio
communication, 604
reception, 739
transmission, 737, 739, 770
RC. See Time constants
RC circuits. See also Pulse response of RC circuits
examples, 385
frequency effects, 630–632
high-pass ﬁlter, 806–808
low-pass ﬁlter, 800–802
practice problems, 386
problems, 400
RC and RL transfer functions, 791–800, 822
in steady state dc, 383–384
timing applications, 385–386, 400
RC network
problems, 774–776
series-to-parallel RL and RC conversion, 753–757, 774–776
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1006
Index
Reactive power (Q), 576
to balanced wye load, 894
equations for real and, 583
overview, 571, 573, 575
power triangle relationship between real, apparent and,
581–583, 597
quality factor, average power and, 741
Reactors (chokes), 435. See also Inductors
Real power (P) (active power). See also Active power
equations for reactive and, 583
overview, 571, 573
power triangle relationship between reactive,
apparent and, 581–583, 597
Reciprocals, 540
Reciprocity theorem
current sources and, 316
examples, 317–318
overview, 316
problems, 330–331
voltage sources and, 316
Rectangular form
conversion between polar form and, 537–538
overview, 536
Reﬂected impedance, 840–842, 868
Regulation, voltage, 216, 850–851
Relative maximum power, 721
Relative permittivity
overview, 339
of various materials, 339
Reluctance (), 415
Residual magnetism, 429
Resistance (R), 16. See also ac resistance; 
RLC circuits
conductance, 82–83, 89
of conductors, 56–59, 84–85
dc, 110
dynamic, 110, 111, 122–123
electrical wire tables, 59–62, 85–86
equivalent series, 345
impedance concept and, 557
in-process learning checks, 59, 62, 66, 69, 89
linear or ohmic, 110
nonlinear, 79–81, 110–111, 122–123
Ohm and, 56
ohmmeter measuring of, 75–77, 88
overview, 54–55, 333
photoconductive cells or photocells, 78–79, 88
problems, 84–89
radiation, 591
shunt (parallel) resistance, 242
sinusoidal ac and, 548–549
superconductors, 83–84
symbol, 7
temperature effects, 66–69, 86–87
thermistors, 77–78, 88
total equivalent, 132, 172
voltage sources, internal, 147–148, 161–162
winding, 849
of wires and circular mils, 62–66, 86
Resistive circuits, 92, 99, 612
Resistive load, power to, 573–574
Resistivity, 57
of conductors, 65
Resistors
bleeder, 337
color coding, 73–74, 88
ﬁxed, 69–71
heat dissipation of, 103
integrated circuit package, 70–71
Ohm’s law for ac circuits, and, 604–606
power, 70, 71
power rating of, 103–104
problems, 87–88
types of, 69–73, 87
variable, 71–73
Resistors in parallel
calculator hint for solving for, 173
formula for capacitors in series and, 351
n equal, 173–174
overview, 171–173
problems, 192–195
three, 175
two, 174–175
Resistors in series
formula for capacitors in parallel and, 351
overview, 129, 132–136
problems, 155–159
Resonance
impedance of series resonant circuits, 744–745, 773
in-process learning checks, 752, 757, 766, 779
overview, 736–738
parallel resonance, 758–766, 776–778
power, bandwidth, and selectivity of series resonant circuits,
745–751, 773–774
problems, 770–779
quality factor, Q, 741–743, 772
series resonance, 739–741, 770–771
series-to-parallel RL and RC conversion, 753–757, 774–776
Resonant circuits. See also Parallel resonant circuits; Resonance;
Series resonant circuits
actual frequency response curve, 737, 738
circuit analysis using computers, 767–769, 778–779
frequency and, 737–738
overview, 737–738
quality factor, Q, 741–743, 772
two main types, 738
Rise and fall times, 387
RLC circuits
frequency effects, 634
with sinusoidal ac excitation, 548
RL circuits
frequency effects, 632–633
high-pass ﬁlter, 809–810
low-pass ﬁlter, 802–803
RL and RC transfer functions, 791–800, 822
RL network
problems, 774–776
series-to-parallel RL and RC conversion, 753–757, 774–776
RL transients (inductive transients), 457. See also Inductive
transients
using computers, 474–478, 482
RMS meters, true, 522
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
1007
RMS values. See also Effective values
effective values as, 517, 520–521
overview, 517, 520–521
representing phasors as, 545–547
Root mean square (rms), 520
S. See Apparent power
Saturation, 429
Schematic capture, 111
Schematic circuit diagrams, 16
symbols, 17
Schering bridge, 681
Scopes. See Oscilloscopes
Secondary (winding), 830, 831
Secondary batteries, 39–40
Selectivity
curve, 746
series resonant circuit’s power, bandwidth and, 745–751,
773–774
Self-induced voltage, 855–856
Self-inductance, 435, 436. See also Inductance
overview, 440–442
problems, 451
Semiconductors, 31, 32
Series circuits. See also ac series circuits
ammeter loading effects, 148–150, 162
analysis using computers, 150–153, 162–163
circuit ground, 141–142
in-process learning checks, 129, 132, 136, 137, 141,
142, 147, 163
interchanging series components, 137–138, 159
internal resistance of voltage sources, 147–148, 161–162
Kirchhoff’s voltage law, 131–132, 154–155
overview, 127–130
parallel circuits differences with, 165
problems, 153–163
resistors in series, 132–136, 155–159
voltage divider rule, 138–140, 160–161
voltage sources in series, 136–137
voltage subscripts, 142–146, 161
Series connection, 129
Series magnetic circuits
overview, 414
problems, 431–432, 433
problem solving, 420–423, 425–427
Series-parallel circuits
analysis of, 205–211, 230–233
analysis using computers, 223–229, 236
applications of, 211–217, 233–234
in-process learning checks, 207, 217, 219, 237
loading effects of instruments, 219–222, 235–236
overview, 202–203
potentiometers, 217–219, 234–235
problems, 229–236
series-parallel magnetic circuits, 424–425, 433
series-parallel network, 204–205, 229–230
Series-parallel combinations, 167
Series-parallel network
overview, 204–205
problems, 229–230
Series resonance
overview, 739–741
problems, 770–771
Series resonant circuits, 738
examples, 748–751, 754–756
frequency and, 744–751
impedance of, 744–745, 773
overview, 739–741
power, bandwidth and selectivity of, 745–751, 773–774
practice problems, 751, 756, 757
problems, 770–771, 773–776
selectivity curve, 746
series-to-parallel RL and RC conversion, 753–757, 774–776
Shockley, William Bradford, 696
Short circuits, 76–77
inductor with, 450
test, 852–853
Shunt circuit, 165. See also Parallel circuits
Shunt (parallel) resistance, and current source, 242
Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit Emphasis 
(SPICE), 18
Simultaneous linear equations
branch-current analysis of, 247–249, 251
calculator solving of, 249
Sine waves
angular and graphic relationships for, 496–500, 527
angular velocity, 497–498
averages, 514
basic equation, 496
cosine wave, 509
effective values for, 517–519
graphing, 499–500
overview, 485, 487
phasors and shifted, 506–507
problems, 527
radian measure, 498–499
rate of change (derivative) of, 522
Single-phase
load connection to three-phase system, 904
systems compared to three-phase systems, 875
Single-phase equivalent, 886–887
power in balanced systems and, 896–897
Single-pole, double-throw (SPDT) switch, 48
Single-pole, single-throw (SPST) switch, 48
Sinusoidal ac
capacitance and, 553–556
current, 487
inductance and, 550–553
resistance and, 548–549
Sinusoidal ac excitation
in magnetically coupled circuits, 860–862, 871
problems, 871
in R, L, C circuits, 548
Sinusoidal ac voltage
and currents as functions of time, 500–501
overview, 487
source, 487
Sinusoidal ac waveforms, 485, 487. See also Sine waves
low-pass ﬁlter circuits and, 917–918
periodic waveforms composed of, 918, 919, 921
phasors and, 505
SI system, 3, 6–7
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1008
Index
SI system of units
base units, 7
deﬁnitions of units, 7–8
derived units, 7
non-SI units to SI units conversions, 7
relative size of units, 7, 8
symbols, 7
Skin effect, 590–591
SMDs. See Surface mount devices
SMT components. See Surface-mount components
Software, technical. See also Circuit analysis 
software
application software, 17
overview, 17
Solar cells, 43–44
Sounds. See also Decibels
intensity levels of common, 787
Sources, 16. See also Current sources; Dependent 
sources; Independent sources; Voltage sources
Source conversions
ac, 660–663, 687–688
overview, 242–245, 660–663
problems, 281–282, 687–688
SPDT. See Single-pole, double-throw switch
Spectrum analyzer, 934–936
SPICE. See Simulation Program with Integrated 
Circuit Emphasis
SPST. See Single-pole, single-throw switch
Square mil, 62
Square wave, 387, 918
Steady state
conditions in capacitor charging, 367–368
overview, 367
Steady state dc
inductance, inductors and, 447–449, 454
RC circuits in, 383–384
Steinmetz, Charles Proteus, 536
Step-down transformers, 835
Step-up transformers, 835
Strain gauges, 279
Stray capacitance, 390
inductor, 446, 447
iron-core transformer, 850
Stray inductance, 447
Substitution theorem
example, 313–314
overview, 313
problems, 329
Supercapacitors, 349–350
Superconductors, 83–84
Superheterodyning, 739
Superposition theorem
examples, 291–293
overview, 290, 292
power and, 290
practice problems, 293
problems, 324
Superposition theorem, for dependent sources
ac applications, 700–701, 730–732
examples, 700–701
overview, 700
practice problems, 701
problems, 730–732
Superposition theorem, for independent sources
ac applications, 696–699, 729–730
examples, 697–699
overview, 696
practice problems, 699
problems, 729–730
Surface mount capacitors, 348–349
Surface-mount (SMT) components, 5–6
Surface mount devices (SMDs), 348
Susceptance, 619
Switches
inductor equivalent at switching, 467
overview, 47
problems, 53
transients and, 366
Symbols
ac source, 487
active power, 573
admittance, 619
ampere-turns, 415
apparent power, 580
basic three-phase circuit connection, 879
batteries, 36
capacitance, 7
complex number, 536
constant-current sources, 240
current, 7
dc voltage sources, 36–37
delta, 240
dependent and independent sources, 659
electric ﬁeld, 342
electrolytic capacitor, 348
ﬂux, 437
ﬂux density, 410
ground, 141
impedance, 557
inductance, 7, 435, 436, 440
inductor, 446
instantaneous power, 572
magnetic ﬁeld intensity, 416
magnetic ﬂux, 410
meter, 47
permeability, 36
permittivity, 339–340
pi circuit, 265
power factor, 584
preﬁxes, 12
reactive power, 575
real power, 573
reluctance, 415
resistance, 7
schematic circuit diagrams, 16–17
sinusoidal voltage source, 487
SI system of units, 7
tee circuit, 265
tesla, 410
three-phase voltages and currents, 880, 881
time constant, 373
time-varying voltages and currents, 355
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
1009
transformer, 833
transient duration, 373–374
voltage, 36–37, 97, 487
weber, 410
wye, 240
Systéme International, 3. See also SI system
T. See Tesla
T. See Period
Tantalum electrolytic capacitors
overview, 347
solid, 348
wet slug, 348
Technology at work, examples, 4–6
Tee circuit, 265. See also Delta-wye (pi-tee) conversions
Telephone, 782
Temperature coefﬁcients
capacitance, capacitors and, 346
for common materials, 67
overview, 66–67
Temperature effects, on resistance
overview, 66–69
problems, 86–87
Temperature intercepts, 67
Terminals
corresponding, 837
designations of multimeters, 45
determining diode, 80–81
dotted, 837, 856, 857
voltage, 147
Tesla (T), 410, 876
Tesla, Nikola, 410, 486, 830, 876
TF. See Transfer functions
Thermistors
overview, 77–78
problems, 88
Thévenin equivalent circuit, 295, 296, 297, 298, 300, 301,
310, 321
proof of maximum power transfer theorem, 308
Thévenin’s theorem
circuit conversion steps, 294–295
examples, 295–299
linear bilateral networks in, 294
maximum power transfer theorem and, 308
Norton’s theorem and, 300
overview, 293–295
practice problems, 299–300
problems, 324–328
Thévenin’s theorem, for dependent sources
examples, 711–718
overview, 711–712, 715
practice problems, 715, 719
problems, 733
Thévenin’s theorem, for independent sources
examples, 702–705
overview, 702
practice problems, 705–706
problems, 732–733
Three-phase circuits
standard representation, 879
Y-Y system, 879
Three-phase circuit connections
basic, 877–880, 908
delta-connected generators, 879
evolution of, 878
four-wire and three-wire systems, 878–879
neutral-neutral voltage in wye-wye circuit, 880
overview, 877–878
phase sequence, 880
problems, 908
standard representation, 879
symbology, 879
Three-phase circuits, power measurement
overview, 897–898
problems, 912–914
two-wattmeter method, 898
wattmeter readings determination, 898–900
watts ratio curve, 898–900
Three-phase relationships, basic
currents for wye circuit, 884–885
deﬁnitions, 880–881
line and phase currents for delta circuit, 885
line and phase voltages for wye circuit, 881–882
milestones in, 885
nominal voltages, 882–883
problems, 908–909
reference selection, 887
single-phase equivalent, 886–887
summary of, 887
voltages and currents symbols and notations, 880, 881
Three-phase systems
balanced systems, 875
basic three-phase circuit connections, 877–880, 908
basic three-phase relationships, 880–887, 908–909
circuit analysis using computers, 904–906, 915
examples, 888–893, 909–910
in-process learning checks, 887, 915
measuring power in three-phase circuits, 897–900,
912–914
overview, 874–876
power in balanced systems, 893–897, 910–912
power system loads, 904
practice, 907
problems, 908–915
single-phase systems compared to, 875
three-phase voltage generation, 876–877
unbalanced loads, 901–904, 914–915
unbalanced systems, 875
Three-phase voltage generation, 876–877
Three-phase voltage generators
basic three-phase circuit connections, 877–880, 908
delta-connected, 879
overview, 876–877
Three-wire system, 878
Tightly coupled, 833
Tightly coupled circuits, 833
Time
domain, 543
references, 380
rise and fall times, 387
transient analysis meaning of, 369
voltage and current as functions of, 500–504, 527–529
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1010
Index
Time constants (  RC). See also RC circuits
current buildup transients, 463–465
notes about, 380
overview, 373
symbol, 373
universal time constant curves, 374
Time scales
ac voltage generation, 489
inductive transients and, 471–473
Total conductance, 172
Total equivalent resistance, 132, 172
Transfer functions (TF)
band-pass ﬁlters, 811–813, 818–819
boundary functions, 792–793
overview, 791–792
phase shifts, 791, 792, 793, 794, 795, 796, 797
voltage gain, 791–792, 793, 794, 795, 796–797
Transfer functions, RC and RL, 791–800, 822
Bode plot sketching of, 792–800, 801–802, 808–810
examples, 796–798, 803–805, 809–810
high-pass ﬁlter circuits, 807–810
low-pass ﬁlter circuits, 801–806, 807
overview, 791, 792
practice problems, 798–799, 806, 810
problems, 822
writing, 799–800
Transformation ratio, 835. See also Turns ratio
Transformers. See also Coupled circuits; Iron-core transformers
air-core, 831, 832, 855–856
construction, 831–832
ferrite-core, 832
frequency response curve of audio, 855
overview, 828–834
planar, 832–833
power transformer ratings, 842, 869
symbols, 833
turns ratio, 835, 840, 844, 845, 851
two broad categories, 831
Transformer applications
autotransformers, 846–847
impedance matching, 844–845
isolation applications, 844
power supply transformers, 842, 843
problems, 869
transformers in power systems, 842–844
transformers with multiple secondaries, 845–846
Transformers and coupled circuits
coupled impedance, 862–863, 872
Faraday’s law, 833–834
in-process learning checks, 839–840, 847–848, 855, 873
introduction, 829–834
iron-core transformers: ideal model, 834–839, 867–868
loosely coupled circuits, 833, 855–860, 870–871
magnetically coupled circuits with sinusoidal ac excitation,
860–862, 871
overview, 828–829
power transformer ratings, 842, 869
practical iron-core transformers, 848–852, 869–870
primary winding, 830, 831
problems, 867–872
reﬂected impedance, 840–842, 868
secondary winding, 830, 831
transformer applications, 842–847, 869
transformer tests, 852–854, 870
voltage and frequency effects, 854–855
winding directions, 833
Transformer tests
open-circuit test, 852, 853–854
problems, 870
short-circuit, 852–853
Transients. See also Inductive transients
capacitive, 364
in capacitive circuits, 365, 366
current buildup, 461–465, 479–480
desirable, 366
inductance and, 458, 459
in inductive circuits, 365, 366, 457
overview, 346, 458
switches and, 366
undesirable, 366
Transient analysis, meaning of time in, 369
Transient analysis using computers
examples, 395
Multisim, 390–393
overview, 390
practice problems, 392, 393, 394
problems, 402
PSpice, 390, 393–396
Transient duration (5), 373–374
Transistor, 213, 696
bias, 213
Turns ratio, 840, 844, 845, 851
overview, 835
Two-wattmeter method, 898
Ultracapacitors, 349. See also Supercapacitors
Unbalanced bridge, 271
Unbalanced loads
delta loads, 902–904
overview, 901
problems, 914–915
three-phase system, 901–904, 914–915
wye loads, 901–902
Unbalanced systems, 875
Unit conversions, 7
magnetic, 411
overview, 8–10
problems, 19–20
Unit systems. See also SI system of units
English (US Customary), 6, 7
metric, 6, 7–8
Universal-bias circuit, 216
Universal time constant curves, 374
Unloaded output, 218
VA. See Volt-Amperes
Valence electron, 30
VAR. See Volt-amps reactive
Variable capacitors, 349
Variable inductors, 446
Variable resistors, 217. See also Potentiometers
overview, 71–73
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Index
1011
Varistor, 81
VDR. See Voltage divider rule
Vector algebra, 603
Volts, 35–36
Volta, Alessandro, 1
Voltages. See also ac voltage; Capacitor with initial voltage; 
dc voltage; Induced voltage; Line voltage; Phase 
voltage
additive and subtractive, 856–857
air-core coils, 855–856
back, 438
capacitor relationship between charge and, 355–357
current buildup transients and circuit, 462–463
effects of iron-core transformers, 854
inductor, 459
measuring, 44–46, 51–52
nominal, 882–883
overview, 26–28, 34
peak-to-peak, 494
potential difference and, 34, 36
potential energy and, 35
problems, 50, 281–282
rating of capacitor, 345
reference convention, 98
symbols, 36–37, 97, 487
terminal, 147
volts and, 35–36
working, 345
wye-wye circuit neutral-neutral, 880
Voltages and currents. See also ac voltages and currents; 
Ohm’s law
atomic theory review, 29–32, 49
of capacitor during charging, 354–357, 362
coulomb unit of electrical charge, 31, 33, 50
current, 37–39
determining particular, 501–502
as functions of time, 500–504, 527–529
in-process learning checks, 32, 39, 53
measuring, 44–47, 51–52
overview, 26–28, 34–39
with phase shifts, 502–504
as phasors, 536
practical dc voltage sources, 39–44, 51
problems, 49–53
switches, fuses and circuit breakers, 48–49, 53
symbols for time-varying, 355
voltage, 34–37
voltage polarity and current direction, 98–100, 119
Voltage divider rule (VDR), 177, 617–618
for capacitors in series, 353–354
overview, 138–140, 616
problems, 160–161, 647–648
Voltage gain
in decibels, 784
as function of frequency, 792
multistage systems, 789
overview, 783
transfer functions, 791–792, 793, 794, 795, 796–797
Voltage polarity
convention, 129–130
current direction and, 98–100, 119
Voltage ratio
iron-core or ideal transformers, 834–835
turns or transformation ratio, 835
Voltage regulation, 216
iron-core transformer, 850–851
Voltage sources. See also ac sources; dc sources
actual, practical or real, 147
conversions, 242–245, 281–282
ideal, 147
internal resistance of, 147–148, 161–162
in parallel, 176–177, 195–196
practical dc, 34, 51
reciprocity theorem on, 316
in series, 136–137
sinusoidal, 487
symbol for dc, 36–37
Voltage subscripts
double subscripts, 142–145
point sources, 146
problems, 161
single subscripts, 145–146
Volt-amperes (VA), 575, 584–585
Volt-amps reactive (VAR), 575
Voltmeters, 45, 46, 47, 116, 153
decibel scale in, 788
loading effects, 184–186, 200
problems, 200
Watts, 8
ratio curve, 898–900
Watt, James, 1, 8
Watthour meter, 106–107
Wattless power, 571
Wattmeter, 104
readings of three-phase circuits, 898–900
two-wattmeter method, 898
Waveforms. See also ac waveforms and average value;
Nonsinusoidal waveforms; Periodic waveforms; 
Phasors; Pulse; Sine waves; Sinusoidal ac 
waveforms
composite, 919–920, 943–944
Fourier series equivalents of common, 926–929
half-wave symmetry, 924–925
odd symmetry, 924
overview, 485
rise and fall times, 387
shifted, 502–504
Waves. See also Sine waves
cosine, 509
square, 387, 918
Wb. See Weber
Weber (Wb), 410
Weber, Wilhelm Eduard, 410
Westinghouse, George, 486, 830, 876
Wheatstone, Charles, 240, 270
Wheatstone bridge circuit, 240, 270
Winding
directions, 833
primary, 830, 831
resistance, 849
secondary, 830, 831
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1012
Index
Wires
circular mils and resistance of, 62–66, 86
diameters, 59
stranded, 61
Wire tables, electrical, 59–62
Working voltage, 345
Working voltage dc (WVDC), 345
Wye (Y), 240
Wye circuits, 265. See also Delta-wye (pi-tee) conversions; 
speciﬁc Y topics
currents for, 884–885
line voltage, 881–882
neutral-neutral voltage in wye-wye circuit, 880
phase voltage, 881–882
power formulas summary for, 895
Wye loads
active power to balanced, 893
reactive power to balanced, 894
unbalanced, 901–902
Y. See Wye
Y. See Admittance
Y- system, 879–890
Y-Y system, 879
neutral-neutral voltage in wye-wye circuit, 880
Z. See Impedance
Zener diode, 216
Zero-impedance conductor, 886
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

