P a g e  | 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CISSP in 100 Pages: 
A Study Companion 
 
By: The Last Minute Exam Cram Team 
 
 
 
 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 2 
 
Foreward: 
 
 
The field of computer security is an ever-expanding one, with countless job opportunities to 
appropriately qualified and certified individuals.  The purpose of this booklet is not to provide 
a comprehensive review of the eight domains being assessed on the CISSP.  There are other, 
more complete textbooks for that.  It is our hope that this publication will be a helpful 
supplement to your other study materials.  A way to review, and solidify your knowledge. 
Good luck on your certification exam. 
 
~The Last Minute Exam Cram Team 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2017 – Last Minute Exam Cram ~ All Rights Reserved 
 
This publication is not to be copied, altered, or otherwise reproduced in any way, without express 
written consent by the copyright holder. This applies to both commercial and non-commercial uses. 
 
Disclaimer 
The information in this book is provided for education and informational purposes only. No warranty 
or any kind is expressed or implied, including warranty of accuracy, completeness, or fitness for any 
specific purpose. The information herein is not intended to be and does not constitute financial or 
legal advice.  You understand that you are using any and all information available in this book at your 
own risk. 
 
 

P a g e  | 3 
 
 
 
Table Of Contents: 
 
 
Domains 
 
1. Security and Risk Management 
 
2. Asset Security 
 
3. Security Engineering 
 
4. Communication and Network Security 
 
5. Identity and Access Management 
 
6. Security Assessment and Testing 
 
7. Security Operations 
 
8. Software Development Security 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 4 
 
 
 
Domain No. 11 
Security and Risk Management2 
 
 (Security, Risk, Compliance, Law, Regulations, Business Continuity) 
 
Overview 
 
Security and Risk Management is one of the domains of the CISSP examination. 
It is concerned with the dissemination of general information related to the 
Security and Risk Management and covers the basic security principles 
connected with  
o Confidentiality 
o Availability  
o Integrity 
 that forms the basis of the security functions.  
 
The candidates are tested for sufficient knowledge in these areas as this forms 
the basis for the Security Governance and Compliance.  
 
The main focus of testing of CISSP candidates revolves around the general 
ethical considerations and the ISC Code of Ethics as is the case with all other ISC 
Examinations. This is to make sure that the candidates exhibit a higher degree 
of Ethical Code while applying their acquired skills during the CISSP 
Certification. 
 
For the successful implementation of Information Security Function the security 
policies and procedures must be applied regularly in a careful manner.  Due to 
this the candidates doing their CISSP certification are tested for their skills 
necessary for the due development and implementation of the policies within 
the Information Security Framework. 
 
The candidates doing the CISSP certification must also have enough knowledge in 
various aspects that make up for the 
                                                           
1 Watch this video on Domain 1 (1 hr 5 min) 
2 Part Two of Video (2 hrs 11 min) 

P a g e  | 5 
 
 
o Continuity Planning 
o Recovery Point Objectives 
o Business Impact Analysis 
o Requirements Gathering etc. 
 
It is pertinent to note that in the modern Information Security context Risk 
Management becomes very vital for the overall safety and security of the whole 
Information System itself. As such the CISSP candidates are thoroughly tested for 
their proper understanding of the concepts that make up the Risk Management.  
The following topics in the Risk Management are included in the testing 
procedure: 
o Risk Analysis 
o Countermeasures 
o Selection and Implementation 
o Risk Monitoring 
o Reporting 
o Risk Frameworks.  
 
In addition to this, proper introduction is given to the Threat Modeling and the 
proper ways to integrate Risk Management concepts for the risk free acquisition 
and management of Software, Service Contracts and the Hardware that are using 
them. 
 
The candidates appearing for the CISSP certification should have good knowledge 
in the Personnel Security Policies and will be tested for their ability to establish 
and maintain a high level of prowess in educating, training and conducting 
programs of awareness in the Risk Management concepts. 
  
The primary areas of knowledge will be  
 
1. Understanding and application of the concepts of Confidentiality Integrity 
and Availability 
 
 These are the three fundamental information security concepts and comprise the 
C-I-A triad and are considered to be the most important basis of Information 
Security. 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 6 
 
 
Here you will understand the concepts of Security Governance, classification of 
data as well as Risk Management, for setting up your Missions, Goals and 
Objectives. For this you have to practice all relevant policies of security, follow 
the prescribed standards, and act as per the established standards and 
procedures to ensure overall security of your system.  
 
You will be required to take stock of the necessary management practices that 
are put in place for assuring information security. You are also responsible for 
identifying the security education, conduct required training, create the degree 
of awareness and utilize the opportunities present for the accomplishment of the 
concepts of Integrity, Confidentiality and Availability in respect of the Information 
security. 
 
Under this domain you will be concerned with ensuring confidentiality of data by 
preventing the unauthorized using of or disclosure of information, and how you 
will ensure that  only authorized persons alone have access to it.  
You will be learning how to safeguard the accuracy as well as completeness of the 
information and methods used for information processing thereby ensuring the 
highest possible integrity of Information.  
 
You will be also learning how to ensure availability of the information so that only 
the authorized users have timely and reliable access to the information, assets 
and associated systems at all times when they need it. 
. 
 
2. The Process of Application of Security Governance Principles  
 
Here  as a CISSP certified information security specialist you will be able to set the 
right ways of achieving the goals of the Organization.  You will give shape to its 
Mission statements in a secured and safe environment and help it achieve all the 
business objectives without losing its credibility, safety and security. Towards this 
you will be taking stock of all the available business cases, and get hold of the 
required resources and plan your security functions and set a budget for the 
same.  
 

P a g e  | 7 
 
As the activities of the organization may involve in many of the activities like 
acquisitions from both private individuals, or private companies as well as from 
the Government, it is necessary that as a CISSP professional you will be concerned 
with ensuring of security of all transactions with that of third parties.  This is true 
for all transactions of sales 
and disposals by way of 
divestitures. As a person in 
charge of security of the 
organization you will also 
take care of constituting 
governance committees and 
oversee 
their 
activities 
ensuring information and 
other security while dealing 
with third parties. 
 
 Though everyone in an organization is responsible for the information security, 
no one is truly accountable. To avoid this and to fix the specific responsibilities 
on each and every one of the stake holders including employees, vendors, 
consultants, interns, contractors etc, you will be entrusted with the task of 
defining specific roles and fastening responsibilities on each one of them. 
As a CISSP professional you will be also called upon to assemble necessary control 
frameworks to help all the stake holders of the Organization to understand their 
limits and know how to act within their allotted spheres and perform their roles, 
fulfill their responsibilities without any conflict.  
 
As the security of the information is of paramount importance for the success of 
the organization you must have mastered all the necessary steps for assuring the 
information security by exercise of due care in all your activities. 
 
Diligence is the watchword while ensuring information security, and for this you 
must ensure that all the activities you plan towards the fulfillment of the 
Confidentiality, integrity and availability of information is carried out in the most 
diligent way. 
 
 
“THE INFORMATION SECURITY FUNCTION WILL 
NOT BE VERY SUCCESSFUL WITHOUT CAREFULLY 
CONSTRUCTED 
AND 
UNIFORMLY 
APPLIED 
SECURITY POLICIES AND PROCEDURES AND 
CANDIDATES WILL BE TESTED ON THEIR ABILITY TO 
DEVELOP 
AND 
IMPLEMENT 
POLICIES 
AND 
PROCEDURES 
WITHIN 
AN 
INFORMATION 
SECURITY CONTEXT.” ~CISSP HANDBOOK 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 8 
 
The following are the areas of study for your CISSP certification: 
 
 How to align security functions to achieve desired Goals, Mission and 
Objectives of the business like Business Cases, acquiring necessary 
resources and planning budget etc.  
 
 Defining the Organizational Processes like Acquisitions, Governance 
Committees, and Divestitures etc. 
 
 Defining the Roles of Security and the Responsibilities 
 
 Building up of necessary Control Frameworks 
 
 Exercising Due Care 
 
 Exercising Due Diligence 
 
 
3. The process of Compliance 
 
Compliance with various Legal provisions, Rules and standards are vital for the 
day to day running of the Organization. Towards this as the man on the spot 
burdened with the compliance of various Rules and Regulations to maintain the 
standards of information security you have to be well aware of the compliance 
requirements.  
 
In addition to this you have to be well prepared to exercise  constant monitoring 
and follow up of various processes and procedures for substantial compliance of 
Governmental regulations and those that you have set for yourself to maintain 
the Confidentiality, Availability and  Integrity of the information security system. 
 
For complete legal compliance you have to be well versed in the following study 
areas during your certification as a CISSP: 
 
 Providing for Legislative and Regulatory compliance 
 Providing for Privacy requirements compliance 
 

P a g e  | 9 
 
4. Study of Legal and Regulatory issues involved in the Information 
aspect in a Global business scenario 
 
Today we are all living in a Global village and the business scenario has undergone 
a complete change. In this changed scenario information security assumes a great 
significance as like opportunities coming to your organization on a global level 
your organization has to be prepared to meet the threats also that emerge on a 
global level.  
 
This calls for putting in place strict information security system in place so that 
your organization is able to ward off threats that are threatening your 
confidentiality, availability and integrity even from the other side of the world. 
 
When an organization tends to expand its business activities to far off places of 
the globe it is likely to meet various changes and challenges in its activities. To 
tackle these and help your organization proceed with its business objectives in 
other countries and societies you as a CISSP professional is expected to be always 
on the lookout for threats to your information security and swiftly respond them 
in a conclusive manner. This helps your business to retain its momentum in spite 
of increased level of competition and enhanced level of threat to its safety and 
security. 
 
During global operations your organization will be dealing with people of different 
cultures, way of doing business, and differing approach to business and this will 
bring in many problems in the day to day activities having the potential of severely 
compromising your information security system.  
 
In these circumstances, it is necessary that you have to act with utmost 
confidence, dedication and proficiency in protecting the information security that 
is very vital for the continued success of your organization.  
 
Towards this you will be learning more on the following during your preparation 
for the Certification. 
 
 Computer crimes 
 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 10 
 
 Licensing and Intellectual Property Rights like Trademark and Copyrights, 
Management of Digital Rights etc) 
 
 Controls imposed on Imports/ Exports 
 
 Trans- Border Data flow 
 
 Privacy Issues 
 
 Data Breaches 
 
5. Understanding the Professional Ethics 
 
Ethics is the most important trait you as a CISSP certificate holder is expected to 
have. The concept of professional ethics springs from the set of moral values that 
dictate you what to do in a given situation to comply with the overall expectations 
of the society at large and your organization in particular. Credibility in action can 
only come out of the ethical behavior and it is one of the requirements for 
maintaining your CISSP Certification.  
 
As ethical values are commonly based on the national interest, rights of the 
individuals concerned, tradition of the location or the industry, culture, or religion 
and these ethical values are the ones that tell us what we should do in a given 
situation. 
 
To maintain high level of professional ethics you must know how to overcome 
and counter act the  
. 
  Computer Game Fallacy 
  Law-Abiding Citizen Fallacy 
  Shatterproof Fallacy:  
 Candy-from-a-Baby Fallacy 
 Hacker’s Fallacy 
 
Towards this study of the following forms part of your study for your CISSP 
certification 
 

P a g e  | 11 
 
 Exercising the ISC code of Professional Ethics 
 
 Supporting your Organization’s Code of Ethics 
 
6. Study on developing and implementing the documented Standards, 
Procedures, Guidelines and Security Policy of your Organization 
 
A CISSP certified professional is in total control of the entire information security 
system and as such he must be well aware of the policies, procedures, guidelines 
and standards and the way in which they interact with each other in the real life 
business situations. It is a part of your job to be abreast of all the differences and 
relationships that come into play during your work routine and be aware of the 
different types of policies and their applications. 
 
Never forget that the policies, guidelines, standards and procedures are meant to 
work together and form the basic blue print of the information security program 
you are conducting. These are necessary to provide good governance; guidance 
and decision support and help you establish a legal authority inside the 
organization.  
 
As these are necessary for making cost-effective and efficient information 
security systems these must not be overlooked at all. These criteria are the ones 
that define the nature of governance and help in running the day to day 
operations and help in taking good decisions. 
 
So, study of these topics is included in the CISSP Study area and you are expected 
to develop a good working knowledge in developing the necessary policies 
guidelines, standards and procedures. 
 
7.  Understanding the requirements of the Business Continuity. 
 
As an Organization cannot be prepared for all types of eventualities that arise 
through natural calamities and man- made disasters that impact on its 
functioning, it must be able to resume its operations without much delay. For this, 
a good security system must be in place that has the widest scope for business 
continuity and disaster recovery with minimum cost and time so that the 
Organization is able to recover from the disaster with the lowest possible damage. 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 12 
 
 
The role played by a CISSP professional in the disaster situation is very vital for 
the disaster recovery and Business continuity.  Hence you have to be well versed 
in all the concepts that deal with the  
 
o Business Continuity Management 
o Various components of business continuity planning 
o Defining the best practices for business continuity and disaster 
management 
o Putting in place the best practices for easy and swift recovery 
o Process necessary for the development, selection and implementation of 
solutions for the disaster recovery and business continuity 
o Setting up of faster recovery options with the use of redundant 
technologies 
o Setting standards and routines for information back up 
o Secure management of offsite facilities 
o Specifying the types of tests and drills to be conducted during disaster 
recovery with particular focus to information security 
 
 To achieve this as a student for the CISSP certification you will be studying the 
following in detail 
 
 Developing and documenting the Project Scope and Plan 
 
 Conducting of Business Impact Analysis 
 
8.  Providing for and contributing to the Personnel Security Policies 
 
As a CISSP professional you must be aware of the various employment policies 
and practices and must have sound knowledge in how these policies can be 
molded in such a way as to achieve the overall information security objectives. 
For this it is necessary for you to have thorough understanding of all types of 
information security roles and the individual responsibilities on an Organizational 
level. 
 
The background checks and the security clearances must be made an integral part 
of the employment process. These checks will help the organization to know 

P a g e  | 13 
 
beforehand the type of the candidates they are considering for recruitment and 
take on-board only those that have higher level of integrity who can be trusted 
and made a part of the information security system for uncompromising security 
set up in the organization. 
 
While recruitment, Reference checks with particular focus on the personal, 
employment and professional integrity must be made compulsory. A due 
verification of all the data in the employment applications and resumes must be 
carried out in a strict manner and any discrepancy must be viewed seriously so 
that no security problems occur at a later date. 
 
Checks must be conducted on credit records of the probable candidates as well 
as drug testing must be carried out to know the person under consideration is 
trustworthy and will add value to the organization.   
 
If necessary special background investigation must be conducted on the FBI and 
INTERPOL records to make sure that the person to be appointed does not pose 
any security threat to the organization after he has been appointed. 
 
Apart from this periodic post- employment monitoring and screenings must be 
built into the security system so that the continued good conduct of the employee 
is assured as long as he remains on the payroll of the organization.  
 
As a part of the security routine within the Organization, carefully drafted 
Employment Agreements must be executed both at the time of appointment and 
at the time of promotion to the sensitive posts within the Organization. These 
Agreements must include the terms of non- compete, non- disclosure and 
acceptable user policies. 
 
The hiring and termination procedures of the Organization must be designed in 
such a way that it offers  fair treatment and assures the safety of all its information 
assets. Likewise while giving the Job descriptions at the time of appointment as 
well as after appointment must be concise, clear and must be able to clearly 
define the roles and responsibilities with respect to the security of information.  
 
For achieving all these CISPP certification study focuses more on topics including 
 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 14 
 
 
  Conducting Employment and candidate screening like Reference Checks, 
Education Level Verification etc. 
 
 Creating the Agreements and Policies of Employment 
 
  Putting in place the right type of Employment Termination Processes 
 
 Creating the right Vendor, Contractor and Consultant Controls 
 
 Providing for Compliance 
 
 Defining levels of Privacy 
 
 
9. Understanding and Applying the Risk Management Concepts 
 
Apart from the basic concepts of information security, and security fundamentals, 
risk management is the most important facet of the CISSP certified professional. 
You will be learning under this concept the importance of the risk management, 
quantitative risk assessment, methodologies that are used for assessing the risk, 
making right calculations of risk. You must also know how to safeguard selection 
criteria for the assessment of risk and fulfill all the objectives in this respect in a 
safe and secure way. 
 
You must be able to assess the threat and vulnerability of an asset. You should 
understand the relationship of the threat, vulnerability and risk for the accurate 
risk assessment in all cases of natural as well as man mane threats.  This helps you 
to assess the vulnerability of a resource, process, product, or system 
 
You will also understand that the risk management consists of three active 
components of 
o Risk Identification 
o Risk Analysis and 
o Risk Treatment 
 

P a g e  | 15 
 
The risk identification takes place during the risk assessment phase, and depends 
on the asset valuation that may be either qualitative with reference to the cost of 
the asset or qualitative stressing the degree of its importance to the organization.   
 
 You will learn that an inaccurate asset valuation will be detrimental to the 
organization while it will give many benefits when this is done in the right way.  
This is done by taking into account the Initial and maintenance costs for the asset, 
its organizational or internal cost and the public or external costs.  
 
Once this is determined,   a threat analysis is conducted by defining the actual 
threat anticipated, its possible consequences on the organization, probable 
frequency of the threat, chances of both manmade and natural threats 
occurrence are all calculated for conducting a vulnerability assessment. 
 
The next stage in the Risk management is the risk analysis. Here you will be 
learning how to run a methodical examination of  all the elements of risk 
management like identification, analysis and control for helping the organization 
to form an effective risk management strategy. This is done by  
 
1. Identifying the assets that need protection 
2. Defining the perceived threats 
3. Finding the annualized loss expectancy 
4. Creating the right safeguards  
 
by following either a  qualitative risk analysis or a quantitative risk analysis.  
 
Based on the risk assessment, now you will be required to  bring in the right risk 
treatment that help you select the right types of safeguards and counter 
measures to mitigate the perceived threats through risk reduction, risk 
assignment or transference and risk avoidance as well as risk acceptance.  You 
will also get training in managing risk in a cost effective way by knowing how to 
do the cost- benefit analysis. 
 
Towards this you will be focusing mainly on the following during your study for 
the CISSP certification namely:  
 
 Identifying and providing for Threats and Vulnerabilities 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 16 
 
 
 Providing Quantitative, Qualitative and Hybrid Risk Assessment and 
Analysis 
 
 Providing for the Risk Assignment and Acceptance like System 
Authorization 
 
 Selection of the right Counter-Measures 
 
 Defining ways of Implementation 
 
 Providing for the preventive, detective and corrective types of  
 
 Conducting Control Assessments 
 
 Providing for Monitoring and measurement 
 
 Conducting Asset Valuation 
 
 Creating Reports 
 
 Providing for Continuous Improvement 
 
 Study of Risk Frameworks 
 
10. Understanding and Applying Of Threat Modeling 
 
A CISSP professional’s work centers on the understanding and nature of threats 
your organization is facing and finding effective ways of counter-acting them, 
minimizing or altogether removing their impacts on the information security. The 
threats may be either man- made or natural that has the capability of impacting 
the operations of the business and the organizational assets in an adverse way.  
 
To help you create a systematic process for identifying these threats and 
vulnerabilities and bring in suitable counter measures to prevent the adverse 
effects affecting the assets of the organization you will be learning about  
 

P a g e  | 17 
 
. 
 Identification of threats like Adversaries, Employees, Contractors and 
Trusted Partners 
 
 Knowing how to determine and diagram Potential Attacks like spoofing, 
social engineering. 
 
 Ability to perform Reduction Analysis 
 
 Knowing the Technologies and the Processes that are necessary for 
remedying threats like Software Architecture and Operations 
 
11. Integrating Security Risk Considerations into Acquisition Strategy and 
Practice of the Same 
 
A CISSP certified professional occupies an important position in any organization 
and he has to play multiple roles to safeguard the integrity and usability of the 
information security system.  He has to be well aware of the risk considerations 
that are likely to have an impact on the overall functioning of the business. 
Acquisition of assets and materials for the organization is day to day affair and it 
needs to be monitored constantly to make sure that none of the threats emerge 
out of this inevitable activity in the organization. 
 
To know how to frame the right acquisition strategy and implement the risk 
considerations you will be having the opportunity to study the following topics: 
 
 Study of the Software, Hardware and related Services 
 
 Providing for Third Party Assessment and monitoring like conducting On-
Site Assessments, exchange of Documents and Review, Review of Policies 
and Processes 
 
 Prescribing requirements for Minimum Security 
 
 Finding the right Service Level Requirements 
 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 18 
 
12. Establishing and Managing Information Security Education, Awareness and 
Training  
 
In any Organization, it is necessary to impart the right type of education and 
training to create the required levels of awareness in the minds of all those who 
form part of the Information security program.  As a CISSP certified person you 
have to be aware of the ways of training and education for all those in the 
Organization and for this you must have sound knowledge of all the tools and 
objectives necessary for the security education and training. 
 
Most of the times it is an overlooked factor that security awareness is taken for 
granted and overlooked thus paving way for holes in the overall information 
security during day to day operations by common users. To avoid this you have 
to be well aware of the ways of  
 
o Bringing in the support of the senior level management for the awareness 
programs and training 
 
o Must be able to clearly demonstrate that information security is of 
paramount importance to the organization 
 
o Must show how the level of security impacts on everyone and their 
individual job functions 
 
o Must be able to design and conduct the right type of training and education 
as a training too basic will be simply ignored and one that is too technical 
will not be understood by those in the Organization 
 
o After the training you must be able to include the security information with 
the day to day activities of the organization  
 
o Apart from this you must be able to follow up the effectiveness of the 
security training and education and must take immediate corrective steps 
whenever needed. 
 
 During your study for the CISSP program you will find that an effective security 
awareness program takes one of the following forms of 

P a g e  | 19 
 
 
 A general awareness program 
 
 A formal training session 
 
 Educating those in the Organization 
 
An awareness program conducted for  providing the basic security information 
making everyone understand its importance is offered as an Indoctrination and 
orientation programs, presentations by way of lectures, interactive CBT’s, video 
presentations etc, or delivery of printed materials in the form of corporate 
newsletters, periodic bulletins and security posters 
 
Security training is much more effective than an awareness program as it 
provides more in- depth information with high focus on a specific security 
related task or a skill. This is usually given in the form of a  
 
o Class-room training 
o On- the job training 
o Technical or vendor training 
o Qualification programs for Apprentices etc 
o Security Education is the best way to provide for deepest level of security 
training.  
 
This can be structured in such a way that it focuses on the underlying principles 
of security, explaining its methodologies or laying down concepts involved in the 
security process.  
 
Towards this the CISSP certification study area focuses more on  
 
 Creating the right levels of Awareness, Training and Education required 
within the Organization 
 
 Conducting periodic reviews of relevancy of content Periodic reviews for 
Content Relevancy 
 
 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 20 
 
3 
 
 
Domain No.24 
Asset Security 
(Protecting Security of Assets) 
Overview 
 
Asset security is the second domain of the CISSP examination. This is mainly 
concerned with the processes involved in the collection, manipulation and 
protection of information through the entire lifecycle of the Organization. The 
classification of information and the assets used with all these form the 
supporting assets, and you will be required to have a sound knowledge in this 
area with reference to the information security. 
 
Ownership of information, information systems, the business processes involved 
form the areas of study as the second domain for your certification.  
 
In the present days, we see that there is an explosion in the ways in which we 
collect  and store  data in digital form and this becomes the  personal information  
that must be protected though a well defined information security system. The 
ability to acquire digital information has also given rise to many concerns 
including that of the privacy considerations which must be protected making it 
one of the most vital parts of the asset security domain. 
 
You will be studying the following topics with respect to the individual privacy 
protection   including the concepts that deal with the 
o Data Owners 
o Data Processors 
o Data Remanence 
o Limiting Factors Of Data Collection 
o Factors That Affect Safe Storage of Collected Data 
 
                                                           
3 Listen to streaming podcasts episodes for Domain 1 Here 
4 Watch this series of videos on Domain 2  

P a g e  | 21 
 
In this context, while studying collection and storage of digital information you 
have to study about the data retention also.  The concepts that deal with the data 
retention must be studied with particular emphasis on the organizational, legal 
and regulatory requirements. Due to this you will be tested on all these topics in 
your CISSP certification examination. 
 
Due to all this, it becomes necessary for the CISSP candidate to have sufficient 
knowledge in the data collection and storage functions as he will be responsible 
for the selection and implementation of the right types of data security controls 
in the Organization. 
 
You will be studying about the following in detail to have sufficient knowledge in  
  Defining and implementation of Baselines 
 Tailoring and scoping processes 
 Selection of standards 
  Use of Cryptography etc 
 
In addition to this, you will be also studying about other data handling 
requirements like data storage, data destruction and data labeling. As a Certified 
CISSP professional you will be expected to have the capability to conduct 
evaluation of data handling requirements and be well versed in developing the 
right type of policies and procedures for secure acquiring, handling and storage 
of information. 
 
The knowledge areas prescribed for your CISSP certification under the Asset 
Domain   includes 
 
1. Classification of Information and Supporting Assets (E.G., Sensitivity, 
Criticality) 
 
Classifying data that is being used in the organization is one of the best ways of 
controlling access to information and the assets associated with it. As the person 
responsible for the Information security you need to decide and put in place the 
right access controls to determine who uses which information. You have to 
ensure that not every user has access to all information and his access must be 
limited to the needs, position and purpose of the user. 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 22 
 
 
To achieve this type of information security by limiting access to data, the first 
thing you have to do is to classify data and put in  a set of  strict protocols to 
clearly  classify the data and allow access to the required people thus preventing 
unauthorized access to all. The information classification can be based on many 
variables governed by various criteria. This is one of the vital functions that is the 
first step towards putting in place a strong information security set- up for your 
organization. 
 
As the person who is responsible for the security of information you need to 
assign strict rules of access to each class of persons so that the accidental or 
malicious attacks on the Information system are fully prevented. 
 
2. Determine and Maintain Ownership (e.g., Data Owners, System Owners, and 
Business/Mission Owners) 
 
Determining and maintaining ownership, rights and permissions emanating from 
it is yet another way to implement a good information security protocol. In any 
organization you can see a number of owners of information and they will be 
having various types of user policies for their data and information. 
 
 Accepting these and putting in place the effective ways of controlling access 
through permissions for dealing with the information in which they have to deal 
and deny the permission for others is the way of handling ownership of data and 
information. Towards this a CISSP certified information security specialist must 
be having good knowledge in handling the rights and permissions of data owners, 
system owners, business owners and the mission owners in separate ways. 
 
 This is necessary for providing the right type of information security within the 
Organization without compromising on the confidentiality, availability and 
integrity of the Information Security System  
 
3. Protection of Privacy 
 

P a g e  | 23 
 
  The information security system you are putting in place for your organization 
must be capable of protecting the privacy of all those connected with it.  This must 
be so tuned towards preventing the unauthorized use or misuse of information 
collected from individuals.   
 
The CISSP curriculum expects you to have a sound knowledge on  how to 
 
 Collect information from individuals in fair and legal manner 
  Make sure that the information so collected  is used only for the purpose 
for which it was collected 
  Make the information collection process accurate and relevant at all times 
 Make these information available to the individuals who have a legal  right 
and permission to access the same 
 Update and make them error- free without compromising on their security 
 Safeguard the personal information from unauthorized use 
 Assure safety and integrity of the personal information when they have to 
be transmitted to other places or persons who are not bound by the 
Information system you are maintaining etc. 
 
All these you have to study with reference to the  
 
  Protection of personal data of Data owners 
 Protection of personal data in the hands of the  Data processors 
  Dealing with data security taking into account the  Data Remanence of 
memory devices 
   Assuring personal data security through  personal data Collection 
limitation 
 
 
4. 
Ensure 
Appropriate 
Retention 
(E.G., 
Media, 
Hardware, Personnel) 
 
To 
ensure 
the 
highest 
possible 
information 
security it is necessary to 
have a good data retention 
 
“THE RAPID EXPANSION IN THE COLLECTION AND 
STORAGE OF DIGITIZED PERSONAL INFORMATION 
HAS RESULTED IN A CORRESPONDING INCREASE IN 
THE IMPORTANCE OF PRIVACY CONSIDERATIONS, 
AND PRIVACY PROTECTION CONSTITUTES AN 
IMPORTANT PART OF THE ASSET SECURITY 
DOMAIN.” ~CISSP HANDBOOK 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 24 
 
policy as a part of your Organization’s protocol for the secure retention of 
information for both operational as well as regulatory compliance.  As an 
Information security specialist after your CISSP certification it is necessary to 
create a data retention policy that provides for  
 
 Organizing the information in a secure way so that they can be searched 
and accessed whenever needed 
 
 Deletion and disposal of data in a permanent manner when the data is no 
longer needed without any chance of retrieval at a later date by any 
unauthorized person 
 
Apart from operational compliance there are many instances for the Regulatory 
compliance and the data retention policy framed must also be able to provide 
data and information to the Governmental and other agencies that are legally 
entitled to receive data from the organization in   a secure manner.   The data 
retention policy must also be able to provide for the deletion and permanent 
removal of data from data storage media, hardware systems and Personnel files 
as soon as the statutory compliance period is over. 
 
You have to gather as much knowledge as possible on the concepts of data 
retention in the modern days. You must also be able to provide for the 
Information security in the Organization with the right types of data retention 
policy as a way of enforcing good information security protocols. 
 
 
5. Determine Data Security Controls (E.G., Data at Rest, Data in Transit) 
 
When the data you want to protect is stored in a file or in a media then it is said 
to be a data at rest. If the same data is in the process of being transmitted through 
a network, then it becomes a data in transit. Each one of these types of data needs 
a different set of standards selection for the information security. 
 
For protecting the data at rest the best way is to adopt the Drive and tape 
encryption that is good for protecting the data even after there is a physical 
breach of the security controls. 

P a g e  | 25 
 
For effective protection of the sensitive data they must be backed up on offsite 
media or data servers that are governed and protected by their own information 
security protocols. The transfer of data must be done in a secure way following 
the standards you have selected for the data in motion. These must be 
scrupulously followed while sending the data to your offsite storage through data 
transfer networks electronically or through physical movement of data in a secure 
backup media. 
 
Scoping  is the process of determining which standards you want to use for your 
organization information security system and  this  must be done after due 
consideration of various factors with utmost adherence to the Information 
security  objectives you have set to achieve. 
 
With the use of the concept of Tailoring you will be able to customize a generally 
available data security standard, so that it is able to work well and give the best 
possible protection to your organization’s data.  The process of Tailoring usually 
begins with the selection of controls for information security, goes on with 
scoping to avoid those standards that are not good for your information system, 
and proceeds further to end with the application of compensating controls. 
 
Yet another way of safeguarding the information security of data in motion is 
cryptography. This  is the process of  encrypting the information before transfer 
and decrypting the  same after the transfer so that  the content of the 
communication are made unintelligible for all except the person to whom it is 
meant for.   
 
This system is widely in use today so the CISSP certified information security 
professional is expected to have a very thorough knowledge in  
 
o Fundamental concepts of cryptography 
o Basic concepts of cryptography 
o Basic operation of cryptographic systems 
o Common uses and applications of cryptography 
o Methods of attacks 
 
You must be able to apply the cryptographic concepts to issues faced in the real 
world situations and problems faced in protecting the sensitive information of the 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 26 
 
organization. For this you are expected to have a thorough understanding of the 
strengths, weaknesses, applications and uses of the cryptograph based 
information security systems. 
 
The following are the topics covered for the CISSP Certification examination under 
this chapter 
 
 Defining and implementation of Baselines 
 Tailoring and scoping processes 
 Selection of standards 
  Use of Cryptography etc 
 
 
6. Establish Handling Requirements (Markings, Labels, Storage, Destruction of 
Sensitive  
Information 
 
In any organization there will be need to handle data on a day to day basis by 
different categories of users. You might have placed the way the sensitive data 
will be created, accessed, stored and retrieved by these categories of users 
through your information security system. These form part of the handling 
requirements of information and you have to plan elaborately and set up the right 
set of these to satisfy how the information will be handled in a safe and secure 
manner. 
The handling requirements involve in creating the right types of markings and 
labels, so that the data will be handled according to the set of handling routines 
that you have put in place through your information security system.  Efficient 
and secure information handling function starts from the data classification 
where the data are clearly classified according to their significance, criticality, 
value and life of the information. 
 The importance and sensitivity of the data will determine its type of classification. 
Once the set of rules for classifying the information have been clearly defined 
then you have to create the set of rules for marking and labeling them. This makes 

P a g e  | 27 
 
it easy to identify the type of document and handle it in the way it is planned to 
be handled for maintaining its confidentiality, availability and integrity. 
The crux of the information security in an organization lies in the way the objects 
are assigned their labels and how they are handled as per these markings. The 
labeling and marking of information helps in locating and identifying the data that 
are sensitive in nature. The process of labeling is done as per the scheme put in 
place for the organizational data classification. 
The most common labels used in the present days are 
o Top- secret :  the information that is likely to cause grave danger to the  
organization once it is used by unauthorized persons 
o Secret : is the type of information that is likely to cause serious damage to 
the organization 
o Confidential:  is the type of information that is likely to cause damage to 
the organization. 
Apart from this there are lot of additional labels that are in use to denote and 
classify the information and this classification helps the Information Security 
System to ensure the proper handling of the information.  
A CISSP certified Information security Professional must be well aware of the 
problems associated with the destruction of unneeded data  contained in physical 
media or in the electronic memory devices.  It is very important to put in place 
strict rules and routines before the data goes for deletion both manually and 
automatically. You must be aware of the different types of memories used in the 
computer systems and how each of them handles the data deletion process and 
their data Remanence properties. 
This is necessary to prevent the unauthorized declassification of sensitive 
information after the devices that contained these data were subject to non- 
invasive data deletion processes. You have to know the data storage and data 
Remanence characteristics of the following types of memory devices connected 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 28 
 
with computer based information creation, storage, and handling and deletion 
functions: 
 Random Access Memory ( RAM ) 
 Cache memory 
 Read Only Memory ( ROM ) 
 Static Random Access Memory ( SRAM) 
 Dynamic Random Access Memory ( DRAM) 
 Programmable Read- only Memory ( PROM ) 
 Erasable Programmable Read- only Memory ( EPROM ) 
 Electrically Erasable Programmable Read- only Memory (E EPROM ) 
 Flash Memories  
 Solid State Drives 
The data destruction of information covered under your security program must 
be cleaned secured, or destroyed fully before disposing the devices and files that 
contained the data to prevent unauthorized retrieval of sensitive data through 
object reuse. You must know how to prevent the attacks through various types of 
object reuses and how to safely and completely remove the data before 
destroying the media by resorting to  
o Overwriting 
o Degaussing 
o Physical Destruction 
o Shredding etc 
 Thus, you will be expected to have the necessary knowledge in these vital areas 
of Information security and will be tested for while seeking your CISSP 
certification. 5 
 
 
 
                                                           
5 Listen to these Podcasts on Domain 2 

P a g e  | 29 
 
 
 
 Domain No. 3 
Security Engineering6 
(Engineering and Management of Security) 
Overview 
 
Security engineering is the third domain of the CISSP Examination. It covers the 
second largest number of topics that you have to study for your certification. 
 
Security engineering is the process of building and maintaining the required 
information systems and related sub-systems for delivering the functionalities 
that are required to withstand and counteract any threats emanating from 
o Malicious attacks 
o Human error 
o Failure of hardware or software systems 
o Caused by natural disasters.  
 
Thus, the security engineering encompasses a wide range of systems that are 
created for ensuring the confidentiality, integrity and availability in engineering 
systems for the due creation and integration of security controls, behaviors and 
capabilities into the information systems and the enterprise level architecture. 
 
The main focus of the CISSP certification examination would be to test the 
knowledge of the candidates in their ability to build, maintain and manage 
necessary security process through fail proof engineering architectures based on 
sound and secure design principles. They are expected to have sound knowledge 
in all the basic concepts of creating and running security models and develop 
further design requirements for meeting the organizational security 
requirements and to draw necessary security policies and implement them using 
the right type of controls and countermeasures for satisfying those design 
requirements. 
 
To achieve this as the person who is responsible for the security of information in 
the organization you are expected to have all the knowledge that is necessary for 
                                                           
6 Here’s a Playlist of Helpful Domain 3 Videos 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 30 
 
understanding the limitations of security and the capabilities of those systems 
you depend on for the level of information security you want to maintain.   
 
You will be also be expected to be on constant look out for ways of assessing  the 
nature and extent of vulnerabilities in your information system set up and the 
architectures that you are using to maintain such counter measures for mitigating 
the effects of those vulnerabilities and  safeguard the safety and security of 
information. 
 
You have to acquire enough knowledge about the designs and solution elements 
for creating the right type of engineering architectures that help you tide away all 
types of threats to the information security and the CISSP examination is designed 
to test your capabilities and knowledge in the level of preparation to prevent any 
type of attacks that are targeted to jeopardize the level of security you have to 
build for the information and data of the organization.  
 
You have to be well versed in the following topics including 
 
o Vulnerabilities on the client and server side 
o Security of databases 
o Cloud security and distributed systems 
o Systems based on cryptography 
o Industrial control systems 
o Vulnerabilities arising out of web applications 
o Vulnerabilities inherent in mobile devises 
o Risks and threats arising out of embedded systems etc 
 
You must have a good working knowledge in the concepts of cryptography that 
helps in the protection of information while it is in motion and also when it is at 
rest, by suitably altering its readability and usability by unauthorized persons. 
Cryptography has advanced much in the present times and you must have good 
knowledge of creating, running and managing cryptography based solutions and 
systems to ensure the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information. 
These concepts are well covered under this security engineering domain. 
 
In this respect the candidates of CISSP certification will be tested for their 
prowess in the  

P a g e  | 31 
 
 
 General cryptographic concepts 
 Lifecycle of a cryptography based solution 
 System that is necessary for successful cryptography 
 Public key infrastructure 
 Key practices for creating and managing a cryptography process and 
system 
 Concepts of digital signatures 
 Effective Digital rights management 
 
A CISSP student must also possess enough knowledge and good understanding 
of various cryptanalytic attack vectors like  
 
 Brute force attacks 
 Attacks through social engineering 
 cipher- text only attacks 
 Known plaintext attacks 
 Frequency analysis of attacks 
 Cipher text  and implementation attacks 
 
The branch of study comprising of the security engineering not only covers the 
information systems development but also the additional topics that cover all 
the concepts and principles 
of creating applications for design of secure information systems with particular 
reference to the site selection and protection, design of secure facilities and 
enforcing the required level of physical security. 
 
Areas of Knowledge 
 
1. Implement and manage engineering processes using secure design 
principles 
 
To achieve complete information security it is now possible to use many of the 
available engineering processes. The aim of using these to the information system 
is to make them more secure and withstand and counteract the perceived 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 32 
 
vulnerabilities and threats without causing any damage to the overall information 
security system.  
 
For this you have to take care of the following namely 
o Capture the interactions and relations between the system and the 
environment in which it is acting 
o Formulate the necessary  security systems for  the system 
o Implement the security requirements into the information system 
 
Being a CISSP professional you have to be well aware of the problems associated 
with the launch and patch approach to overall information security. Due to the 
use 
of 
the 
distributed 
information systems in the 
organization 
there 
is 
a 
possibility of increasing risks 
associated 
with 
security 
breaches at all the levels.  
 
 So, as the person in charge 
of information security you 
have to get the things in the 
right order from the start 
and this must be the focus of 
any security systems design.  
 
But under practical conditions there is always a possibility for the presence of 
flaws in the system and these are capable of putting the information at risk. You 
have to know how to manage risks even after you have designed a good system 
using the best of the engineering processes. So, you must always try to build a 
system that is good from the start and is able to handle the vulnerabilities arising 
due to failing components or unexpected events.  
 
While designing your system based on engineering processes for information 
security you have to bear in mind the importance of  
 
o Seamless matching of the knowledge of the system and its environment 
o Mutual trust between the system owner and different users of the system 
 
“[CANDIDATES] 
MUST 
UNDERSTAND 
THE 
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS OF SECURITY MODELS 
AND BE CAPABLE OF DEVELOPING DESIGN 
REQUIREMENTS 
BASED 
ON 
ORGANIZATION 
REQUIREMENTS AND SECURITY POLICIES AND OF 
SELECTING CONTROLS AND COUNTERMEASURES 
THAT SATISFY THOSE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.” 
~CISSP HANDBOOK 

P a g e  | 33 
 
o Engineering requirements needed to design, create and implement the 
system 
o Modeling of the system based on the latest design principles 
o Methods and tools necessary to create and run the system 
o How the designed system will be ready to meet the risk management 
criteria 
 
2. Understand the fundamental concepts of security models  
(e.g., Confidentiality, Integrity, and Multi-level Models) 
 
Within an organization there are numerous places where the computer and 
information security are at play. So, you must be aware of each one of the 
vulnerability prevailing within the system, and put in place the right type of 
counter measures to ensure complete information security. For this you must 
have sound understanding of the security levels of each and every component 
built into your information security system and provide for the vulnerabilities and 
threats that each one of them has to face. 
 
 A CISSP professional must be able to prepare a blue print for the overall security 
of his entire information system and for this he can make use of the available or 
perceived security models that aptly apply to his type of security system. Then he 
has to take care to implement the blueprint and create the right type of system 
architecture with the available engineering models so that they are able to 
withstand and counter act all types of threat to the information security. 
 
Towards this the main focus and testing during CISSP certification will be towards 
the following concepts of computer based security systems: 
 
o Computer architecture and the individual components that form part of 
it 
o Building and managing trusting computing bases 
o Creating effective security mechanisms based on the computer 
architecture 
o Components that form the operating system and their  in- built security 
elements 
o Security models that  help you create  your information security blue 
print 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 34 
 
o Criteria on which your security system is to be  operated and ratings for 
the same 
o Conducting the right certification and accreditation processes to make 
the various users aware of the security aspects of your information 
security system 
 
 
 
3. Select controls and countermeasures based upon systems security 
evaluation Models 
 
When designing an information security system for your organization it is 
necessary to take into account various controls and counter measures that 
will be good to protect the information in all eventualities. As the main aim 
of good information security system is for ensuring the confidentiality, 
integrity and availability of data, you have to take care to select one of the 
best systems security evaluation models available. 
 
In these circumstances, you have to be well versed with the available 
systems security evaluation models that have all the necessary controls and 
counter measures built into it. This will help you use the same for creating 
the elements that make up a secure information system for the 
organization. The evaluation of the security model you have chosen has to 
be carried out in a careful manner so that it is able to fulfill all the 
requirements of your intended information security system. 
 
 . 
4. Understand security capabilities of information systems  
(e.g., memory protection, virtualization, trusted platform module, 
interfaces, fault tolerance) 
 
All information systems have a set of security capabilities. These must be 
thoroughly studied so that it is possible to tweak the system in such a way 
it is made highly secure to protect the information of the organization.  
You must be well aware of the various factors that affect the security 
capability of the overall system and must be able to make necessary 

P a g e  | 35 
 
corrections and changes to the same to get a fully functional and error- 
free information system for your organization.  
 
For this it is necessary to know the process of memory protection, as it is 
a way of controlling memory access rights on the computers and the 
other computer based devices that make up your information security 
system. This forms part of the most modern computer architecture and 
operating systems. This prevents the unauthorized processes accessing 
the memory of the system so that the integrity of the data is protected to 
a great extent. 
 
 
5. Assess and mitigate the vulnerabilities of security architectures, 
designs, and solution Elements 
 
Vulnerabilities and threats are inherent in any Information system and as a 
Security person in charge of maintaining the confidentiality, availability and 
integrity of the system you need to know how to assess the weak spots in 
your information handling and management system.  
 
For this you must have good knowledge in the security architectures on 
which your information security system has been built on, and the designs 
of each of the individual components that make up the system. This will 
help you easily identify the vulnerable aspects of the system and threats 
you can expect out of them. 
 
When you are able to do this you can easily put in place the right type of 
information security elements and counter measures to easily tackle them. 
This must be done on a continuous basis as the vulnerabilities may arise 
from new instances and you have to keep on looking for new threats and 
try to counter them  by anticipating their happening and likely frequency 
of those security problems that are likely to occur  in the  near future. 
 
The vulnerabilities and threats may arise from the client side usage when 
new applets and applications are used in the system.  This may give rise to 
new challenges by way of unexpected security issues and other instances 
of security attacks and you must be able to assess the possible security 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 36 
 
issues that may arise in the system with the use of these new applications 
and be ready with the solutions for those problems to save the information 
security system from any possible attacks. 
 
The problems to the information security system may arise due to server 
based operations like data flow control issues, and it is necessary to have 
very strict data usage and data handling routines in the server environment 
to ensure that no security problem occurs in the data storage, or data 
handling instances between the server and clients operating within the 
Information security system.  
 
Database forms the backbone of any Commercial operations of the 
organization and it is of paramount importance to assure the best possible 
security for the same. As the database is one of the most critical 
information wealth of the organization the information security system 
must be well focused and tuned well to take care of any security problem 
that may arise due to the interference, aggregation, and data mining or 
during the data analytics functions during normal operations of the 
organization.  
 
Particular importance must be laid while going in for data warehousing 
operations and utmost care must be taken to ensure full security for the 
data and all vulnerabilities and threats must be tackled on priority. Suitable 
counter measures must be put in place even before the occurrence of the 
anticipated threats and well planned back up strategies must be laid for 
maintaining the integrity and safety of the database. 
 
The following areas of study are suggested for successful preparation for 
your CISSP certification: 
 
 
1. Client  based (e.g., applets, local caches) 
2. Server based (e.g., data flow control) 
3. Database security (e.g., inference, aggregation, data mining, 
data analytics, warehousing) 
4. Large scale parallel data systems 

P a g e  | 37 
 
5. Distributed systems (e.g., cloud  computing, grid computing, 
peer to peer) 
6. Cryptographic systems 
7. Industrial control systems (e.g., SCADA) 
 
6. Assess and mitigate vulnerabilities in web -based systems 
(e.g., XML, OWASP) 
 
In the present days the computers and Internet have become the most basic 
and inevitable part of any business and their dependability on these has 
brought in new vulnerabilities and threats to their information. Protecting the 
information and providing for its security becomes very difficult in the global 
business scenario, due to explosion of web based attacks and hacking 
attempts.   
 
So, it becomes necessary for the CISSP certified professional to be rightly 
equipped to meet these challenges and safeguard the information so that the 
business of the organization is not compromised in any way.  
 
Towards this, you have to be well versed in the concepts that equip you and 
be ready to assess the vulnerabilities and threats that arise out of your web- 
based information creation, management and storage systems. You must be 
fully aware of the various ways of providing for the confidentiality, Integrity 
and availability of the information at all times. 
  
 
7. Assess and mitigate vulnerabilities in mobile systems 
 
     Use of mobile hand held devices has brought in a new way of creation, handling 
and storage of information. With the ever increasing number of users of these 
devices now it is very important for any business to have separate and dedicated 
information systems for these users to tap on new opportunities that arise out of 
the mobile technology explosion.  
 
At the same time this type of information handling processes has brought in many 
new types of challenges and ways of attacking the conventional information 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 38 
 
security systems in entirely different manners hitherto unexpected and unheard 
of in the earlier information security parlance. 
 
So, to safeguard the vital data from attacks that emanate from mobile based 
systems you must be able to assess the types of vulnerabilities and threats that 
may arise out of mobile systems. You must be able to successfully tackle the 
problems that arise from a mobile system to the information security systems you 
have built for your organization. 
 
8. Assess and mitigate vulnerabilities in embedded devices and cyber 
physical systems (e.g., network - enabled devices , Internet of things 
(loT)) 
 
Embedded systems have become the driving force for the development of the 
technology based development in all the spheres of today’s business activities. 
We see that many new computational and networked devices and systems are 
needed to cope with the demands of the present day businesses and these are 
becoming more vital for the business success. Due to this we depend more on 
these embedded and cyber physical systems as ways of achieving our business 
goals in this fiercely competitive global business scenario. 
 
Use of these systems has brought in a new set of threats and vulnerabilities to the 
information security systems of an organization, and the CISSP certified 
information security person must be well aware of the dangers that are lurking 
on this landscape. He must be able to assess the type, extent and frequency of 
these potential threats to the information system and must be ready to face them 
with the right types of counter measures to minimize or completely avoid the 
dangers arising out of the attacks that may arise out of the use of embedded and 
cyber physical systems.  
 
9. Apply Cryptography 
 
Cryptology is one of the most important ways of protecting the information 
security and it is fast becoming the right way to counter the vulnerabilities and 
threats that are to be anticipated while dealing with data in motion as we all as 
to the data that is stored on a modern cloud based environment. Most of the 
modern information security systems use cryptology as an inevitable and 

P a g e  | 39 
 
indispensable part of their information security systems due to its ability to help 
the organization to meet its goals of information security. 
 
Cryptology can be used for successfully protecting confidentiality of information 
when the data transmitted or the storage data systems are compromised, the 
data in the hands of the unauthorized persons becomes useless as they do not 
have the necessary key to decrypt the information to cause damage to the 
information security.  
 
The 
cryptography 
technology also helps in 
maintaining the integrity of 
the information by ensuring 
a higher degree of accuracy 
due to the use of various 
hashing 
algorithms 
and 
message digests. The availability of the information can be ensured through 
cryptology with the use of various secure ways of authentication like digital 
signatures, digital certificates, Public Key Infrastructure etc.  
 
To make better use of the modern cryptology for information security of your 
organization you must be have a good 
 
o Understanding of the concepts of symmetric and asymmetric key systems 
o Know what keys are and how to use them effectively for meeting your 
information security goals 
o Knowledge to online information safe with the use of right type of 
cryptology based tools an systems 
o Knowledge about the  vulnerabilities and threats that are to anticipated  in 
respect of a cryptology based information security system and  the counter 
measures for the same 
 
For this you have to focus more on these topics while preparing for your CISSP 
certification: 
 
1. Cryptographic life cycle (e.g., cryptographic limitations, algorithm/protocol  
governance) 
 
“CRYPTOGRAPHY INVOLVES THE PROTECTION OF 
INFORMATION, BOTH WHILE IN MOTION AND AT 
REST, BY ALTERING THAT INFORMATION TO 
ENSURE ITS INTEGRITY, CONFIDENTIALITY AND 
AUTHENTICITY.” ~CISSP HANDBOOK 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 40 
 
2. Cryptographic types (e.g., symmetric, asymmetric, elliptic curves) 
3. Public Key Infrastructure (PKI 
4. Key management practice 
5. Digital signatures 
6. Digital Rights Management 
7. Non- Repudiation 
8. Data integrity through Hashing and Salting 
9. Methods of Cryptanalytic Attacks like brute force attacks, cipher- text only, 
known text etc. 
 
10. Apply Secure Principles to Site and Facility design 
 
Site and facility plays an important role not only in the information security 
realm but also for the overall safety and security of the infrastructure of the 
entire organization. So, while selecting your site for the facility creation you 
must have conducted a complete analysis of the threats to the physical 
security and plan your site and facility design accordingly. 
 
You must be aware of the various physical and environmental security controls 
and ensure that there is complete fulfillment of all the physical security 
concepts and controls that are necessary to protect the site and the facilities.  
 
Some of the things that must be satisfied for good site and facility design 
include  
 
o Factors likely to interfere with physical security 
o Elements that must be considered for good facility planning and design 
o Security controls that must be established 
o Access controls that must be put in place 
o Technical controls necessary for effective overall security 
o Environmental and life safety controls necessary 
o Implementation and operation of the overall security System 
 
11. Design and Implement Physical Security 
 
Threats and vulnerabilities to physical security arises in many forms like 
 

P a g e  | 41 
 
o Natural disasters 
o Emergency situations 
o Man- made threats 
o Sabotages 
All these must be properly analyzed and the anticipated threats to physical 
security must be identified so that proper counter measures are placed at all 
places so that no damage due to these affects the survival of the facility at any 
time. The risk analysis carried out must be comprehensive and suitable damage 
control strategies must be implemented.  
 
Some of the common threats include: 
 
 Threats arising out of fire 
 Water and flooding 
 Vibration and movement 
 Severe and extreme weather conditions 
 Electricity hazards 
 Sabotage/terrorism/war/theft/vandalism:  
 Equipment failure 
 Loss of communications and utilities 
 Personnel loss etc.  
 
The focus areas for your CISSP examination under this heading include: 
 
Design and implementation of physical security in respect of  
o Wiring closets 
o Server Rooms 
o Media Storage facilities 
o Evidence Storage 
o Restricted an Work Area Security ( e.g Operations centers) 
o Data Centre Security 
o Utilities and HVAC considerations 
o Water issues ( e.g., leakage, flooding) 
o Fire prevention, detection and suppression 7 
 
                                                           
7 Listen to these podcasts on Security Operations 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Domain No. 4 
Communication and Network Security8 
(Designing and Protecting Network Security) 
The communication and Network security domain forms an important part of the 
CISSP certification process as this is one of the core areas of the information 
security. Due to this in the present day communication set up using various 
modes of data transmission, storage and handling you are expected to have a 
deep understanding of various concepts that make up the Network security and 
the security of information.  
Under this domain you will have a clear understanding of the following important 
aspects that have a very strong impact on the information security in a networked 
environment like: 
o Network Architecture 
o Methods of information transmission 
o Types of data transport and handling protocols 
o Types and nature of control devices in use for secure data communication 
                                                           
8 Video playlist on communication and network security 

P a g e  | 43 
 
o Various security measures necessary for ensuring confidentiality in 
communication 
o Ways to endure integrity and accuracy of information 
o making the information available in a secure manner to every user who is 
authorized to access it 
o Types of security measures for transmission of data over private networks 
o The security measures that must be adopted while sending data over public 
networks 
As a candidate for the CISSP exam you have to learn the basics of networking like 
the network topologies, the process and functioning of IP addressing system, 
concepts of modern network 
segmentation, various types 
of 
data 
switching 
and 
routing, concepts involved in 
the process 
of wireless 
networking, the OSI and TCP 
models of communication, 
TCP/IP protocols and their 
way of functioning with 
respect to the present day 
standards of data transmission over the wide area networks. 
In the present days, there is a widespread use of encryption for ensuring the 
information security while sending data over secured and unsecured data 
networks. Due to this you will be tested for your basic understanding of the 
cryptography processes. Particularly you will be tested for your extent of 
knowledge in the secure network communication. 
This domain also requires you to have a good understanding of various modes of 
communication and ways of ensuring security over the network and you must 
have a good understanding of security network devices and their ways of 
functioning and how these can be used in an effective manner for ensuring the 
right types of security on the network while sending and receiving critical data. 
 
“THE 
CISSP 
CANDIDATE 
IS 
EXPECTED 
TO 
DEMONSTRATE A THOROUGH UNDERSTANDING 
OF 
NETWORK 
FUNDAMENTALS 
INCLUDING 
NETWORK 
TOPOLOGIES, 
IP 
ADDRESSING, 
NETWORK SEGMENTATION, SWITCHING AND 
ROUTING, WIRELESS NETWORKING, THE OSI AND 
TCP MODELS AND THE TCP/IP PROTOCOL SUITE.” 
~CISSP HANDBOOK 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 44 
 
To maintain high degree of information security, a CISSP professional is tested for 
his depth of knowledge about various devices and equipments that form part of 
the communication network like switches, routers, and points of access for the 
wireless systems. They should have sound knowledge and ability to deploy the 
right combination of these network control devices for maintaining the required 
level of confidentiality, availability and integrity of data and information sent and 
received through the communication network. 
Candidates of CISSP certification must also possess enough knowledge in various 
types of security considerations inherent and come built- in with the devices that 
form the network security in respect of the media through which the information 
is transmitted. You must also have sufficient knowledge about  
o Network access control 
o End point Security 
o Content distribution Networks etc 
 As a CISSP certified Information Security Professional you are expected to have 
the ability to design and implement necessary data transmission protocols, 
network elements, control devices, for successful and orderly commissioning and 
running and managing of communication channels. For this you must be well 
aware of the methods of using various technologies to enable the network to use 
applications for efficient and secure handling of all types of information like data, 
voice, remote access, and multimedia content and sending and receiving data 
over virtualized networks. 
You must have good knowledge about network attack factors and must be able 
to assess the vulnerability of each device or sub- system based on which the 
network is functioning and must ensure the security over the entire network by 
knowing how to design, implement, manage and monitor the necessary counter 
measures to mitigate all types attacks on the communication network. 
 
Key Areas of Knowledge 
 

P a g e  | 45 
 
   1.  Apply secure design principles to network architecture  
             (e.g., IP & non-IP protocols, segmentation) 
 
The entire Network architecture must be created with the primary aim of 
maintaining the highest possible information security and towards this you have 
to understand the following principles of design of network security architectures  
like 
 
o Compartmentalization or segmentation of resources:  the various 
components and resources that are used for the creation of the network 
security architecture have different sensitivities. This difference in their 
level of activity affects the overall security of your information system. To 
prevent an adverse effect of one of the less sensitive resources on the 
entire system you must design your network architecture in a way that 
resources of different sensitivity are located in a security zone that matches 
their level of sensitivity 
 
o Layered protections or defense in depth: When designing your network 
architecture you must be able to ensure higher degree of protection to 
your IT system, by making use of different security layers and must be 
created so that each one complements the other in action for added 
security. 
 
o The design should ensure adequate protection: While designing your 
network elements make sure that each and every individual element in the 
network gets adequate protection that are relevant to their anticipated 
vulnerabilities and frequency of attacks. These must be totally compliant 
with all the legal requirements and they must be fully co- operative with 
other elements present in your network system. 
 
o The design should be simple and have least privileges: The users of the 
security system must be able to use the IT resources for performing their 
day to day routines with minimum privileges for ensuring easy   yet secure 
availability of the system information. 
 
o Identify the weakest link in the chain:  you must be aware that the overall 
security of your network system as good as the security of your weakest 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 46 
 
link in the chain. Your design must take this into account and take care of 
the vulnerabilities due to this vital aspect and provide the right and timely 
counter measures so that the damage to the overall network security is as 
minimum as possible. 
 
While designing your network Architecture it is necessary to adhere to the most 
modern network transmission protocols. The IP based network protocols are the 
widest in use and hence the design you are adopting must adhere to these for 
seamless operation across various networks. 
 
The Open System Interconnection protocol popularly referred to as the OSI model 
provides for universal interconnection of all the Network related elements, 
components and devices, and hence the design you create for your network 
security must follow these standards for easy connectivity across various 
platforms and networks. On the other hand the TCP/IP model defines the way of 
sending and receiving data through the Internet and hence these also need to be 
followed for easy access to any type of network in an internet based network 
system. 
 
While trying to create a good network security system, you must not forget the 
fact that an attack targeting any layer or one of the different layers of the 
network’s common stack can take place at any time. Likewise an attack can target 
a specific layer and you have to conduct a risk analysis for each of the components 
in the network  and  know the vulnerability level of each of them and plan, 
implement and monitor effective counter measures to prevent any damage to 
the overall network security system. 
 
You have to focus on the following topics while getting ready for your CISSP 
certification examination: 
 
 
  OSI And TCP/IP Models 
 IP Networking 
 Implications Of Multilayer Protocols (E.G., DNP3) 
 Converged Protocols (E.G., Fcoe, MPLS, Voip, Iscsi) 
 Software- Defined Networks 
  Wireless Networks 

P a g e  | 47 
 
 Cryptography Used To Maintain Communication Security 
 
2. Secure Network Components 
 
A network may have been built on many components that work in synchronous 
manner to transfer data from one point in the network to the other. In the 
present days, we have to use a variety of Network components to successfully 
design and run a network. As the person in charge of the security of the network 
and the information you send through the network, it is your duty to take care of 
the security issues that are likely to arise with each of the individual network 
components. 
 
 You have to conduct a thorough security analysis of each one of these 
components like 
o Bridges  
o Modems 
o Switches 
o Routers 
o Wireless access points 
o Mobile devices 
o Cabling and cabling components 
 
so that you are able to understand the vulnerability level of each of these 
components.  
 
This will help you deal with the specific security issues anticipated in each one of 
the above components and put in place the right types of counter measures. This 
is necessary to ensure that the individual component you are dealing with 
operates with optimum efficiency and does not give rise to any security issues in 
such a way that the overall security of the network is compromised. 
 
Some of the security issues connected with some of the above components 
includes: 
 
 Bridges: In case of using a bridge you have to take specific counter 
measures to prevent a broadcast storm, in which all the broadcast traffic is 
automatically transmitted to all the connected networks in the bridge set 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 48 
 
up without verification of their MAC addresses. This effectively floods the 
entire network thus bringing a serious bottleneck in the smooth 
functioning of the data network. When an attacker creates a broadcast 
storm in a deliberate attack the security of the entire network is under 
threat and you must have good counter measure to deal with this situation 
so that you are able to prevent any data security breaches and the network 
is able to function at normal levels by automatically isolating the bridge 
under attack. 
 
 Switches: When using a switch as an intelligent Hub in a network, it uses MAC 
addresses to route traffic and is configured to transmit the data in a network only 
to the port that is connected to the destination MAC address. This creates 
network segments and helps in increasing data transmission rates to the level that 
matches with the individual network segments. Most of the times a switch are 
mainly used to create Virtual LANs or VLAN to logically segregate a network and 
limit the broadcast domains. Now switches are used in both network layer as well 
as in Application layer in a Data Network and you have to create the right routines 
to find out all the vulnerabilities of the switching technologies and their overall 
impact on the security of the network. This will help you build a good security 
protocol while using switches as basic component in your network. 
  
There are many types of transmission of data as they happen as an analog 
transmission or a digital one. They use different types of transmission schemes 
like synchronous or asynchronous transmissions. They may be transmitted 
through a single channel making it a baseband transmission or through a multiple 
channels making it a broadband transmission.  
 
What is sent through a data transmission medium is one of the following namely: 
o An electrical voltage 
o A pulse of radio wave 
o An energized microwave or  
o A bunch of infrared signals 
 
All these basic characteristics determine the type of transmission and this takes 
information and data with it to the designated place through a combination of 
network components. This process is prone with so many vulnerabilities and 
possible attacks and as a person responsible for the ultimate information security 

P a g e  | 49 
 
and network security you must be able to address all the anticipated 
vulnerabilities to make your data transfer safe, secure and accurate at all times. 
 
The transmission of data takes place through wired connections, or through 
wireless networks or through a highly optimized fiber optic cable. These form the 
media for the transmission of information through the network. These follow a 
number of protocols, standards and have to comply with many of the  procedures 
set up for the transmission to occur and may pose serious security issues if not 
anticipated and provided for  prior to or during and after the transmission of data 
.  
 
You will be studying in detail about all these including the following while 
preparing for your CISSP test. 
 
 
  Operation of hardware (e.g., modems, switches, routers, wireless access  
 points, mobile devices) 
  Transmission media (e.g., wired, wireless, fiber) 
  Network access control devices (e.g., firewalls, proxies) 
  Endpoint security 
  Content - distribution networks 
  Physical devices 
 
3.  Design and establish secure communication channels 
 
The prime function of a CISSP professional taking in charge of the information and 
network security is to create a good design for the communication channels. 
Communication is one of the most basic requirements for a successful business. 
Though there should be controls and restrictions for the use of communication 
channels and media for security reasons, these cannot be too tight or completely 
rigid during the use of communication channels. 
 
But, still you must be able to find the right designs for your network security 
systems and communication must be allowed to happen with reasonable 
restrictions and greater control over the anticipated security vulnerabilities so 
that no part of the data network or the information sent through are 
compromised in any way. 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 50 
 
 
For this you must have a sound knowledge and understanding of various factors 
that determine the design and operation of a secure and fool-proof 
communication network. The communication in the present days may take many 
forms like  
o Voice communication 
o Multimedia presentations and collaborations 
o Remote access facilities 
o Data transmissions 
o Data and information sent through a Virtualized Private Networks 
 
Each type of these communications has their own set of devices and equipments 
and follows a set of protocols to deal with communication of these data types. 
The responsibility of a net work administrator is many-fold since he has to protect 
the confidentiality, availability and integrity of the data and information he is 
transmitting through the network. Apart from this he has to protect the network 
itself against attacks and vulnerabilities. 
 
In this circumstance, it becomes necessary for the right type of designing of the 
communication network as well as operates them as per the set security criteria 
so that no security issue arises. Even when a serious security issue crops up, if the 
design and operations of the communication network are done as per the latest 
concepts of network security it will be possible for them to be suitably answered 
and fix the security hole in no time avoiding costly damage to the information 
security of the business. 
 
Towards this you must have sound knowledge in the following topics 
 
 Voice communications 
 Multimedia collaboration (e.g., remote meeting technology, instant 
messaging) 
 Remote access (e.g., VPN, screen scraper, virtual application/desktop, 
telecommuting) 
 Data communications (e.g., VLAN, TLS/SSL) 
 Virtualized networks (e.g., SDN, virtual SAN, guest operating systems, port           
isolation) etc.  
 

P a g e  | 51 
 
 
4.  Prevent or mitigate network attacks 
 
The main function of an information security specialist includes the prevention 
and mitigation of network attacks. This must be done in an effective and efficient 
manner as the entire information of the business especially the ones that are 
critically important to it may be at risk.  Only by preventing the security breaches 
one can easily avoid the loss of critically important data or hacking into the 
security system of the business.   
In the present day global business scenario your Organization has to deal with 
varius types of hazards to the information security and you have to be very careful 
in designing, implementing and monitoring a good and fool- proof information 
security system. 
An attack to the information security may be with the intent of just sneaking in 
and looking at things and may be passive in nature, which is less dangerous than 
an active attack which is far more dangerous as it is done with the intent of 
causing damage to the information security. When this happens there is a serious 
breach of the security protocol and  it leads to alteration and stealing of data, 
make the data systems go haywire and make the data unusable and corrupted. 
Some of the widely used information security attack modes are as follows: 
Sniffing or snooping:  this occurs when an attacker gains entry into the data path 
and he just listens in and read the flowing data and does not actively interfere 
with the information security system. This type of eavesdropping is possible only 
when the data or information flow occurs in a clear text format and no encryption 
is in use. This type of attack happens all the time and the best way to avoid this is 
to protect your information network with the use of cryptography techniques. 
Modification of data: is a form of communication network attack which happens 
after the attacker has gained entry into the network and is able to get hold of the 
information that is being sent or received. After this he modifies the data and 
resends it without the knowledge of the sender or receiver. This type of attack is 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 52 
 
very dangerous as the attacker can do any modifications to the data as he wants 
and send it as if it was sent by the original sender. Encryption is the key for 
preventing such types of attacks. 
IP address spoofing: in this type of attack the attacker gains entry into your 
network through a spoofed up IP address concealing his real identity. Afterwards 
he modifies, reroutes or deletes your data severely affecting the confidentiality, 
integrity and availability of your precious data. To avoid such attacks your 
information security system must be robust enough to find out the spoofing and 
deny entry, through carefully built TCP/IP protocols. 
 Password based attacks: in this type of attack the attacker gets the access 
information like username and password and gets into the network as if he is a 
genuine user and is able to gain entry as per the privileges of the original account 
holder. If the attacker is able to gain control of an admin level account then he is 
free to do anything he wants on your network and he can receive, reroute, modify 
and delete data on the server or even change the server configurations and 
prevent the other genuine users from entering into the network. This type of 
attacks are very common and they can be prevented by stricter access control 
procedures and implementing a double access controls. Even in case of an 
unauthorized entry the system must be able to identify the compromised account 
and deny access immediately. 
 
 Denial of service attack: has a serious consequence on the network as the 
attacker after gaining entry into your network initiates routines that prevent 
other users from using the system or network, and divert so much of false traffic 
that the network has to be shut down. This can be prevented by stricter access 
controls and by bringing in many redundant systems that prevent further damage 
to the network. 
 
Like this there are so many ways to attack an information security system or a 
network and you must have enough knowledge and resolve to neutralize all these 
and save the integrity of the network in an efficient manner. 9 
  
                                                           
9 Domain 4 Podcasts 

P a g e  | 53 
 
 
 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 54 
 
 
 
 
Domain No. 5 
Identity and Access Management10 
(Controlling Access and Managing Identity) 
 
Overview 
 
Identity management and access control is the next important aspect of the CISSP 
syllabi and it occupies a very significant place in the overall information security 
management. As the users of the system are the dominating factor having very 
deep impact on the design and management of information security systems, you 
have to pay very close attention to this core area in the overall security system of 
the organization. 
 
The users and their ability to create, store, manage and handle vital data and 
information in a safe and secure manner forms the crux of the information 
security system. This domain of the CISSP certification material deals with the 
human element in the information security and the process of managing them for 
successful implementation of an effective information security system for your 
organization. 
 
This domain lets you know how to provision the resources of information security 
among the users of the system and managing their identities, and giving them the 
right types of access control depending on their position in the organization to 
access and use the information in a secured manner. As such this domain is 
concerned with the human element of the information security system and how 
they are allowed to interact and function with the information security system 
you have created for the organization.  
 
This domain explains how you have to design individual components that make 
up the total information security system with the right types of access privileges 
and maintaining the right identity management for easy and effective access to 
the information and data of the organization. 
                                                           
10 Watch these videos on Identity and Access Management 

P a g e  | 55 
 
 
 Most of the attacks happen due to vulnerabilities and mismanagement of the 
identity management part of your information security system and hence you 
have to get very good knowledge in the modern concepts of identity management 
and access control. The main aim of this domain is to prevent the unauthorized 
access to the system and access the information by the unauthorized persons 
causing severe damage to the organization. 
 
The CISSP professional is expected to have a very sound knowledge in the 
concepts of identity management and access control as it goes to the root of the 
information security system, for preventing the attacks and gaining unauthorized 
entry into the information handling system of the organization with malicious 
intent. 
 
This identity management part of the CISSP curriculum aims to help you gain 
knowledge in and test your prowess in the following topics of 
 
o Access management 
o Identification authorization 
o Identity management 
o Authorization of users 
o Authorization of systems and services for secured running of the 
information security system  
o Different types of Authentication 
o Accountability of users 
o Managing Sessions while using the information security system 
o Registration and proofing 
o Federated Identity Management 
o Managing of credential management systems 
. 
In addition to this you will be also tested on how to integrate third party cloud 
based identity management services as an integral part of ensuring the right types 
of identity control and access management. You will also have to be well versed 
in the concepts of on- premise identity services and how it helps in the 
maintenance of confidentiality, Availability and integrity of the information. 
 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 56 
 
You will be tested for your knowledge and capability in implementing and 
managing authorization and access control mechanisms as a part of your overall 
information security system based on rule based mandatory access as well as 
discretionary control of access to the information security system. You are 
expected to have very good knowledge in the prevention and mitigation of 
attacks on the access control mechanisms you have created as a way of protecting 
the information security system, and prescribe the right types of routines for 
successful running of the identity management lifecycle. 
 
 
Key Areas of Knowledge 
 
1. Control Physical and Logical Access to Assets 
 
Controlling access to the security assets is the core function of the information 
security and this is achieved through implementing the right types of physical and 
logical access.  Threats to the information security in this modern computer and 
internet era needs to be highly sophisticated  
and must be able to provide the right type of controls to safeguard the system 
from various types of attacks like 
o Internet based attacks 
o Computer viruses 
o Trojan horses 
o Insider attacks 
o Covert channels 
o Software bugs 
o Honest and bona fide mistakes 
 
To prevent these from compromising your information security system you must 
implement a comprehensive physical and logical control in respect of all the 
laptops, tablets, mobile devices and other types of end point devices the users of 
the system integrate with it. 
 
Access control helps the Security system defined and controls the systems and 
resources a user can access and what he can do and what he cannot do on that 
permitted system or resource.  This is implemented by the formulation of a set of 
rules or permissions and a combination of administrative, technical and physical 

P a g e  | 57 
 
controls. As the person in charge of information security you have to design, 
create and implement the following types of controls for better security 
environment like: 
 
o Preventive controls to reduce the risk of data and information security 
lapses 
o Detective controls for finding out the vulnerabilities, violations and 
incidents in the system 
o Corrective controls for remedying the violations and incidents and 
providing suitable counter measures to prevent their recurrence 
o Deterrent controls for discouraging the occurrence of violations and 
harmful incidents 
o Recovery controls for resetting the system after an attack and restoring its 
normal functions without loss of time or integrity of the overall information 
security system 
o Compensating controls to provide alternative and substitutive ways of 
bringing back normalcy into the system even after a serious attack  
These types of controls complement each other in their functions and are geared 
towards better management of security issues and keep the level of information 
security in the organization at a higher level. 
 
For ensuring better physical and logical access control you have to focus more on 
the following to gain enough knowledge about access management of  
 
 
 Information 
 Systems 
 Devices 
 Facilities 
 
2. Manage Identification and Authentication of People And Devices 
 
Any system put in place for assuring good Access control involve in providing right 
types of  
 
o Authentication 
o Authorization and  
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 58 
 
o Accountability 
 
 Authentication is the process of allowing the access into the system after 
due verification of the identity of the user. As such this is essentially two 
step process of identification of the user and authentication of their 
identity by presenting a pre- allotted specific identity criterion to the 
system. Authentication is the process of accepting one’s identity and 
allowing him to enter the system in a legal and permitted way. 
 
 Authorization is the process that defines the extent and nature of rights an 
authenticated user can enjoy inside the system. 
 
 Accountability is the process that creates the necessary capabilities in the 
system that is able to associate the users with their actions and their impact 
on the overall security of the system. 
 
These are designed and implemented as system based access controls that 
provide first line of defense against attacks and are put in place to protect the 
entire information security system.  
The next type of access control is the data access controls and are created and 
implemented to protect the data in system. 
 
The authentication of users in the system can be done through asking for  
 
o Something you know like a pass word or an personal identification number 
o Something you have like a token or a smart card 
o Something you are like  the use of voice recognition, retina scan, or 
scanning your biometric data including iris characteristics 
 
The process of personal authentication using these may be either two factor 
authentication requiring two of the above three factors or a three- factor 
authentication for all three factors for authentication.  The authentication system 
you build for your system must be a strong one with at least a two factor 
authentication requiring at least two of the three factors and this provides a fairly 
good authentication for those who want to use your information security system. 
 

P a g e  | 59 
 
The identification and authentication is of paramount importance for maintaining 
the required level of security of the overall information security system and hence 
as a CISSP certified professional you must be able to create the right types of 
identification and authentication routines to ensure the confidentiality, integrity 
and availability of the data. For this you have to gain more knowledge in these 
topics: 
 
 Identity management implementation (e.g., SSO, LDAP) 
 Single/multi-factor authentication (e.g., factors, strength, errors, 
biometrics) 
 Accountability 
 Session management (e.g., timeouts, screensavers) 
 
 Integrate Identity As A Service (e.g., Cloud Identity) 
 
Ensuring proper identity of a user to get access into your information security 
system is very important especially if you are using cloud based data storage and 
computing system. You have to put the right types of services to do this and 
fortunately there are many identity–as- a-service offerings that will help you have 
a fool-proof identity authentication system in place with little effort. 
You have to find the right type of cloud- based identity and access management 
solution, or use a Identity as a Service ( IDaaS). This must be able to deliver the 
following features like 
o Single sign-on 
o Password management 
o Provisioning 
o Access certification services for your Cloud environment 
o Access certification for your mobile devices 
o Access certification for on- premises Applications 
This System must be able to offer the required level of security, scalability, 
availability and performance to match the needs of your information security 
system. The IDaaS solution you are creating for your system must be able to 
provide a cost- effective, fast and easy to use solution with good usability through 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 60 
 
a simple, and intitutive user interface. This must be able to connect well with 
other cloud based and internal on- site as well as Web based Applications. 
Some of the requirements for a good IDaaS serviced are 
o Ability to provide single- sign- on  for seamless sign- on experience 
through any device 
o Easy and effective pass word management 
o Excellent user provisioning for streamlines process of creating, revoking 
and changing user access based on various factors 
o Easy and automated access certification 
o Easy to use with very narrow learning curve 
o Comprehensive reporting and Audit functionality 
o Ability to connect  to and manage all the resources in your information 
security system 
o Scalable in nature to accommodate your growing needs 
So, focus on these vital 
points to make your identity 
authentication process as 
secure as possible without 
putting the genuine users to 
face problems during their 
day to day use of the same.  
As 
a 
CISSP 
certified 
Information 
security 
professional you must gain 
necessary knowledge in this regard to tackle all security issues that may arise 
during the user identification and authentication system. 
 Integrate Third-Party Identity Services (E.G., On Premise) 
 
If you are not able to develop an identity and authentication application by 
yourself the next best option is to use a third party identity services available 
now.  This will simplify the identity authentication process. However, you have 
to make sure that the third- party identity services you are getting for your 
organization satisfy the following namely: 
 
 
“CANDIDATES ARE EXPECTED TO BE CAPABLE OF 
IMPLEMENTING 
AND 
MANAGING 
AUTHORIZATION 
MECHANISMS 
INCLUDING 
THOSE BASED ON ROLE-BASED, RULE-BASED, 
MANDATORY 
AND 
DISCRETIONARY 
ACCESS 
CONTROL.” ~CISSP HANDBOOK 

P a g e  | 61 
 
o Availability: the service must be available all the 24 X 7 and the genuine 
users of your system must be able to use it at any time as it is the primary 
point of contact for them to get into the system. If it is not available they 
will not be able to get into the system at all. 
 
o Must be able to work with all the required resources:  the identification 
service you are using must be able to work efficiently on the basis of all the 
requirements available as per the industry standards 
 
o Compatibility: the primary aim of using a third party identity service is to 
simplify the sign- in process for your users over the cloud environment and 
the service you have chosen must be able to work with all  other similar 
services for added compatibly and simplicity of signing in service. 
 
As these third- party identity providers have very high level of security built into 
their products you can get a good headway for providing a secure sign- in process 
for your system users. Know more about these and try to select the one that is 
best for your system. 
 
The access control and identity authentication in an organizational information 
security system may be either role based (RBAC) or Rule based one. In a role 
based access control the access to the computer or network is regulated based 
on the roles of the individual users and they will be allowed to perform specific 
tasks on the system based on their job competency, authority and responsibility. 
In the Rule based access the access into the system is controlled by the pre- 
determined rules of the organization and help the information security system to 
enforce its access control through well defined rules. 
 
To ensure the security of the system you can implement a good discretionary 
access control (DAC) with clear specification of who can access what in the system 
based on the discretion of the system admin. Yet another mode of access control 
is the mandatory access control (MAC) and this has well defined specifications 
allowing which user can access which sets of data ensuring that not all of the users 
have access to all the data in the system. 
 
So, you must have a good knowledge of various types of access controls that 
enhances the security of your overall system. 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 62 
 
 
 Implement and manage authorization mechanisms 
 Role Based Access Control (RBAC) methods 
 Rule -based access control methods 
 Mandatory Access Control (MAC) 
 Discretionary Access Control (DAC) 
 
  Prevent Or Mitigate Access Control Attacks 
 
The main objective of an attacker is to attack your access controls and 
gain unauthorized entry into your system.  There are many types of 
attacks and some of the most common are: 
 
 Brute force attack: in which the attacker tries all combinations of 
letters, characters and numbers to find the password or passphrase 
or PIN to log into the system. Here he can use many hacking tools 
available now and given sufficient time he can achieve his objective. 
The right way to protect this type of attacks is to deny the availability 
of the password file or database. 
 
 Dictionary Attack: this is a type of brute force attack in which the 
attacker is more focused in cracking the password with a pre- 
defined word list. Here he uses word lists or dictionaries available on 
the Web and tries to gain entry into the system by using password 
cracking utilities like L0phtcrack or John the Ripper, which are fast in 
their action. This helps them crack the password database within a 
short time and gain entry into the information security system, to 
fulfill their bad objectives. This type of attack can be prevented by 
protecting the database of passwords or files in a secure manner. 
 
 Rainbow table attack: here also it is a form of brute attack, and the 
attacker takes the password file or database and compares the hash 
of the passwords with a universally available hashes table which 
converts the hashes into their corresponding plain text equivalents. 
To prevent this type of attack “salt” your hashes and store them at a 
very secure place. 
 

P a g e  | 63 
 
 Stack- overflow or Buffer overflow attack: this is like a denial of 
service attack and here the attacker enters the system in an 
unauthorized manner when he  makes an application or a protocol 
in the system to cause overflow of data by making it to store more 
information than it is allowed to do. This makes the data already 
stored in the location get corrupted, and crash the application 
leading to unexpected or unpredictable behavior of the information 
security system. This type of attack is very common and is capable of 
causing more damage to the entire IT infrastructure of the 
organization. To mitigate this type of attack identify the 
vulnerabilities as early possible and take decisive steps and counter 
measures to prevent such attacks. 
 
Apart from this there are many other types of attack like Man- in-the- 
Middle attack, Password sniffing, session hijacking, social engineering, etc.  
 
To prevent such attacks you have to follow systematic approach by doing 
the following: 
 
o Simulate the attacks to identify the vulnerabilities and weak spots 
in  your network by threat modeling 
o Carry out honest asset evaluation to determine the level of overall 
security 
o Do a thorough vulnerability analysis 
o Conduct a source code review to find out the state of health of 
various applications and protocols 
o Create an access aggregations simplifying the access controls 
 
A CISSP professional must know how to prevent such attacks on the 
network and must be prepared to prevent the damages in case an attack 
occurs and help to recover as early as possible. Towards this you are 
expected to have a good knowledge about how to Prevent or mitigate 
access control attacks. 
 
 
4. Manage the identity and access provisioning lifecycle (e.g., 
provisioning, 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 64 
 
Review) 
 
For protecting the security of the network it is necessary to put in place the 
right types of account provisioning, review and revocation. This involves in 
the following phases of IAM provisioning lifecycle: 
 
Role design, creation and review: in this phase of early stages of 
development, configuration or customization of the security system each 
role of the users are defined. This is reviewed periodically to ensure that 
they are appropriate and safe for the overall security system 
 
Access provisioning:  there should be good and formal ways of requesting 
access to the new users who want to have access to the network resources. 
This methodology must be secure and be able to maintain the overall 
security protocols set for the system or network. 
 
 You need to have good knowledge of these to assure safe and secure 
operation of your network and information security system with a higher 
degree of security.11 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
11 Listen to these Domain 5 Podcasts (Streaming) 

P a g e  | 65 
 
 
 
Domain No. 6 
 Security Assessment and Testing12 
(Designing, Performing, and Analyzing Security Testing) 
 
Overview 
 
An information security system has to face many types of risks and may have 
adverse impact on the overall security of the information due to various factors. 
These risks to the system leads to vulnerabilities and these in turn lead to breach 
of security. As a CISSP certified person you must know where and how to look for 
and identify these risks inherent in the system and analyze them in detail to find 
suitable solution to each one of them before they lead to security issues. 
 
Security assessment and testing are very vital to the success of information 
security in any system and hence these two concepts occupy an important place 
in the CISSP curriculum and are added as a separate knowledge domain. The deep 
study of these topics is necessary as they form an integral part of the certificate 
exam. You also need to gain knowledge when entering into the information 
security system creation and management when you begin working as a CISSP 
certified professional later. 
 
In an information security system, you will find that there are many assets and 
these are the basic components that make up your overall security system. Each 
one of them is prone to risk factors and evaluation of their nature, extent, and 
type of risk associated with each of them becomes a necessary task for taking the 
required action. For this you have to use some of the tools and techniques to 
counter the actions that may jeopardize the information security in the 
organization. 
 
Some of the types of anticipated risk factors include: 
 
o Architectural issues that arise due to incompatible system components or 
those that arise due to weakness in their construction or functioning 
                                                           
12 Domain 6 Videos 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 66 
 
o Design flaws that come into play due to poor or bad design of the 
information security system 
o Configuration errors due to improper setting up or inability to operate the 
assets as per the set security criteria 
o Hardware vulnerabilities due to poorly designed components and 
subsystems or those cannot function at the level anticipated  
o Software issues due to poorly designed software applications, or those that 
are infected, or affected by malicious programs and include bad patches in 
the coding 
 
Apart from this the action of the organization itself in formulating its  
 
 Security policy plan for effecting fool- proof security 
 Defining of various security processes 
 Procedures for affecting the security processes etc   
 
 and other weaknesses arising from known or unknown sources may affect the 
security of the information system, and this makes the system unable to deliver 
its intended functionality in a safe and secure manner. 
 
While preparing for the CISSP certification you must know how to conduct the 
continuous evaluation of the risk factors and must be capable of validating the 
assessment and test the strategies that are necessary to maintain the required 
level of security of information system to provide for the tirade of confidentiality, 
availability and integrity of the information. 
 
To be a successful information security professional you are expected to have 
sound knowledge on the concepts of  
 
o Conducting vulnerability assessments 
o Know how to conduct penetration testing 
o How to run synthetic transactions 
o Go for code review and testing 
o Deal with misuse cases 
o Run interface testing 
 

P a g e  | 67 
 
You must know how to ensure that security policies and procedures put in place 
for safeguarding the information security are applied in a uniform and consistent 
manner to ensure the high level of security of the information system. You will be 
also responsible for  ensuring the plan for business continuity and disaster 
recovery are created, maintained, updated and will be kept ready for immediate 
implementation in case of a disaster. For this you will be held responsible for the 
collection, analysis and formation suitable processes and plans based on the 
security process data. 
 
You must be prepared to be tested for your knowledge and skill in the following 
areas including:  
o Account management 
o Management review 
o Evaluation of key performance 
o Study of  risk indicators 
o Verification of data and information backups 
o Training of staff and creating awareness among users about the risk factors 
and the security process that are running  
o Plan for and implement the disaster recovery  
o Plan and implement processes for business continuity 
 
You must know how to respond to the security evaluation and assessment and 
must be able to conduct honest, to the point and focused analysis and prepare 
concise reports on the same. This is necessary for creating the right types of 
mitigation strategies for implement them for prompt action towards maintaining 
the information security. 
 
 A key capability that is expected from the CISSP certified person will be the ability 
to analyze the risk factors and prepare the report based on the test outputs. You 
must also ensure the conducting of and facilitating internal security audits as well 
those conducted by third parties. 
 
Key Areas of Knowledge 
 
1. Design and Validate Assessment and Test Strategies 
 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 68 
 
It is necessary for any organization to get the right type of security for its vital 
information and data. For this they need to follow and implement sound 
information security systems. A CISSP certified professional is fully trained to do 
this in a better way and for this they are taught how to design secure information 
handling systems and manage them without any security issues. 
 
In the present days of information explosion era, the security threats are 
everywhere and are constantly evolving in nature, potential and extent. For this 
you must be well versed in the ways of detecting the vulnerabilities in your 
information security system and provide for the right ways of countering them so 
that the security of the information is ensured.  You have to have a thorough 
understanding of the various components and elements that were assembled to 
make up your system and their weaknesses. 
 
As the strength of a chain depends on the strength of its weakest link, so does 
your information security system and it is as secure as the security of your 
weakest component in your security system.  To know how to make your system 
more secure and safe for the organization you must know how to  
 
o Develop working assessment of the information system and do the 
assessment in a consistent manner 
o You must have the ability to evolve suitable strategies based on the results 
of the assessment to counteract any vulnerability in the system 
o Do the testing of your strategies and apply them to real  life situations and 
find out the shortcomings in your overall strategies 
o Conduct the assessments as per the changed strategies and find out results 
of the changes you have made 
o Do various types of tests like penetration testing on a continuous basis to 
see the strength of your security system 
o  Create the right type of management controls, operational controls and 
implement  them at the right time and constantly monitor their effect on 
the overall security system 
o Conduct the tests at regular intervals and take the outputs, study them and 
come out with security updates in an comprehensive way 
o Collaborate and work with security Auditors both internal as well as third 
party Auditors and come out with the right security criteria as per the 
perceived threats to the information system 

P a g e  | 69 
 
 
These form some of the basic functions of a CISSP certified Information security 
professional and for this you are expected to have sufficient knowledge in the 
following concepts of how to Design  security   system tests and conduct and  
validate assessments. Create right strategies to tackle any security issues and test 
strategies for counter acting any security issues. 
 
 
2. Conduct Security Control Testing 
 
Conducting security control testing is one of the primary functions of a CISSP 
Certificate holder who is responsible for the security of the information system. 
The 
process 
of 
control 
testing involves in taking into 
account various elements 
and individual components 
that have been assembled to 
work as a single security 
system.  As each of the 
components has their own 
level of security issues a 
thorough vulnerability study on each of them is a must before you can arrive at a 
comprehensive vulnerability and the anticipated threat perception for the whole 
information security system. 
 
To do the vulnerability assessment you must be well aware of the security 
problems that may crop up from each one of the components and factors of the 
system and these have to be added together to  arrive at the overall vulnerability 
assessment. Once this is done, you can be confident of facing the threats with the 
right types of counter measures to deal with each one of them in a fitting manner 
so that you are able to maintain the required level of confidentiality, integrity and 
availability of the information that is being dealt with by your security system. 
 
There are many ways to do this and you have to be well aware of penetration 
testing and the routines you have to follow to complete this effective way of 
vulnerability assessment to identify precise levels threat possibilities, and take 
right steps at the right time to counter the vulnerabilities found in the system. Yet 
 
“CANDIDATES WILL BE TESTED ON VULNERABILITY 
ASSESSMENTS, 
PENETRATION 
TESTING, 
SYNTHETIC TRANSACTIONS, CODE REVIEW AND 
TESTING, MISUSE CASE, AND INTERFACE TESTING.” 
~CISSP HANDBOOK 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 70 
 
another way of finding possible failures of the information system components is 
by conducting log reviews for finding out the health of each of the hardware 
components that are working in your system.  You have to conduct the log 
reviews of various security procedures you have put in place to make sure that 
they are working in the way you wanted.  
 
 Another way of conducting security control testing is by running synthetic 
transactions on the system elements and find how they react in case of an attack 
and implement necessary corrective steps in case of a possible security issue.  You 
should also concentrate more on code review and testing as most of the modern 
security systems run through software applications. When there is an issue with 
the coding of the software application it can lead to serious security issues later. 
So you must know how to conduct the code reviews and testing to ensure security 
of your information system. 
Misuse case testing is also done on the parts and users of the security system to 
know their preparedness for facing security threats and this will show how the 
system will react and act to prevent misuse of the security routines. This is 
necessary to prevent malicious attacks on the system and you have to be well 
versed with the ways of testing on this important aspect and are able to put in 
the right types of security controls for adding strength to your security actions. 
 
 A Test coverage analysis helps in finding the extent of testing that is carried out 
to ensure the implementation and operation of the right type of security controls. 
This will determine whether the testing you are conducting on the system is able 
to give the necessary inputs for the vulnerability assessment of the system. Based 
on this assessment you will have to take the vital decision of going for extended 
testing routines and put in more security controls to make sure that all your 
security protocols are running perfectly to protect the information security 
system from all possible threats, attacks and vulnerabilities. 
 
An interface testing is also necessary to find out the vulnerabilities that may arise 
during the use of interaction with the system through the API, User Interface and 
physical contacts with the components of the security system. This will make sure 
that the interfaces through which we are operating the security system are 
running as per the security guidelines you have implemented. 
 

P a g e  | 71 
 
Thus a detailed study of the following topics forms an integral part of your 
preparation for CISSP certification: 
 
 Vulnerability assessment 
 Penetration testing 
 Log reviews 
 Synthetic transactions 
 Code review and testing (e.g., manual, dynamic, static, fuzz) 
 Misuse case testing 
 Test coverage analysis 
 Interface testing (e.g., API, UI, physical) 
 
3. Collect Security Process Data 
(e.g. Management and Operational Controls) 
 
Collecting security process data is the backbone of any security system and it is 
vital for assessing the health of your information security system. The collection 
of the data must be done as per strict rules as it is one of the vital aspects of the 
security system. This is the earliest indicator of possible vulnerabilities and will be 
able to give opportunities for a CISSP certified information security specialist to 
find the possible security issues and decide what type of corrective actions must 
be taken to protect the overall security of the system. 
 
The process of collecting data from your security system may be done in many 
ways and these must be well documented and be able to give you all sets of data 
for conducting a comprehensive security data analysis. You must also conduct 
complete management review to know the readiness of various aspects of 
security management systems you have implemented to protect the health and 
security of your information system. This is necessary to know how the factors 
that are added to the system to manage the security functions are effective to 
prevent the threats and attacks on it. 
 
Yet another important function expected from the CISSP certificate holder is the 
performance analysis of the system.  As the health and security of  your 
information security system depends on the performance levels of each of the 
individual elements you have put together to make up the security of the whole 
system, you must monitor the performance each of these items and compare 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 72 
 
them with the standard benchmarks you must know how to take immediate 
corrective actions when you find shortcomings. To do this you must be aware of 
the risk indicators and take their values to find out the performance anomalies of 
the elements and replace them in case they fail to meet the standards. 
 
Back up of critical data must be done on a regular basis and it must be made a 
continuous process as an important part of the overall security set up. As anything 
may happen to the system at any time you have to plan for verifying the backup 
data on a regular basis so that no loss of data occurs in case of a security attack.  
 
Training and creating awareness among various classes of users must be 
undertaken as a part of the security operation. This is necessary for making every 
user of the system aware of the risks involved and the vulnerabilities anticipated 
in the information security system.  Once this is done the users can be easily 
educated to run the security operations and take preventive actions to avoid data 
loss or security breaches automatically without waiting for the interference of 
others.  This also enables the users to operate the system as per the set security 
protocols for safety and security of the information security system. 
 
Disasters may happen at any time and most of them happen when you are not 
expecting them to happen. Disasters with respect to the organization may be 
both natural as well as man- made and some of them may be so serious as to 
affect the very existence of the organization.  Such things must be anticipated at 
all times and  you have to run your information security and physical security of 
the organization in a state of readiness to meet any type of disaster and come out 
of its bad effects within  minimum time and with minimum damage.  
 
This calls for extensive knowledge in disaster management and recovery and the 
creating a set of fool- proof strategies for business continuity.  As this matter goes 
to the very existence of the organization you are expected to have very good 
knowledge in the concepts that relate to the business continuity and disaster 
management during your study for CISSP certification. 
 
 
 Account management (e.g., escalation, revocation) 
 Management review 
 Key performance and risk indicators 

P a g e  | 73 
 
 Backup verification data 
 Training and awareness 
 Disaster recovery and business continuity 
 
4. Analyze and Report Test Outputs  
 (e.g., Automated, Manual) 
 
Risk analysis and report preparation are some of the important functions of an 
information security professional. You have to conduct various types of analysis 
to take stock of the overall security situation in your organization and based on 
the reports you prepare, you will come to know the types of anticipated threats 
and the impending vulnerabilities that have to be adequately taken care of. Thus, 
the report preparation is an essential skill and during your study for the CISSP 
certification you will be able to get the necessary exposure in the ways of 
analyzing various factors that are likely to have a bearing on the overall security 
position and how to tackle them in an effective manner. 
 
5. Conduct or facilitate internal and third party audits: 
 
Audits are a part of day to day routine of an organization and they are the 
indicators of how your information security operations are functioning. There are 
various types of audits that are conducted both by internal auditors as well as by 
external third party auditors. As the man responsible for the smooth and effective 
functioning of the security system you are expected to take an active role in these 
audits. You have to prescribe the nature, type and criteria for security audits and 
you have to provide all the relevant data and information to facilitate the due 
conduct of audits. 
 
As a part of the internal training and awareness programs you have to conduct 
internal audits to know the level of knowledge you have imparted to the different 
levels of users about the type and extent of security operations you are carrying 
on in your organization. Based on these audit reports you will be able to 
determine the effectiveness of the training and take remedial actions. 
 
There are periodical security and other types of audits conducted by various 
agencies partly as a way of routine procedures of the organization and partly as 
compliance to legal regulations. These audits are to be conducted as per legal 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 74 
 
procedures and the reports are to be filed with governmental and other 
authorities.  
 
Here also you will be helping the external auditors to have a thorough audit of 
the security aspects of the organization and based on their report you have to 
take corrective actions to make your security system function with utmost 
confidentiality, integrity and availability at all times.13 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
13 Podcasts on Security Assessment and Testing 

P a g e  | 75 
 
 
 
Domain No.  7 
  Security Operations14 
(Foundational Concepts, investigations, Incident Management, Disaster 
Recovery) 
 
Overview 
 
In the present day competitive business scenario security of information is 
paramount to a business. Due to this, information security has evolved into a 
separate branch of study. The CISSP certification lets the world know that you 
have sufficient knowledge and skills to protect the information and the 
information handling systems from being attacked by various factors. The security 
operations forms part of the CISSP curriculum as one of the domains and it has 
many topics that are necessary for the information security specialist to have 
good grasp of. 
 
This domain lets you study in detail the topics that correspond to the operation 
of security systems that are geared towards maintaining the confidentiality, 
integrity and availability of the information which forms the tirade of the 
information security. Here, you have to study in detail the various security 
concepts that must be applied for maintaining the information safety. You will be 
also studying about various operations that must be successfully and consistently 
undertaken to run the enterprise computing systems with information security   
as their main goal. 
 
The study of topics covered under this domain mainly relate to the practicalities 
connected with the tasks and situations that may arise during the operation of 
information security systems. These topics will make you aware how an 
information security professional has to tackle these situations and successfully 
safeguard the information security systems of the business. These are the 
concepts that you will be using on a daily basis during your work day and will be 
focused on how to anticipate a vulnerable situation and how to deal with them 
                                                           
14 Video Playlist on Domain 7: Security Operations 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 76 
 
and place the right types of counter measures to save the information from 
external malicious attacks as well as natural and man made disasters.  
 
It is practical in nature and intended to cover the tasks and situations that 
information security professionals are expected to perform or are presented with 
on a daily basis. It is also representative of the areas where security professionals 
spend most of their time so it is no surprise that the security operations domain 
is the largest in terms of individual topics on the CISSP examination. 
 
Forensic investigations are a part of the information security domain and you as 
a certified professional must have sufficient knowledge in all the concepts that 
will aid in conducting such investigations.  
 
You must also have good knowledge on the latest investigative concepts like 
 
o Evidence collection 
o Evidence handling 
o Documentation  of investigation processes 
o Reporting for investigation operations 
o Techniques of investigations 
o Digital forensics 
 
It is also necessary to understand and be well aware of various requirements for 
investigations of the following nature like 
 
 Investigation on civil matters 
 Criminal  
investigations 
 Operational 
investigations 
 Investigations relating 
to regulatory matters 
 
 There are various security 
functions that form part of 
the duties of a certified CISPP professional for the proper upkeep of the  
information security and among them efficient logging and close monitoring of 
 
“IN 
ADDITION 
TO 
SUPPORTING 
FORENSIC 
INVESTIGATIONS, LOGGING AND MONITORING 
PROVIDE VISIBILITY INTO THE DAY TO DAY 
OPERATION OF THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
INFRASTRUCTURE.” ~CISSP HANDBOOK 

P a g e  | 77 
 
the security systems  are the most basic and vital among them. The basic 
functions of logging and monitoring play a multiple role in the overall information 
security administration and management.  
 
These functions are necessary for knowing the state of and following the real 
condition of the security elements during their day to day operations. They are 
also needed for supporting the ongoing investigations. They help you to know the 
real health and effectiveness of the systems that make up your information 
technology infrastructure. 
 
The logging and monitoring cover a wider range of concepts like 
 
o Intrusion detection for preventing attacks on the information security 
system 
o Prevention of intrusions to safeguard the safety and integrity of the 
information 
o Collection and processing of security information 
o Handling of event monitoring and reporting systems 
o Protecting against the data leakage etc 
 
The security operations you have set up and running for the upkeep of the 
information security systems need resources to perform efficiently. It is the duty 
of the CISSP professional to know in detail various aspects of resource 
provisioning for the security systems. You must also know how to efficiently 
manage, handle and operate these resources in such a way they are able to give 
the required power and energy to run the security systems in a flaw less manner. 
It is to be noted that these resources must be made available to the security 
system during their entire life cycle, as the entire information security system is 
based on these resources for their running efficiency. 
 
A CISSP certified professional is also expected to have the necessary exposure and 
knowledge about the creation, setting up of, managing and maintaining various 
types of protective controls that have been integrated into the information 
security system. The preventive controls about which you are expected to have 
deep knowledge include  
o Firewalls 
o Intrusion prevention systems 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 78 
 
o White listing of Applications 
o Installation and setting up of anti- malware and  anti- virus applications 
o Using of honey pots and honey nets 
o Sandboxing etc 
 
You must also know how to enter into and managing of third party security 
contracts and related services for maintaining the information security systems 
and applications. Apart from this some of the additional requirements of knowing 
about patches, vulnerability inherent in the system itself and those that have to 
be anticipated from external sources must also be thoroughly studied for your 
certification exam. 
 
There are many additional topics that must be studied in detail under the security 
operations domain like: 
 
o How to respond to incidents in the information security system 
o Taking steps for early recovery of the system from the incidents 
o Recovery from disasters both natural as well as from man- made ones 
o Ensuring business continuity by ensuring early recovery and rapid disaster 
recovery 
o Conducting of processes that are necessary for the incident management 
o Create the right types of disaster recovery processes 
o Testing and assuring the adequacy of the recovery processes 
o Participating in business continuity planning 
 
 This domain also deals with the topics on ways of ensuring physical security and 
ways of protecting the personal security of the users of the information system in 
the organization.  
 
 
Key Areas of Knowledge 
 
1.  Understand and Support Investigations 
 
Investigations are a part of the information security management and you have 
to conduct or support the conducting of investigations by other agencies within 
or outside of the organization.  Whenever there is an attack leading to a breach 

P a g e  | 79 
 
of security, you have to find out how this attack was possible and who did it and 
for what they have done it. You have to find out the damages caused to the 
information systems and find ways to tighten the loop holes if any found in the 
system. 
 
When the attacks are criminal in nature the law enforcing agencies conduct 
investigations to find out the culprit or if a civil action has taken place then 
investigations are done to find out who was at fault and how much is the loss 
caused and who has to compensate whom etc. 
All these investigations are based on the information security systems you are 
operating and the actions or omissions that have been conducted on them. So, 
you must take an active role in conducting the investigations or support the 
investigations conducted by others.  
 
As this is an important function  with respect to the management of information 
security systems you must have good knowledge about various aspects of 
investigations and the things you have to do and those that you should not do. 
 
All investigations have the common purpose of evidence collection and it is your 
duty to help others in the process of evidence collection.  So you should have 
sound knowledge on  
 
o Types of evidence like direct evidence, physical evidence,  documentary 
evidence or demonstrative evidence 
o Rules of evidence like best evidence and hearsay evidence rules 
o Admissibility of evidence by business records exception principle 
o Chain of custody 
o Evidence life cycle  that involves in the collection and identification, analysis 
of evidence, Storage preservation and transportation, presentation in 
court, return to victim or owner 
 
Report preparation and documenting the outcomes of the investigations is also 
an important function of a CISSP certificate holder and for this complete and 
accurate record keeping is must and it must be done for each of investigations 
held in the organization. The report of an investigator is the final record of the 
investigation and hence must be properly documented for future use as well as 
for compliance of various legal and procedural compliances.  
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 80 
 
 
 Hence it becomes important for you to understand the necessity for acquiring 
the required knowledge about the ways of preparing the accurate reports of 
investigations and the information it must contain.  
 
There are many techniques to conduct investigations and  it must be started as 
soon as the incident or information related  crime has come to light. It is a 
convention to treat all the incidents as an information security crime unleass 
otherwise proved. Various  investigation techniques are used  dpending on the 
goals to be achevied through the investigatin, or the demands of the relevant 
rules, regulations and legal requirements in a particular situation.   You should 
be well aware of the investigaion techniques like root- cause analysis, incident 
handling etc. 
 
Knowledge about all the investigation techniques is necessary so that you can 
slect the one that is needed to contain the damage caused by the  incident 
without delay. As the investigation is going to be the first step in securing the  
information system from the adverse effects of the attack or crime, you  have to 
select the right investigation technique that yields quick and effective ways of 
both stopping the attack and preventing its effects affecting the whole system. 
 
 In the present days of computer era, we are living in a digital information 
explosion and we are flooded with digital data of every kind. As an information 
security person you must have sound knowledge in the Digital forensics. You will 
be dealing with digital data and information in a digitized format throughout 
your work time. The information system you are building for your organization 
must be geared towards maintaining the confidentiality, availability and 
integrity of digital information.  
 
A major part of your endeavor will be spent towards integrating various devices, 
and information handling processes to create, manipulate, store and handle 
digital information. Whenever there is an incident on your information security 
system you should be well equipped to launch the right type of digital forensics 
to get to the root of the crime or incident and take prompt steps to stop it 
immediately as well as arrest its effects causing damage to the overall 
information security system.   
 

P a g e  | 81 
 
For this you must acquire good amount of working knowledge about various 
types of devices and modes of handling the digital data like digital media, data 
networks, and software applications that run these devices as well as embedded 
devices that form part of the information security system. 
 
  Evidence collection and handling (e.g., chain of custody, interviewing) 
  Reporting and documenting 
  Investigative techniques (e.g., root-cause analysis, incident handling) 
  Digital forensics (e.g., media, network, software, and embedded devices) 
 
2. Understand Requirements for Investigation Types 
 
A  CISSP candidate must be well versed in the investigation requirements to 
handle any type of situation. This depends on his ability to look for the right set 
of protocols and put them in motion as soon as an incident takes place on the 
information security system.  The types and techniques employed for 
investigation may change depending on the type of attack and goals of the 
investigation. You must be able to clearly identify the requirements for each of 
the investigation types and provide the right type of support to carry on the 
investigation and come out with its desired outcomes in an effective and 
prompt manner. 
 
You must be in total control of the operational requirements of investigations 
and have them built in the system. They must be able to be launched in a swift 
manner in case of their necessity. The system must have been built on the 
principle of swift response in case you need it to respond to an investigation 
request or you need to launch an investigation to deal with an attack or 
commission of a crime on the system.  
 
The operational requirements of investigation must be well defined and 
standardized to provide for the desired outcomes to the investigation whenever 
they are launched. For an investigation to proceed as planned it must be based 
on some sound protocols. These in turn are based on the set of requirements 
and the design of the investigation  
Techniques that work on the strength of the operational requirements you have 
set for the investigators to work and reach their goals with meaningful and 
efficient outcomes leading to concrete results. 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 82 
 
 
In case there is a criminal incident that is to be taken to the law enforcement 
authorities then the investigation will be conducted by external governmental 
agencies in a formal manner.  You will be expected to co- operate with them and 
submit all the required documents and information for the investigation to be 
completed as per law. This calls for deciding on the requirements for the 
criminal investigation and comply with all the demands of the law enforcement 
agencies.  
 
This calls for sound working knowledge in the functioning of the cyber crime cell 
and the latest developments in this field so that you will be able to meet the 
requirements that are necessary for a criminal investigation. 
 
Loss or breach of information security may lead to civil liabilities for or against 
the organization you are working for.  Most of the times this will be based on 
contractual liabilities and hence you must have a good knowledge of the law 
relating to contracts in your place and you are expected to gather all the 
requirements to meet this type of investigations usually conducted in a court of 
law or an agency appointed under their authority or an arbitrator empowered 
under the contract between the parties. 
 
Every organization conducting a business must have to comply with various legal 
provisions, rules and regulations of the government or by the departments 
working under the same. There are many submissions and information 
submitted to these on a periodical basis.  Apart from this, there are many 
special directions from these agencies for additional or special information. As a 
way of compliance of these you will have to be aware of the requirements for 
preparing the reports and datasheets to be submitted for legal compliance. 
 
In the present days of electronic data in a digitized format making discoveries 
for the purpose of conducting investigations differ much from the conventional 
ways of making discoveries during the course of an inquiry. As a CISSP 
professional you have to be well versed in the ways of assisting eDiscoveries and 
help the investigating agencies get the full set of information they require for 
completing the investigation.  
 

P a g e  | 83 
 
Hence you must concentrate more on the following topics and understand and 
create the requirements for investigation types 
 
 Operational 
 Criminal 
 Civil 
 Regulatory 
 Electronic discovery (eDiscovery) 
 
3.  Conduct Logging and Monitoring Activities 
 
As a part of maintaining the information security system integrity there are many 
types of access controls. These help in maintaining the right type of security of 
the system and help the users access and manage data in a safe and secure 
environment.   To make sure that the access controls that are set up to achieve 
this are working in the way you have planned and to know the vulnerabilities 
residing in the system, you  have to log each and every interaction that is taking 
place between the organization  and the users of the information security system. 
This becomes the basic record based on which you are going to build your security 
system to make it fool proof and failsafe.   
 
When you have initiated a proper logging system for ensuring the secure running 
of the information handling system, you can pin-point the problems that are 
occurring in the system and their source with reasonable certainty.  Once you 
have a very efficient logging system in place you can be sure of finding the 
condition of the information security system and will be able to remove the 
security routines that are not functioning as expected or bring in new security 
protocols to fine tune the system for higher levels of security. 
 
Monitoring of the information system is a vital role played by an information 
security specialist and this is a part of the logging activities that has been built into 
the system itself.  Close and consistent monitoring is very essential for the proper 
functioning of the security system and by doing this you will  able to easily 
anticipate the problems that are likely to arise through a particular element of the 
system. 
 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 84 
 
By creating a super responsive and high efficiency logging and monitoring 
protocols in the system you will be able to provide more inputs into the business 
continuity plan and the disaster recovery plans. So, as a CISSP certified 
professional you are expected to have a deep knowledge in the methodologies 
and resources needed for good logging and monitoring activities. 
 
As a way of closely monitoring the functioning of the security system there will 
be various types of intrusion detection and prevention systems integrated into 
the information security system. These systems are meant for real time 
monitoring and easy analysis of the network activity. This is useful in preventing 
potential vulnerabilities escalating into the full blown security issues. As they are 
able to provide a real –time monitoring and reporting you will be able to take 
immediate steps to address the happening of the attacks. 
 
These intrusion detection and prevention systems play a very vital role in 
maintaining an enhanced level of security in the system and hence a study of 
these systems and their way of functioning and how they can be used to achieve 
the final goals form part of the CISSP knowledge area. 
 
 In this respect you need to study about various types of intrusion detection and 
prevention systems like  
o active systems 
o passive systems 
o Net- work based systems 
o Host based systems 
o Knowledge based systems 
o Behavior based systems 
 
Getting the necessary security information on a consistent basis is necessary for 
the information security specialist to know the state of health and the condition 
of the overall system. This helps him find out the vulnerabilities and weakness of 
the components that are working together to ensure that there is required level 
of security in the system. The system must be so tuned as to get all the required 
security information so that suitable counter and preventive action can be taken 
to mitigate any adverse eventualities that may occur in the system. 
 

P a g e  | 85 
 
When you have put in such measures and protocols that have automated security 
information delivery systems, the system can be saved from any possible attacks 
as the security information available   will be able to give a clear understanding of 
what is happening and what to expect in the near future. With this vital 
knowledge, it is possible for proper and effective event management to save the 
system from total crash or be liable to be affected by man- made disasters. 
 
 Security information helps the organization in building a fool proof disaster 
recovery planning and business continuity planning. Armed with the latest 
security information you will be able to find suitable solutions for each of the 
anticipated vulnerabilities and disasters that have the capability to threaten the 
existence of the organization.   
 
Getting the right security information at the right time is the crux of any 
information security system and it is vital for a CISSP candidate to study deeply 
the  
 
o Types of security information that must be taken from the system 
o Design suitable security routines to extract this security information 
o How to analyze the data  
o How to prepare concise and to the point security reports 
o Find out the vulnerabilities and anticipated events 
o Putting in place the right counter measures and preventive actions 
 
Continuous monitoring is the process of monitoring the performance of the 
information security system whereby the functioning of the security controls are 
ensured to be running within the set parameters. This is set to run on an ongoing 
basis and feedback of the system helps the personnel running the system to know 
about the changes that occur in the system as and when they happen so that they 
can take note of the impact of these changes on the overall security of the system 
as soon as the changes take place. The continuous monitoring process goes on 
until there is a need for reaccreditation occurs due to changes that have modified 
the security controls already running or due to change in federal or agency 
policies that require reauthorization. 
 
During this continuous monitoring process you need to take care of the following 
processes namely: 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 86 
 
 
o Undertaking the configuration management and control of  various 
security controls 
o Continuous verification and authentication of ongoing security controls 
o Creating status reports and writing the necessary documentation for the 
same 
 
Apart from this the continuous monitoring also involves in the process of 
disposition of information, monitoring of the hardware elements and overseeing 
the functioning of the software applications. This also covers the other functions 
like moving of data, its archiving, discarding of information and destroying 
information in a safe and secure manner. This phase of information security also 
takes care of the sanitation of hardware and software systems for efficient risk 
management while disposing them. The residual data must be handled in a secure 
way so that the migration of system elements does not lead to any security issues. 
 
 It is necessary to extend the continuous monitoring process to configuration 
management and the related security control activity. When there is necessity to 
make changes to the information security system, then first the changes 
proposed are properly documented and then their impact on the security of the 
overall system is determined and proper actions and security routines are also 
changed in a comprehensive manner to maintain the same level of security before 
changes were made to the information security system. 
 
Egress monitoring refers to the security controls that have been established to 
monitor and control outgoing traffic. The main aim of this type of security control 
is to prevent unauthorized data transfer, data exfiltration heavily compromising 
the security of information of the organization.  
 
There are many ways to do this and some of the most common among them are 
the 
 
 Prevention of steganography attempts: by this process an unauthorized 
transfer of data takes place by concealing the data to be transferred 
clandestinely inside or along with the authorized data. The concept of 
steganography is well developed and is widely used as a tool for 
unauthorized transfer of data creating a serious information security 

P a g e  | 87 
 
breach. So, this type of attempts must be carefully monitored and each 
transfer of data to outside of the organization must be carefully analyzed 
and the contents of the transfer closely monitored to make sure that the 
information authorized to transfer does not contain any other data. 
 
  Data Loss prevention systems: these are well developed in the present 
days with capabilities to monitor, scan and detect particular data based on 
various criteria. When you have this type of system in your security set up, 
then you can configure them to detect, scan and prevent the transfer of 
data from your information storage and handling systems. 
 
 Watermarking: is the process of adding id parameters to the data holders 
so that you can easily identify them and prevent their use outside the 
organization in an unauthorized manner. 
 
Thus, this domain contains very critically important information and the concepts 
for effective security operation and hence the candidates opting for CISSP 
certifications must pay more attention towards this and acquire thorough 
knowledge about the various concepts that are in use to enhance the overall 
security of the information system.  
 
  Intrusion detection and prevention 
  Security information and event management 
  Continuous monitoring 
  Egress monitoring (e.g., data loss prevention, steganography, 
watermarking) 
 
4. Secure the Provisioning of Resources 
 
  Asset inventory (e.g., hardware, software) 
  Configuration management 
  Physical assets 
  Virtual assets (e.g., software -defined network, virtual SAN, guest 
operating  
 systems) 
  Cloud assets (e.g., services, VMs, storage, networks) 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 88 
 
  Applications (e.g., workloads or private clouds, web services, software as 
a  
 service) 
 
5. Understand and Apply Foundational Security Operations Concepts 
 
 Need -  to - know/least privilege (e.g., entitlement, aggregation, transitive 
trust) 
 Separation of duties and responsibilities 
 Monitor special privileges (e.g., operators, administrators) 
 Job rotation 
 Information lifecycle 
 Service - level agreements 
 
6. Employ Resource Protection Techniques 
 
  Media management 
 Hardware and software asset management 
 
7. Conduct Incident Management 
 
  Detection 
  Response 
  Mitigation 
  Reporting 
  Recovery 
  Remediation 
  Lessons learned 
8. Operate and Maintain Preventative Measures 
 
  Firewalls 
  Intrusion detection and prevention systems 
  White listing/Blacklisting 
  Third- party security  services 
  Sandboxing 
  Honey pots/Honey nets 
  Anti-malware 

P a g e  | 89 
 
 
 
9. Implement and Support Patch and Vulnerability Management 
 
10. Participate In and Understand Change Management Processes 
 (e.g., Versioning, Base lining, Security Impact Analysis) 
 
11. Implement Recovery Strategies 
 
  Backup storage strategies (e.g., offsite storage, electronic vaulting, tape  
rotation) 
  Recovery site strategies 
  Multiple processing sites (e.g., operationally redundant systems) 
  System resilience, high availability, quality of service, and fault tolerance 
 
12. Implement Disaster Recovery Processes 
 
  Response 
  Personnel 
  Communications 
   Assessment 
  Restoration 
  Training and awareness 
 
13. Test Disaster Recovery Plans 
 
  Read- through 
  Walkthrough 
  Simulation 
  Parallel 
  Full Interruption 
 
14. Participate In Business Continuity Planning and Exercises 
 
15. Implement and Manage Physical Security 
  Perimeter (e.g., access control and monitoring) 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 90 
 
  Internal security (e.g., escort requirements/visitor control, keys and 
locks) 
 
16. Participate In Addressing Personnel Safety Concerns (E.G., Duress, Travel,  
Monitoring) 15 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
15 Cryptography podcasts 

P a g e  | 91 
 
 
 
 
 
Domain 8  
Software Development Security16 
(Understanding, Applying, and Enforcing Software Security) 
Overview 
 
Security in software development is the last domain of the CISSP examination 
requirements. This domain lets you know the security controls that must be 
fulfilled while working in software development environments. You will be able 
to learn the security concepts that are currently in force for ensuring information 
security during the development and implementation of a software application. 
This tells us how best security practices must be adhered to and followed while 
going through the systematic development and launching of new software 
applications or while redeveloping the existing software solutions. 
 
A CISSP professional is not expected to be a skilled software developer or a 
qualified software security engineer. But they must know how to assess the 
requirements necessary for implementing the right types of security controls. 
They must also know how to enforce the security boundaries for the safe and 
secure operation of the software application within the ambit of the overall 
information security system. 
 
For the purpose of ensuring the right ways of implementing the security controls 
that are in place, the CISSP person must be able to know how to enforce the 
security guidelines during every phase of the software development lifecycle. To 
make sure that the CISSP candidates have sufficient knowledge for ensuring 
information security while working with software development scenarios, they 
will be tested for their level of knowledge in: 
 
o Types and nature of software development methodologies 
o Software maturity models 
o Operations and maintenance of software development systems 
                                                           
16 Videos on Software Development Security 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 92 
 
o Providing for change of management during software development life 
cycle 
o Providing for an integrated development team to take charge of each of 
the stages in the software development lifecycle 
 
As a certified information security professional it is necessary to have knowledge 
in the concepts that deal with enforcement of security controls in all types of 
software development environments. For this you must have learnt the concepts 
that deal with anticipated security vulnerabilities in the software development 
process like 
 
 Security consideration for software development tools 
 Security issues that are likely to arise due to weakness in the software 
development methods currently in use 
 Security related weaknesses in the source code 
 Vulnerabilities in security set ups due to improper or wrong coding of the 
software applications 
 Security concerns that arise during the configuration and setting up of the 
software application into  the   overall information security system 
 Ensuring security in the code repositories 
 Providing for the right type of security in respect of Application 
programming interfaces 
 
Apart 
from 
these, 
the 
candidates for CISSP have to 
prove 
their 
depth 
of 
knowledge in the concepts 
relating to the software 
security control assessment. 
For this, you have to focus on 
the topics of logging and 
auditing with emphasis to 
change of management, analysis of risk and vulnerabilities and taking suitable 
mitigation activities for ensuring an enhanced level of software security. You also 
need to have good knowledge in the impact of the software applications that 
have been acquired from external sources. 
 
 
“CISSP’S 
ARE 
NOT, 
GENERALLY 
SPEAKING, 
SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS OR SOFTWARE SECURITY 
ENGINEERS; HOWEVER, IT IS INCUMBENT UPON 
THEM TO ASSESS AND ENFORCE SECURITY 
CONTROLS ON SOFTWARE BEING OPERATED 
WITHIN THEIR ENVIRONMENTS.” ~CISSP HANDBOOK 

P a g e  | 93 
 
Key Areas of Knowledge 
 
1. Understand and apply security in the software development lifecycle 
 
The security of the information system depends on the level of security you have 
built into each component of the overall security system. As most of the sub- 
systems are software driven you have to understand the vulnerabilities inherent 
in each one of them. This will help you build a sound security system without 
compromising on the functional abilities of various software applications you are 
using.  
 
Apart from this when you are developing a new software application for your 
information security system or for the use of your organization you must specify 
the security imperatives that must be built into the software. This will help the 
developers understand the level and type of security features you expect in the 
applications once they are launched and running. This is a better way to enhance 
the security behavior of the software development process than finding the 
vulnerabilities and addressing them later after the software application has been 
built and launched. 
 
This calls for good knowledge of the software development lifecycle and the 
current methodology that is being used for creating the software. As the security 
requirements and degree of errors, Security holes and vulnerabilities change with 
the methodology used for the software development you must have more 
knowledge on these, especially the most modern Agile methodology or the more 
common and traditional waterfall methodology. 
 
You should also acquire enough knowledge in the maturity models that are 
applicable to the software development cycles and their natural levels of security. 
When  you find that there is need for more stringent security routines you have 
to specify the necessary security protocols that must be followed while  
developing and testing the maturity models so that the software applications 
abides by your security directions. 
  
Once the software application was developed and launched you have to test the 
same against your set security values and satisfy yourself as to the compliance of 
all the security requirements you have asked for.  While operating the application 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 94 
 
you may notice some vulnerability due to coding inefficiencies and you have to 
provide the right counter measures so that the software application does not 
pose any security issues to your information security system. 
 
Towards this and to ensure that you understand the importance of acquiring 
knowledge for proper development of the software application with required 
security norms you have to study the following concepts in some detail: 
 
 Development methodologies (e.g., Agile, Waterfall) 
 Maturity models 
 Operation and maintenance 
 Change management 
 Integrated product team (e.g., DevOps) 
 
2. Enforce security controls in development environments 
 
When you want to ensure   confidentiality, availability and integrity of your 
information security system then you have to place the security controls right 
from the development stage. Developing a software application involves many 
persons and many processes. It is not possible to have a one on one control of the 
entire range of processes or users who are involved in developing the software 
application. Further to complicate your security control enforcement the 
development of the software application may take place at an off shore 
outsourced location over which you cannot enforce any sort of security routines. 
 
To obviate the occurrence of any of the security issues that may crop up due to 
the flaws in the software development process you need to state, deliver and 
enforce the security controls even before the start of the software application. 
This is to ensure that the software application development process is carried 
with the full knowledge and commitment to the security routines you want to 
enforce in the software application. 
 
An easy and effective way would be to select and involve a security enabled 
software development environment or make your software development 
environment a fully secure one.  While proceeding with the software 
development you must stress the necessity for following a software development 
methodology that does not give any room for security weaknesses or unknown 

P a g e  | 95 
 
and unexpected vulnerabilities. This helps you access the types of security issues 
that may crop up during its operation and be ready with suitable counter 
measures to deal with them in such a way no serious security issues are seen in 
your information security system. 
 
All software applications need configuration before they can be integrated into 
the system and begin their functioning. This is an important occasion for checking 
the security readiness of the software application. You have to device suitable 
routines and place the right protocols to check for any unanswered vulnerabilities 
and try to remove them at the first instance or be ready to counteract their effects 
once they are found to be the result of faults in the source code. 
 
 Hence it is necessary for the CISSP person to have good configuration 
management skills to make the software application run with all types of security 
controls right from the time of their configuration. 
 
The other instances of security breach occur in the code repositories unless you 
are aware of the vulnerabilities in the coding of the software application.  
Providing security at the code repositories is the most reliable way of securing the 
software application development phase and its installation phase. This includes 
the necessity for providing the necessary amounts of security at the programming 
interfaces as they are the main sources of interaction with outside world hence 
they become easy targets of attacks. 
 
Due to all these the CISSP curriculum lays special emphasis on how to enhance 
the security of the software application during its development phase and   for 
this you must have sound working knowledge in the following concepts:  
  
  Security of the software environments 
  Security weaknesses and vulnerabilities at the source-code level (e.g., 
buffer  
 Overflow, escalation of privilege, input/output validation) 
 Configuration management as an aspect of secure coding 
 Security of code repositories 
 Security of application programming interfaces 
 
 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 96 
 
3. Assess the effectiveness of software security 
 
Effective security can be implemented only by constant assessing and monitoring 
of the security controls you have placed in the software development lifecycle. 
This is necessary and vital for the success of the overall information security 
system that is geared towards fulfilling the demand for a secure and safe working 
environment for the organization.  
 
While ensuring the proper functioning of the security system, various types of 
audits are conducted to  
o know the performance level of security controls 
o the effectiveness of these controls as well as their preparedness to act on 
any vulnerabilities 
 
the results of these audits helps you understand the security routines you have 
devised to safeguard your information security system and make it work as 
desired.  Audits may be conducted through internal teams or through external 
agencies and they must be done in a periodical manner to get the desired results 
and to be prepared to meet any eventualities. 
 
Software applications tend to change during their various phases of working life 
and these changes may bring about new vulnerabilities and weaknesses. You have 
to assess the effects of these changes on the security controls. Whenever a new 
change in the software application function is noticed then you have to look for 
its corresponding weakness or vulnerability prompting you to launch the 
necessary counter measures. 
 
 Risk analysis of various factors that are functioning as a part of your information 
security system is a vital function of the CISSP professional. To obviate the 
happening of any unexpected security issues, it is necessary to conduct risk 
analysis on every part of the software application development process and the 
resulting products. This will give a good handle over the selection and 
implementation of the right type of security controls for the software 
applications. Mitigation of the security issues that come to the notice during the 
risk analysis is to be done at the right time without delay or waiting for the 
security issue to arise. 
 

P a g e  | 97 
 
Acceptance testing helps in finding the particular elements of the software 
application that readily accepts your demands of various security controls you 
want to be implemented into the system. To know the acceptance level of the 
system in question you must know how to do an acceptance testing and based on 
its results, you must be able to put in additional security controls or modify the 
existing ones that are not showing good acceptance and implement them to 
ensure the required level of security. 
 
Towards this focus on the following concepts while preparing for your CISSP 
certification namely: 
 
  Auditing and logging of changes 
  Risk analysis and mitigation 
  Acceptance testing 
 
 
4. Assess Security Impact Of Acquired Software 
 
 In the day to day functioning of the organization it is necessary to use many 
software applications that are developed by third parties. These applications may 
not be having all the security elements put into them during their development. 
When your organization wants to use them for its purposes, you need to conduct 
a security assessment of the acquired software. This will help you find the level of 
security available in the application and if it is not up to your expected level you 
have to add the necessary security controls to it to make it comply with your 
security requirements.  
 
If this is not possible then you have to find the security impact of the acquired 
software application by carefully studying its known vulnerabilities and fine tune 
your security controls to take care of these vulnerabilities. You must be prepared 
not only to face any type of threats that are known now but also expect during its 
operation at later stages. 
 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 98 
 
Hence your ability to assess the security impact of the acquired software is a 
necessary feature you must be well prepared to ensure the confidentiality, 
integrity and availability of information at all times.17 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
17 Podcast episodes for Domain 8 

P a g e  | 99 
 
References: 
Arata, A. (2005). Perimeter Security. 
Bacik, S. (2008). Building an Effective Information Security Policy Architecture. 
Bertino, E, Takahashi (2011). Identity Management: Concepts, Technologies, and Systems. 
Bosworth, S, Kabay, M, Whyne E (2009). Computer Security Handbook. 
Boudriga, N. (2009). Security of Mobile Communications. 
Buffington, J (2010). Data Protection for Virtual Data Centers. 
Chin, S, Older, S (2010). Access Control, Security and Trust: A Logical Approach. 
Davis, C (2001). IPSec: Securing VPNs. 
Dowd, M, McDonald J, Schuh (2006). The Art of Software Security Assessment: Identifying and Preventing Software 
Vulnerabilities. 
Dwivedi, H (2010). Mobile Application Security. 
Fennelly, L (2012). Effective Physical Security. 
Foreman, P (2009). Vulnerability Management. 
Hernandez, S. (2012). Official (ISC)2 Guide to the CISSP CBK (3rd edition). 
Herold, R. (2010). Managing an Information Security and Privacy Awareness and Training Program, (2nd edition). 
Kadrich, M (2007). Endpoint Security. 
Kenan, K (2005). Cryptography in the Database: The Last Line of Defense 
Khairallah, M (2005. Physical Security Systems Handbook: The Design and Implementation of Electronic Security 
Systems. 
Landoll, D. (2011). The Security Risk Assessment Handbook: Complete Guide for Performing Security Risk 
Assessments. 
Luotonen, A (1997). Web Proxy Servers. 
Newman, R (2009). Security and Access Control Using Biometric Technologies: Application, Technology, and 
Management. 
Nissenbaum, H (2009). Privacy in Context: Technology, Policy and the Integrity of Social Life. 
Prowell, S, Kraus, R, Borkin (2010). Seven Deadliest Network Attacks. 
Rajnovic, D (2010). Computer Incident Response and Product Security. 
www.ebook3000.com

P a g e  | 100 
 
Santos, O. (2007). End-to-End Network Security: Defense-in-Depth 
Stallings, (2013). Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practice, 6th edition. 
Swidersky, F, Snyder, W (2004). Threat Modeling. 
 

