City of Light:
The Story of Fiber Optics
JEFF HECHT
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

City
of
Light

THE SLOAN TECHNOLOGY SERIES
Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb
Richard Rhodes
Dream Reaper:
The Story of an Old-Fashioned Inventor in
the High-Stakes World of Modern Agriculture
Craig Canine
Turbulent Skies: The History of Commercial Aviation
Thomas A. Heppenheimer
Tube: The Invention of Television
David E. Fisher and Marshall Jon Fisher
The Invention that Changed the World:
How a Small Group of Radar Pioneers Won the Second
World War and Launched a Technological Revolution
Robert Buderi
Computer: A History of the Information Machine
Martin Campbell-Kelly and William Aspray
Naked to the Bone: Medical Imaging in the Twentieth Century
Bettyann Kevles
A Commotion in the Blood:
A Century of Using the Immune System to
Battle Cancer and Other Diseases
Stephen S. Hall
Beyond Engineering: How Society Shapes Technology
Robert Pool
The One Best Way:
Frederick Winslow Taylor and
the Enigma of Efﬁciency
Robert Kanigel
Crystal Fire: The Birth of the Information Age
Michael Riordan and Lillian Hoddesen
Insisting on the Impossible:
The Life of Edwin Land, Inventor of Instant Photography
Victor McElheny
City of Light: The Story of Fiber Optics
Jeff Hecht
Visions of Technology:
A Century of Provocative Readings edited by Richard Rhodes
Last Big Cookie
Gary Dorsey (forthcoming)

City
of
Light
The Story of Fiber Optics
JEFF HECHT
1

3
Oxford
New York
Auckland
Bangkok
Buenos Aires
Cape Town
Chennai
Dar es Salaam
Delhi
Hong Kong
Istanbul
Karachi
Kolkata
Kuala Lumpur
Madrid
Melbourne
Mexico City
Mumbai
Nairobi
Sa˜o Paulo
Shanghai
Taipei
Tokyo
Toronto
Copyright  1999 by Jeff Hecht
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
First issued as an Oxford University Press paperback, 2004
www.oup.com
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hecht, Jeff.
City of light : the story of ﬁber optics / by Jeff Hecht.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-19-510818-3; 0-19-516255-2 (pbk.)
1. Fiber optics.
I. Title.
TA1800.H42
1999
621.36'92—dc21
98-6135
1 3 5 7 9 8 6 4 2
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper

For Lois,
Leah,
and Jolyn

THE SLOAN TECHNOLOGY SERIES
Technology is the application of science, engineering, and industrial organization
to create a human-built world. It has led, in developed nations, to a standard of
living inconceivable a hundred years ago. The process, however, is not free of
stress; by its very nature, technology brings change in society and undermines
convention. It affects virtually every aspect of human endeavor: private and public
institutions, economic systems, communications networks, political structures, in-
ternational afﬁliations, the organization of societies, and the condition of human
lives. The effects are not one-way; just as technology changes society, so too do
societal structures, attitudes, and mores affect technology. But perhaps because
technology is so rapidly and completely assimilated, the profound interplay of
technology and other social endeavors in modern history has not been sufﬁciently
recognized.
The Sloan Foundation has had a long-standing interest in deepening public
understanding about modern technology, its origins, and its impact on our lives.
The Sloan Technology Series, of which the present volume is a part, seeks to
present to the general reader the stories of the development of critical twentieth-
century technologies. The aim of the series is to convey both the technical and
human dimensions of the subject: the invention and effort entailed in devising the
technologies and the comforts and stresses they have introduced into contempo-
rary life. As the century draws to an end, it is hoped that the series will disclose
a past that might provide perspective on the present and inform the future.
The Foundation has been guided in its development of the Sloan Technology
Series by a distinguished advisory committee. We express deep gratitude to John
Armstrong, Simon Michael Bessie, Samuel Y. Gibbon, Thomas P. Hughes, Victor
McElheny, Robert K. Merton, Elting E. Morison (deceased), and Richard Rhodes.
The Foundation has been represented on the committee by Ralph E. Gomory,
Arthur L. Singer, Jr., Hirsh G. Cohen, and Doron Weber.
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation

Preface to the Paperback Edition
‘‘It’s not over,’’ Don Keck told me in 1995 when I interviewed him about the
development of ﬁber optics. The intervening years proved he was right. The
bandwidth revolution that Will Hicks foresaw has come to pass. Indeed,
the revolution has had consequences that no one expected. For the ﬁrst time,
the telecommunications industry had more bandwidth than it knew what to
do with. Combined with the emergence of the World Wide Web and expan-
sion of the Internet, the bandwidth revolution has taken the ﬁber-optics world
on a roller-coaster ride that has soared to the heights of overnight wealth
and plummeted to the depths of economic ruin.
A new epilogue reﬂects those tumultuous times. My original story wound
down with the completion of the global ﬁber-optic telecommunications net-
work around 1990. The epilogue covers the bandwidth revolution. It starts
with the technology that opened the door, the optical ampliﬁer, which I had
mentioned only brieﬂy before. Then it shows the origins of the boom in optical
networks, which evolved into the telecommunications bubble that led to to-
day’s economic bust. The dot.com companies that grew with the Internet
started the technology stock bubble, but ﬁber-optic communication rode it to
the bitter end. The bold dream of a planet-spanning network wound up in
bankruptcy court.
The story of ﬁber optics isn’t complete without the tale of the boom, the
bubble, and the bust. I have room here to cover it only brieﬂy. Having ridden
that particular roller coaster, I’m still a bit wobbly on my feet, trying to
understand what really happened. Telecommunications was swept up in the
economic tempest of a speculative bubble, like railroads were in the late nine-

viii
PREFACE TO THE PAPERBACK EDITION
teenth century. Railroads remained the backbone of national transporta-
tion systems for a century. Likewise, ﬁber will remain the backbone of the
global telecommunication network, although individual companies will come
and go.
I have taken advantage of this new edition to correct mistakes and omissions
in the ﬁrst. I owe particular thanks to Bob Maurer, Don Keck, and Bill Wolf
for their comments and reﬂections. The part of the epilogue covering optical
ampliﬁers is based in part on my article ‘‘The evolution of optical ampliﬁers,’’
in the August 2002 issue of Optics & Photonics News. I think Lisa Rosenthal
for commissioning the article, and Dave Payne, Emmanuel Desurvire, and
Larry Johnson for helping with my research on optical ampliﬁers.

Preface
When I started to explore the history of ﬁber optics, I had no idea the origins
of what seemed such a young technology dated back more than a century
and a half. Yet the more I dug, the farther the roots stretched, back in time,
around the world, and across disciplines. I found forgotten heroes, discovered
mistakes in the sketchy standard histories, and tried to untangle a few lin-
gering mysteries. I learned how a powerful new technology evolved to ﬁll the
needs of our society.
The basic concept behind ﬁber optics began as a thing of beauty, but Vic-
torian scientists saw it as little more than a parlor trick to play with light.
Over the decades, others borrowed the idea, inventing and re-inventing ways
to guide light. The trickle of innovation reached a critical mass in the 1950s,
and the young technology slowly emerged into the world. More advances
followed, including a series of breakthroughs that in twenty years transformed
a crazy idea into the backbone of the global telecommunications network.
My job here is to tell the story of ﬁber optics. If I were writing a novel, my
hero might make an elegant invention in her basement, struggle for years to
perfect and market the idea, and ultimately become the multibillionaire head
of an industrial empire. Modern technology doesn’t work like that, making
the tale both more complex and more fascinating.
No one genius did it all. It took a cast of thousands to develop the essential
pieces and assemble them into working systems. Think of it as a city of light,
a still-growing community building a structure elegant in concept and useful
in function. I’ve had the good fortune to spend many years watching and
writing about that richly textured place. It’s full of struggles and successes,

x
PREFACE
bright and beautiful ideas, and ﬁreside tales told relaxing with old friends. I
have tried to ﬁll this book with that spirit.
I owe many people thanks for making this book possible. A generous grant
from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation gave me the time and resources for the
job. Art Singer of the Sloan Foundation supplied help and encouragement
well beyond the ﬁnancial support. Victor McElheny generously helped me
with my proposal; he and John Armstrong gave thoughtful feedback on my
manuscript. My Oxford editor, Kirk Jensen, patiently guided me to tell the
story and explain the technology clearly. Thanks also to my agent, Jeanne
Hanson, and to Helen Gavaghan for telling me about the Sloan program.
The story of the origins of light guiding draws heavily on careful research
by the late Kaye Weedon, who found the earliest accounts of demonstrations
by Daniel Colladon and Jacques Babinet. Sadly, I never met Weedon, and he
never published his ﬁndings. However, he did give several lectures and gave
copies of his notes to Jeofry Courtney-Pratt, who kindly sent me copies. I wish
I could have thanked Weedon in person for pointing me in the right direction.
Many others have given generously of their time, lent me documents and
pictures, and commented on earlier drafts of parts of the book. For insight
into the early days of imaging ﬁber optics, I thank especially Lem Hyde, Brian
O’Brien, Jr., Walt Siegmund, Martin Carey, Willem Brouwer, Larry Curtiss,
Bob Potter, Will Hicks, and Holger Møller Hansen. Many others helped me
understand the development of ﬁber-optic communications, including Charles
Kao, George Hockham, Don Keck, Murray Ramsay, Dick Dyott, John Midwin-
ter, Martin Chown, Roger Heckingbottom, Jack Cook, David Hanna, Charlie
Sandbank, Richard Epworth, Laszlo Solymar, Rich Cerny, Al Kasiewicz, Paul
Lazay, Ray Jaeger, Rob Cassetti, and Jack Kessler. Max Riedl, Jean-Louis Tru-
del, Jonathan Beard, and Julian Carey translated articles. To The Point Graph-
ics in Newton, Massachusetts, helped me with drawings. Phyllis Smith, Donna
Cunningham, Joan Finamore, Mary Wright, Connie Coburn, Patricia Thiel,
Andy Goldstein, Tim Proctor, Rene´ Sigrist, and Lesley Hepden helped me track
down details, people, and pictures. Fred Abbott, Rick Martin, and Steve Salt
trusted me with rare references that have sat too long in my ofﬁce. Countless
others talked with me in person or on the phone, sharing stories and an-
swering questions about friends, relatives, and former co-workers. I’ve tried
to keep everything straight, but if I haven’t it’s my fault, not theirs.
I’ve had a good time writing this book. I hope you enjoy reading it.
Newton, Massachusetts
J. H.
December 1997

Contents
The Sloan Technology Series
vi
Preface to the Paperback Edition
vii
Preface
ix
1
Introduction: Building a City of Light
3
2
Guiding Light and Luminous Fountains (1841–1890)
12
3
Fibers of Glass
28
4
The Quest for Remote Viewing:
Television and the Legacy of Sword Swallowers (1895–1940)
34
5
A Critical Insight:
The Birth of the Clad Optical Fiber (1950–1955)
46
6
99 Percent Perspiration: The Birth of an Industry (1954–1960)
60
7
A Vision of the Future: Communicating with Light (1880–1960)
76
8
The Laser Stimulates the Emission of New Ideas (1960–1969)
92
9
‘‘The Only Thing Left Is Optical Fibers’’ (1960–1969)
103
10
Trying to Sell a Dream (1965–1970)
117
11
Breakthrough: The Clearest Glass in the World (1966–1972)
131
12
Recipes for Grains of Salt:
The Semiconductor Laser (1962–1977)
147

xii
CONTENTS
13
A Demonstration for the Queen (1970–1975)
160
14
Three Generations in Five Years (1975–1983)
176
15
Submarine Cables:
Covering the Ocean Floor with Glass (1970–1995)
201
16
The Last Mile: An Elusive Vision
216
17
Reﬂections on the City of Light
227
18
Epilogue: The Boom, the Bubble, and the Bust
239
Appendix A. Dramatis Personae: Cast of Characters
257
Appendix B. A Fiber-Optic Chronology
265
Notes
279
Index
329
Photo gallery follows page 116

City
of
Light

This page intentionally left blank 

3
1
Introduction
Building a City of Light
I . . . managed to illuminate the interior of a stream [of wa-
ter] in a dark space. I have discovered that this arrange-
ment . . . offers in its results one of the most beautiful, and
most curious, experiments that one can perform in a course
on optics.
—J. Daniel Colladon, 18421
T
he Sunday evening phone call sounded completely ordinary. A friend who
lives a few miles away wanted me to call a few other Caltech graduates
for the alumni association. I had helped him before, and I agreed to help him
again. We chatted a bit, and as we ﬁnished, he added, ‘‘You know how
dedicated I am? I’m calling from my hotel room in Cairo at two in the morn-
ing.’’
I was stunned. When I was growing up in the 1950s and 1960s, it was
rare to get long-distance calls from relatives a few hundred miles away. They
didn’t call to chat but to report news in static-toned voices that sounded far,
far away. My friend’s voice sounded as clear and sharp as a telephone can
be, as if he was calling from his home in the next town, not 5400 miles away
in Egypt. Such miracles are the daily work of ﬁber optics.
A Global Fiber-Optic Network
I have grown accustomed to such miracles. As a correspondent for the
London-based weekly magazine New Scientist, I use the telephone network to

4
CITY OF LIGHT
reach across the world. International dialing is easy. My ﬁngers have mem-
orized the codes for the London ofﬁce. I start with 011, the code for inter-
national direct calling. Then comes 44, the country code for the United King-
dom, and 207, the city code for central London. Those eight digits route the
call to the right region; four digits—a ‘‘1’’ and the area code—sufﬁce for calls
in North America. Then I push seven more buttons and after a breath or two
a phone rings on an editor’s desk.
You cannot mistake a telephone voice for a live one; the telephone is not
a high-ﬁdelity instrument. Some distort voices much more than others. With
a little practice, you can recognize speaker phones, cellular phones, or $9.95
discount-store specials. Yet without the effects of the telephone itself, it is hard
to tell a call from London from one from down the block. I can recognize the
editors’ voices; they can tell when sinus trouble clogs my nose, or laryngitis
roughens my throat. The telephone lines are as transparent as they sound.
A few miles from my home, my telephone calls shift from copper wires to
glass optical ﬁbers.
The part of the telephone network we see is electrical. A microphone con-
verts the vibrations of air molecules shaken by my voice into electronic sig-
nals. The phone sends the electronic signals through copper wires in my
house, which connect to wires that run to a telephone pole across the street.
From there, more wires carry the signals down the pole and through under-
ground ducts to a building a few miles away, where electronics convert them
to digital code—a string of ones and zeroes. The circuits decode the numbers
I dialed, ﬁgure out the call’s destination, switch the signals to a cable headed
in that direction, and shufﬂe the bits of my voice together with the digitized
signals from other phone calls being sent along the same digital highway on
their routes to their separate destinations.
The electronic bit stream switches off and on a tiny semiconductor laser
no larger than a grain of salt, turning my voice into pulses of invisible infrared
light. A hair-thin optical ﬁber collects the millions of pulses a second that
carry my words—and other voices and facsimile messages and computer
data—and sends them on their way south to New Jersey, where domestic
phone lines connect to ﬁber-optic cables that cross the Atlantic. At the inter-
national switching center, other circuits amplify and reroute the bits of my
voice along with thousands of other digitized conversations. Then they travel
thousands of miles through optical ﬁbers protected from the abyssal depths
by the layers of white plastic and metal shielding that make up a 0.827-inch
(21-millimeter) submarine cable. On the other side of the Atlantic, a British
international switching center reroutes them to other ﬁbers that carry them
to London. In the British capital, more ﬁber-optic cables carry the light pulses
through a maze of underground ducts to the building that houses New Sci-
entist. An electronic receiver in a box somewhere in the building turns the
light pulses back into electrical signals that go through wires to the phones
on the editors’ desks.
We don’t see the optical ﬁbers in the telephone system, any more than we
see the electronic chips that control a videotape recorder. If we were to see

INTRODUCTION
5
them, they would not look spectacular. A single optical ﬁber is a tiny clear
ﬁlament, coated with plastic that makes it a little thicker and stiffer than a
human hair, like monoﬁlament ﬁshing line. Your eye can easily miss a single
bare ﬁber, and your ﬁngers fumble at trying to pick one up. The semicon-
ductor lasers that generate the signals that pass through the ﬁbers resemble
tiny ﬂakes of metallic confetti, the size of grains of salt.
Yet these technological wonders are far more sophisticated than they look.
The ﬁbers that span the globe are the clearest, purest glass. Ordinary plate
glass is very different stuff, old-fashioned pea-soup London smog compared to
the sharp, clear mountaintop air of ﬁbers. A pane of plate glass transmits only
about 90 percent of the light that reaches it, no matter how clean you scrub
it. The surfaces reﬂect most of the remaining 10 percent, but the glass itself
absorbs some. We are so used to the reﬂections and dirt that we use them as
cues to tell if the glass is there; clean a glass door too well, and someone may
try to walk through it. We often don’t notice that any light is lost inside the
glass. Yet look into the edge of a piece of plate glass and it seems dark and
green, because little light can pass through the several inches of glass between
the edges of the pane.
Plate glass is good enough for windows. Binocular and camera lenses are
made of more costly optical glasses that contain fewer light-absorbing impu-
rities. The glass for optical ﬁbers must be even purer—with no more than ten
impurities per billion atoms. The ﬁbers are as clear as glass can be, so clear that
even after passing through 100 kilometers (60 miles) of ﬁber, one percent of
the light emerges from the other end. It’s as if you could duck your head into
the water below the cliffs of Dover and peer through the English Channel to
dimly see the feet of bathers wading along the French beach at Calais.
The tiny lasers that send the signals are not simple crystals like grains of
salt. They are made of thin layers of semiconductor, with compositions de-
signed to control how light and electric current ﬂow through them. Their
structures are delicate and elaborate; the layers are thinner than a thou-
sandth of a millimeter, or 1⁄25,000th of an inch. The tiny chips are cheap, but
it is expensive to package them to direct their light unerringly into the tiny
cores that carry light in optical ﬁbers.
Watching the Breakthrough
Optical ﬁbers didn’t seem likely to go so far when I ﬁrst encountered them a
quarter century ago. They seemed mere optical toys, which guided light along
their lengths. Bend a ﬁber, and the light turns the corner. Hold one end of a
bundle of ﬁbers close to a light bulb and let the other end splay out, and the
tips of the ﬁbers sparkle with light as a decorative lamp. Back then, I bought
my sister one as a Christmas present. She used it for a couple of years, but it
ended up as a techno-artifact in my attic.
I started hearing about ﬁber optic communications a couple of years later
in 1974, when I started working at a little laser-industry magazine called

6
CITY OF LIGHT
Laser Focus. It was one of dozens of new ideas the industry was investigating,
and it didn’t even seem the most promising at the time. Lots of people tested
lasers for various applications, but few of the ideas proved practical.
The editor wanted me to chase news, so I called around America, asking
California companies and Bell Labs in New Jersey about ﬁber-optic commu-
nications. However, I didn’t call overseas when I heard that a British police
department had installed the ﬁrst practical ﬁber-optic communication system
in 1975. I didn’t have a phone number, and I knew international calls were
expensive. A few years earlier a cousin stationed in South Korea by the Army
had made a collect call to a girl friend in New York. They argued, and spent
about a half hour on the line—and ran up a bill of $750. That was about
three weeks of my salary, and I knew better than to run up bills like that. I
based my story on a report in another magazine; it wasn’t good journalism,
but I had to ﬁll the magazine.
Progress over the next few years was rapid. In 1976, Bell Labs ran a ﬁeld
trial in Atlanta. The next year, Bell Labs, GTE, and British Telecom used ﬁber
optics to carry live telephone trafﬁc in their networks. They poked and prod-
ded and cautiously examined the new technology, as if they expected a horde
of gremlins to emerge and shout ‘‘gotcha,’’ and all the potential attractions
of ﬁber optics to evaporate. Again and again they reported the same welcome
but monotonous litany—the system worked as promised.
There are few more exhilarating experiences in journalism than riding the
crest of a technology breakthrough. Everywhere I turned there were ad-
vances. Fibers improved, lasers improved, detectors improved. Each new sys-
tem sent signals faster and farther than old ones. New people and companies
came into the ﬁeld. The little village of ﬁber-optic pioneers grew. I was caught
up in the excitement of a fast-growing ﬁeld. I still remember the thrill of
hearing Peter Runge of Bell Labs outline plans for laying the ﬁrst transatlantic
ﬁber-optic cable at a 1980 meeting. I felt the same thrill I remembered as a
boy reading Werner Von Braun’s plans for space travel in Across the Space
Frontier. Fiber-optic communications was on a roll.
Laser Focus had grown, too, and after seven years I was managing editor
with four people working for me, but it wasn’t where I wanted to be. I left
to freelance and naturally started writing about ﬁber optics. I wrote an article
on the ﬁber-optics market for a short-lived magazine called Technology, and
one about futuristic ﬁber communications to the home for Omni. Meanwhile,
the technology grew apace. I watched three generations of ﬁber-optic systems
appear in ﬁve years. Laboratory systems kept pushing to higher and higher
performance. Optical ﬁbers became the medium of choice for long-distance
telephone transmission, the backbone of national networks. The ﬁrst trans-
atlantic ﬁber cable, called TAT-8, came into service at the end of 1988. Nat-
urally, I wrote about it for New Scientist.
I also noticed the difference it made in international calls. Before TAT-8,
satellite links carried most calls. The signals took a fraction of a second to
make the round trip to and from the satellite, parked 22,000 miles above the
equator, just long enough to disturb the timing of a conversation. Satellite

INTRODUCTION
7
channels sometimes brought other irritations. I recall many one-way conver-
sations, when London could hear me but I couldn’t hear them, or vice versa.
Sometimes silence, or a hum or whine from presumably unhappy electronics,
suddenly replaced the British voices. Other times echoes of my words would
return a second after I spoke them, often louder than the voice on the other
end. ‘‘Sorry,’’ I would say, ‘‘let’s try again,’’ and one of us would call back
to try to get a better line.
The ﬁber cable gave a new alternative. The bad lines and the satellites
were still there, but TAT-8 added 40,000 good circuits through echo-free
cable—a thousand times more than the ﬁrst transatlantic telephone cable
carried in 1956. Since then, more ﬁber cables have crossed the Atlantic, and
poor connections to Britain are as rare as within North America. Even Egypt,
Israel, Hong Kong, and Australia come in loud and clear. When something
goes wrong with the phone line, it’s almost always in the few miles of aged
copper wire that connect my house to the nearest ﬁbers in the telephone
network.
Wires, cables, ﬁbers, and other transmission media are not the whole story
of the revolution in communications. Telephone calls must be routed from
point to point, by switches that make temporary connections in the global
lattice of ﬁbers, wires, and radio signals. At the start of the century, telephone
switching was by hand, with ranks of operators plugging wires into sockets
in the sort of big black switchboards that survive only in old movies. Later
clattering banks of electromechanical switches replaced them, which ﬂipped,
ﬂopped, and stepped from point to point, making and breaking connections
in response to control pulses that originated in telephone dials. Sometimes
you could hear the mechanical switches clicking on their way to making
connections on the line, just as you could hear the pulses as a telephone dial
rotated. Later came transistorized electronic switches, special-purpose com-
puters designed to send signals along complex routes. Without them, phone
calls could never weave their ways through the maze of big-city networks.
But they’re another story, to be told another day.
How Fiber Optics Changed Communications
What is so good about ﬁber optics? Looking at the telephone network will
help you understand. The old wires running to my house are both its strength
and weakness—new equipment has to work with the same wires used for
decades. With a screwdriver and very little ingenuity, I can hook up a massive
45-year-old dial phone in Western Electric basic black. Someone dropped it a
few years back and broke a corner off the case, but it still works. So do my
modem, answering machine, and fax machine. It’s a simple, versatile system
of information pipes that is standard throughout North America.
Phone companies laid the wires to provide what they call ‘‘POTS,’’ plain
old telephone service. They designed the network to carry electrical signals
that replicate sound waves at the frequencies we must hear to understand

8
CITY OF LIGHT
speech—300 to 3000 hertz (or cycles per second), if you like speciﬁcations.
That’s only part of the human ear’s nominal range of 20 to 20,000 hertz, so
sound quality isn’t good. But it does the job because you don’t need high
ﬁdelity to understand speech.
Phone wires can carry other audio signals as well as speech. The push
buttons on a Touch-Tone phone whistle musical notes at audio frequencies.
Modems and fax machines warble their codes as tones in the audible speech
range. Our ears don’t understand their electronic speech, but the telephone
network carries their signals nonetheless, and other modems and fax ma-
chines decode the sounds.
The phone wires in your walls are strands of copper, coated with plastic
insulator and grouped in pairs (or sometimes fours). When they have to go
a long way, they’re often wound around each other, making what the phone
industry calls twisted pairs. The problem with standard twisted-pair phone
wires is that they were designed to carry a single conversation, which doesn’t
amount to much information. Adjust and condition them properly, and if all
goes well they can carry the equivalent of a few dozen conversations a few
miles, or of many more over a thousand feet. But that’s it. So far, no more
information can ﬁt through the pipe.
Modern telephone systems contain electronics that convert the whistles,
warbles, and words into digital signals within a few miles of your home. Each
‘‘voice channel’’ becomes a series of 64,000 bits per second. More electronics
interleave those bits with the bits that encode dozens, hundreds, or even
thousands of other telephone calls. Phone companies have a hierarchy of
levels, each one combining more digitized voice channels to generate a
higher-speed signal. Sometimes the slower signals go through special metal
cables or are relayed by microwave towers, but typically they go through
optical ﬁbers.
Most modern ﬁbers concentrate light signals in tiny cores about nine mi-
crometers—0.009 millimeter—across. That might seem a tiny pipe, but in
fact it has a huge information capacity. Its small size keeps short pulses of
light from spreading out and interfering with each other as they travel down
the ﬁber. With the best state-of-the-art transmitters phone companies can
buy, a single ﬁber can carry more than one trillion bits per second, equivalent
to 13 million telephone conversations.2 Pairs of ﬁbers carry two-way trafﬁc,
one carrying signals in each direction.
The clarity of glass ﬁbers is another advantage. Depending on the design,
they can carry signals tens of miles without any internal ampliﬁcation. That’s
vital if you’re building a cable crossing a continent or an ocean, or a cable-
television network serving a small city. Cable television network use coaxial
cable (‘‘coax’’), with a central wire surrounded by a plastic layer that is en-
cased in a metal sheath, and usually covered with a protective jacket. Coax
thinner than a pencil hooks home video systems together; thicker coax—
costlier but able to carry signals farther—links cable companies to homes.
Yet even those costly coaxial cables can’t carry signals very far. Cable com-
panies have to install signal-amplifying repeaters about every half kilometer

INTRODUCTION
9
(500 yards) because the signal weakens with distance. Those ampliﬁers keep
cable technicians busy. You don’t need them with ﬁber, so cable-television
companies are replacing their old coax with ﬁber-optic cables.
The huge information capacity of optical ﬁbers changes the ground rules
of telecommunications, which the telephone deﬁned early in the twentieth
century. What seemed adequate pipeline then today delivers only an elec-
tronic trickle in a world parched for information. The telephone network was
engineered to manage information as carefully as nomads husband the scarce
waters of the Sahara. The huge capacity of ﬁbers promises to irrigate our dry
lands, but ﬁrst we must ﬁnd uses for the ﬂow that will justify the costs of
extending the data pipeline all the way to our homes. We value information
almost instinctively, like desert nomads think water is a ‘‘good thing,’’ but
faced with an overwhelming abundance, we are as lost as a Bedouin by the
sea. We have long dreamt of making the desert bloom, but we don’t know
how.
The Roots of Fiber Optics
I discovered ﬁber-optic communications when the technology was still young
and the City of Light was but a small town. Some early settlers are still
around, active developers of new technology or elder statesmen. Others have
died or moved on. As the ﬁeld has grown, many new people have joined it.
Awareness of ﬁber optics has spread around the world like the glass threads
themselves. The ﬁeld and the technology have not stopped growing. Even as
I put the ﬁnishing touches on this book, I heard of new advances that promise
even better ﬁber-optic systems in coming years.
Where did this technological revolution come from? How did it grow so
fast, out-competing older and better-funded projects? This book tells the story,
one more fascinating than I imagined when I started.
In studying ﬁber optics, I have learned how technology evolves, like life
itself. The idea began as little more than a parlor trick, guiding light in jets
of water or bent glass rods to make physics lectures more entertaining.
Brighter electric lights powered illuminated fountains that awed visitors to
the great Victorian exhibitions, who were accustomed to faint gas lights.
Later, bent rods of glass or plastic guided light to illuminate teeth for dental
exams.
Another generation of engineers adapted light guiding, assembling arrays
of thin, ﬂexible glass ﬁbers to look into inaccessible places. The market niche
was not ﬁlled until developers found how to keep light from leaking between
ﬁbers. Once that innovation was perfected, the technology of ﬁber bundles
evolved rapidly, like animals that had just arrived in a new, unpopulated land.
New applications proliferated in the late 1950s and 1960s, from looking
down the throat to military imaging systems.
Flexible bundles of optical ﬁbers let physicians reach into otherwise inac-
cessible parts of the body. Surgeons threaded ﬁber-optic endoscopes down

10
CITY OF LIGHT
patients’ throats to examine the interiors of their stomachs without surgery.
Similar instruments probed the other way through the intestines, seeking
cancers or precancerous lesions so physicians could remove them before they
spread. ‘‘Fiber optics saved my life,’’ a geologist told me, by allowing his
surgeon to direct radiation therapy precisely at a tumor inside his skull.
Optical communications required different types of optical ﬁbers, and the
evolutionary leap was not easy. Some people who have worked in both areas
consider medical imaging bundles a different technology than communication
ﬁbers. It took breakthroughs in transmission concepts and glass production,
and like the ﬁrst dinosaurs to take wing as birds, the ﬂight of ﬁber-optic
communications was at ﬁrst uncertain. But the evolutionary potential was
there, and an outpouring of innovations launched ﬁber communications so
it soared high.
Why a ‘‘City of Light’’?
The title ‘‘City of Light’’ ﬁrst came to mind as a catchy phrase. The more I
worked on the book, the more I liked it.
One reason is that the roots of ﬁber optics lie in the nineteenth century, a
time when scientists entertained the public by devising elegant lecture dem-
onstrations. First they guided light along jets of water in lecture halls. Later
engineers picked the same principle to show glittering displays of light in the
night-time ‘‘fairy fountains’’ of the great Victorian exhibitions. The most spec-
tacular was in Paris, the City of Light, in 1889.
Another is that a veritable city of people helped create ﬁber-optic technol-
ogy, with their work spanning decades. Too often we gloss over the many
people behind some great innovation, to focus on a single ‘‘inventor.’’ Look
at the wall of inventions at the subway stop serving the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology,3 and you will be told that Narinder Kapany invented ﬁber
optics in 1955. In reality, Kapany was only one of many contributors, and
1955 marks only the awarding of his doctoral degree for a project conceived
by his thesis adviser, Harold H. Hopkins. The technology grew from the in-
terplay of many people and many ideas, often competing with each other. I
have tried to focus on the most important, but there is no room in a book
like this to credit everyone.
In addition, the best-known role of ﬁber optics has become as a technology
of communication, and communication is an essential part of any city.
Both communication and the failure to communicate play important roles in
the story. And this is a story played out on a grand scale, in laboratories
around the world. Most of the work was done in Europe, North America, and
Japan, but some developers came from other places, including China, India,
and South Africa. The fruits of their labor now link all the continents ex-
cept Antarctica. We can explore the world through optical ﬁbers, and talk
with people half a world away. That still amazes me when I stop to think
about it.

INTRODUCTION
11
Finally, the idea of a City of Light looks toward the future that we hope
can in some way be brighter. The ﬁber-optic revolution is not over. New
wonders continue emerging from the labs, and skilled engineers keep con-
verting them into practical hardware. More than 30 years have passed since
the ﬁrst visionary suggested stringing ﬁber optics all the way to homes, and
they haven’t arrived at my door yet. Perhaps I have become too much a fan
of ﬁber optics, but I still think that day should come before another three
decades pass.

12
2
Guiding Light and
Luminous Fountains
(1841–1890)
Among the most wonderful displays, electric and visual, at
the recent French exposition were those pertaining to the
luminous fountains, which were arranged on a grand scale
and occupied a large portion of the plateau in front of the
main entrance. The chameleon-like changes of color in the
fountain water were something astonishing to behold. It
was not accomplished by the mere throwing of colored
lights upon the exterior of a spouting jet, but was due to
an interior electric illumination of the molecules of the wa-
ter; the beams of light being, so to speak, thrown into and
imprisoned within the crystal walls of the water and then
carried along with it, becoming visible by interior reﬂection
during the discharge of the water.
—Scientiﬁc American, December 14, 18891
I
t is 400 kilometers (250 miles) as the crow ﬂies from Geneva to Paris, a
leisurely day’s drive on modern highways. The train ride took a much longer
day in 1889, but to the 86-year-old Daniel Colladon that marked tremendous
progress. In 1825, he had spent four bumpy days and nights on the same
route in a horse-drawn coach on his way to study physics in the center of
European science. Paris had been called the City of Light since it became the
intellectual center of the Age of Enlightenment in the late eighteenth century.2
Colladon made his 1889 trip to see the Universal Exhibition, which cele-
brated the centennial of the French Republic and the nineteenth-century pro-
gress that eased the old man’s journey. Honored, eminent, and proud, Col-

GUIDING LIGHT AND LUMINOUS FOUNTAINS
13
ladon was still an active scientist. He was famous for inventing compressed
air, which powered machines deep underground and delivered fresh air to
miners, making their job faster and safer. Yet he felt cheated because Italian
engineers won the contract to build the ﬁrst long railroad tunnel through the
Alps using his idea.
The fountains that lit up the City of Light in 1889 used another of Col-
ladon’s inventions. Forty-eight years earlier, he had shone a beam of light
along a jet of water, to entertain lecture halls in Geneva and London with an
optical trick called total internal reﬂection (see box, pp. 24–26). Now a new
generation of engineers had made his invention a thing of beauty on a much
grander scale, building a tableau of illuminated fountains before the main
entrance to the Universal Exhibition.3 The public marveled at how electric
lights—still a novelty—illuminated the fountains at night. Some lights played
on the water from above; others shone up from the base of the fountain or
along jets emerging from the sides of sculptures. Trapped within the water,
the light passed along the jets until it emerged sparkling, as it had in Colla-
don’s lectures, and as it would in optical ﬁbers.
The Man Who Guided Light
Daniel Colladon was a 38-year-old professor at the University of Geneva when
he ﬁrst demonstrated light guiding in 1841.4 He wanted to show ﬂuid ﬂow
through various holes and the breaking up of water jets observed earlier by
French physicist Felix Savart.5 Colladon’s experiments worked, but at ﬁrst the
audience couldn’t see the ﬂowing water in his lecture hall, particularly with
the poor lighting available in the mid-nineteenth century.
He solved the problem by collecting sunlight and piping it through a tube
to the lecture table. A lens focused the light through the water tank and
along a jet squirting out a hole in the other side. When the light rays in the
water hit the edge of the jet at a glancing angle, total internal reﬂection
trapped them in the liquid. They bounced along the curving arc of water until
the jet broke up, as shown in ﬁgure 2-1. Instead of traveling in a straight
line, the light followed the curve of the water.
In a dark room, the effect was impressive, ‘‘one of the most beautiful, and
most curious experiments that one can perform in a course on optics,’’ Col-
ladon wrote. ‘‘If the water is perfectly clear, and the opening of the diaphragm
very [smooth], the stream is scarcely visible, even though a very intense light
circulates inside it. But whenever the stream encounters a solid body that
obstructs it, the light that it contains escapes, and the point of contact be-
comes luminous. . . . If the stream falls from a great height, or if its diameter
is only of some millimeters, it breaks apart into drops in the lower region.
Then only does the liquid give light, and each point of rupture in the stream
casts a bright light.’’6
Proud of his new trick, Colladon used it in the public talks to the urban
intelligentsia that were an important sideline for mid-nineteenth-century sci-

14
CITY OF LIGHT
Figure 2-1: Colladon’s fountain sparkles with light from an arc lamp, illustrated
in his 1884 article. (from Daniel Colladon, ‘‘La Fontaine Colladon,’’ La Nature 2nd
half year 1884, p. 325)
entists. Auguste de la Rive, another Geneva physicist, duplicated Colladon’s
experiments, replacing the sun with an electric arc light. Colladon had a
craftsman make an electric-arc version for the Conservatory of Arts and Sci-
ences of Paris in October 1841, and Colladon or an associate demonstrated
light guiding in London.7 Only the following summer did Colladon get around
to writing up his work for publication. The likely impetus was a rumor that
a Belgian scientist was doing something similar, and Colladon pointedly in-
sisted his work was ‘‘previous by several months.’’ In fact, the Belgian’s ex-
periments were quite different.8
The Curious Coincidence of Prof. Babinet
Colladon sent his report to Franc¸ois Arago, an old friend who headed the
French Academy of Sciences and edited its journal, Comptes Rendus. Arago

GUIDING LIGHT AND LUMINOUS FOUNTAINS
15
recalled that Jacques Babinet, a French specialist in optics elected to the acad-
emy in 1840, had made similar demonstations in Paris. Babinet focused can-
dlelight onto the bottom of a glass bottle as he poured a thin stream of water
from the top. Total internal reﬂection guided the light along the jet, illumi-
nating a china plate or sheet of paper at the end. Arago asked Babinet to
write up his work.
Well established as a lecturer and instrument maker,9 Babinet complied,
but he wasn’t as eager for recognition as Colladon. His brief account suggests
he didn’t think the whole thing was very important, and Colladon probably
put on a better show. Yet, in passing Babinet mentioned something else. The
idea also ‘‘works very well with a glass shaft curved in whatever manner,
and I had indicated [it could be used] to illuminate the inside of the mouth.’’10
Colladon mentioned only water jets; Babinet, who specialized in optics,
extended the principle to guiding light along bent glass rods. Since glass ﬁbers
are merely very thin glass rods, that meant he anticipated the idea of ﬁber
optics. He even suggested a practical application that would resurface a half
century later: dental illuminators. Yet Babinet also knew the limits of glass
technology. Examining lighthouse lenses, he had found that the best glasses
of his time were not very clear, so light couldn’t go far through them. Look
into the edge of a sheet of plate glass today, and you can see the same green
color Babinet saw a century and a half ago. It’s no wonder he thought light
guiding little more than a parlor trick.
The Magic of Glass
Babinet probably also doubted light guiding in glass was new. It almost cer-
tainly was not. Glass dates back at least 4500 years to ancient Egypt and
Mesopotamia.11 By 3500 years ago, Egyptians were sculpting miniature heads
of transparent glass, which the years have since turned milky white.12
Ancient and medieval glass workers must have seen glass rods guide light.
For 2000 years, glass blowers have thrust glass tubes into glowing furnaces
to soften them. Workers pausing to relax from the hot, hard job must have
seen the ﬁery glow of the furnace emerging from the glass. Master glass
makers noted total internal reﬂection as they made sparkling ornaments for
the bright glass chandeliers that illuminated the great rooms of the rich. But
they kept their secrets to themselves. Scientists began to study total internal
reﬂection in medieval times as they sought to understand the mystery of the
rainbow,13 but they did not understand it until the laws of refraction were
formulated in the seventeenth century.
By the mid-nineteenth century the cutting edge in physics had moved
elsewhere. The industrial revolution made glass commonplace in windows
and bottles. Babinet may have felt his brief report in Comptes Rendus only
restated the obvious. After sending his letter to Arago, Babinet apparently
never returned to the guiding of light before he died in 1872.

16
CITY OF LIGHT
Special Effects for Faust
Daniel Colladon’s interests turned toward the practical side of science we now
call engineering. He designed a plant to extract gas from coal for the spreading
network of gas lamps in Geneva. Later he helped build other plants in Basel,
Bern, Lausanne, and Naples. But he didn’t forget light guiding.
Lighting was a problem in nineteenth-century theaters; candles, gas lights,
and lanterns cast only feeble illumination and raised the specter of ﬁre. In
1849, the Paris Opera began testing electric arcs, which passed a strong
current between a pair of carbon electrodes to create a blindingly bright light.
Producing the current was not easy, but the opera found it worth the effort
because audiences liked the bright lights. Four years later, Colladon helped
the opera duplicate his light-guiding trick as a special effect to catch audience
attention in a ballet called ‘‘E´lias et Mysis.’’ Gounod’s opera Faust followed,
with light from an arc lamp focused along a red-glass tube ﬁlled with water
in a scene where the devil (Mephistopheles) makes a stream of ﬁre ﬂash from
a wine barrel. It wouldn’t hold a candle to modern special effects, but it was
impressive to 1853 audiences who saw bright lights as a novelty.14
The opera recognized a good crowd pleaser and in 1855 put L. J. Duboscq,
who had worked with Colladon, on the full-time payroll.15 He brought mock
suns, rainbows, and lightning to the opera stage. He also designed illuminated
playthings for the rich, which he eventually offered in an 1877 illustrated
catalog. People could spend up to 1000 francs for luminous fountains, where
light played on dancing water, its color changing as a wheel rotated color
ﬁlters in front of a lamp.16
Illuminated Fountains and Great Exhibitions
Luminous fountains took on a much grander scale in the series of great ex-
hibitions the Victorians held to celebrate technological progress. Light was a
symbol of that progress to people who grew up with only the feeble light of
gas lamps and lanterns to fend off the night. Electric arcs were rare before
electric power generators began to spread, but the fairs had their own gen-
erators. The Victorian public came to marvel at bright outdoor lights, and
illuminated fountains were among the most spectacular evening displays.
The ﬁrst great fountains were at the International Health Exhibition, held
in the South Kensington district of London in 1884. The Prince of Wales had
urged the eight water companies serving London to build a pavilion showing
how they gave the city clean, pure water. That inspired Sir Francis Bolton,
an engineer who was the city’s water examiner, to design giant illuminated
fountains to highlight the display.17 The new incandescent light bulb was far
too faint to light the fountains. Bolton lit them with the ﬁery streaks of con-
trolled lightning in electric arcs. Arc lights at the base of the fountain shone
through glass plates onto the rising water jets. Other arc lights illuminated

GUIDING LIGHT AND LUMINOUS FOUNTAINS
17
water jets falling from columns. Changeable ﬁlters colored the beams, tinting
the sparkling reﬂections from the water.
Bolton’s design probably did not guide light as efﬁciently as Colladon had
40 years earlier. Each jet spouted from a pipe above the center of a focusing
lens, so the light initially surrounded the jet instead of being conﬁned inside
by total internal reﬂection.18 Bolton may not have grasped this nuance, or he
may have found it easier to aim light along jets spouting over a thousand
gallons a minute.
Five operators ran the lights and pumping machinery from inside a min-
iature island. To produce the splendid spectacle, they worked in a cramped
and miserable space, wearing dark blue goggles to protect their eyes. Heat
and fumes from the arc discharges made several of them ill.19 Yet outside, the
audience happily watched the sparkling fountains like we watch modern
ﬁreworks. Bolton personally controlled the changing colored lights during the
shows, limited to half an hour by the time the arcs burned. Initially operated
only two nights a week, the fountains were so popular that the shows were
made nightly.20
Word of the London exhibition soon reached Geneva. Still angry that oth-
ers had gained credit for his tunneling innovations, Colladon did not want
his light jet to be forgotten. Nominally at the request of the editor, he slightly
updated his 1842 Comptes Rendus paper for the French journal La Nature,
which published it in late 1884 as ‘‘The Colladon Fountain.’’21 The Swiss
physicist must have thought his place secure.
The South Kensington fountains operated for two more years, as the fair-
grounds hosted other exhibits. Bolton remained in charge but died suddenly
at 56 on January 5, 1887.
By then others were planning bigger and better fountains for the 1887
Royal Jubilee Exhibition, held in Manchester to celebrate the 50th year of
Queen Victoria’s reign. The organizers paid W. and J. Galloway and Sons, a
Manchester engineering ﬁrm, £3,94322 to build a 120-foot ‘‘Fairy Fountain’’23
with triple the illumination and water ﬂow used in South Kensington. Two
lamps illuminated a massive central jet; single separate lamps illuminated
each of sixteen others, placed in two rings. Fairgoers loved the two daily half-
hour shows, and the organizers claimed the fountain was ‘‘the largest and
most magniﬁcent that has ever been erected.’’24 The next year, Glasgow had
the Galloway ﬁrm build a similar sized fountain.25 The public was thrilled,
but the electrical industry wanted fountains bigger than Manchester.26 Col-
ladon watched from afar as he labored on his 643-page autobiography.27
The Universal Exposition
The Eiffel Tower is the most visible legacy of the 1889 Universal Exposition,
but the ambitious planners of the Paris fair also wanted spectacular illumi-
nated fountains. They sent G. Bechmann, chief water engineer for Paris, to

18
CITY OF LIGHT
the British exhibitions, and he returned to design fountains that stood outside
the main entrance, shown in ﬁgure 2-2.
As in Britain, changing ﬁlters colored the light electric arcs cast on the
waters. Flood lamps lit the fountains from above. Mirrors and lenses aimed
light up jets that spouted vertically, much like earlier fountains. However,
Bechmann designed nozzles for horizontal jets with lenses in their middle, so
the light emerged in the middle of a hollow cylinder of ﬂowing water, shown
in ﬁgure 2-3. Viewers saw luminous water spout from the mouths of sculpted
dolphins, then descend in graceful parabolas to the pools beneath.28 As in
Faust, the water seemed alive with light.
Colladon must have been delighted on his visit to Paris. Strictly speaking,
total internal reﬂection did not guide the light; it was trapped within a ﬂowing
tube of water. The simpler scheme of shining light inside a water jet was
impractical with fast-ﬂowing water and bright lights. However, the effect
looked the same to the audience, and that was good enough for anyone but
an optical purist. The fountains at the Universal Exposition were the most
spectacular yet. Paris recognized Colladon as the father of the illuminated
fountains, and Bechmann immortalized him in an article in Le Grande Ency-
clopedie.29
Light Pipes in America
Luminous fountains eventually brightened nights at the 1894 World’s Fair
in Chicago,30 but before then a resolutely practical American had more mun-
dane ideas for light guiding. A Yankee engineer named William Wheeler
wanted to illuminate homes by piping light from an electric arc in the base-
ment. It wasn’t a crazy idea in 1880 when he ﬁled for a patent. People were
piping gas, heat, and water through buildings—why not light?
Wheeler had just ﬁnished an eventful few years. He was trained as an
engineer in the ﬁrst class to attend what is now the University of Massachu-
setts, graduating at 19 in 1871. He settled in his native Concord, Massachu-
setts, and ran an engineering practice in Boston until his college mentor,
William Smith Clark, lured him to Japan to help organize an American-style
agricultural college on the northern island of Hokkaido. Clark became a Jap-
anese legend, and Wheeler served as college president while still in his twen-
ties.31 Wheeler came home full of ideas in 1880, and in the next few years
ﬁled over a dozen patents, most on reﬂectors to concentrate light. In 1881,
after resuming his engineering practice, he founded the Wheeler Reﬂector
Company to manufacture the things.
The ambitious young engineer carefully plotted the logic of light-pipe il-
lumination. His patent32 explains:
It is well understood that electric light may be produced through the use
of dynamo-electric machines cheaper than light from gas or any known
method by combustion. This requires, however, that the light be produced

Figure 2-2: Top. Luminous fountains brighten the night at the close of the Uni-
versal Exposition in Paris November 6, 1889. (Scientiﬁc American, Dec. 14, 1889,
p. 376) Bottom. Daytime view of illuminated fountains (from La Nature, ﬁrst half
year 1889, Fig. 3 on p. 593)

Figure 2-3: A mirror aimed light from an arc lamp into the center of the parabolic
jets at the Universal Exposition. The hollow nozzle generated a tube of ﬂowing
water, lit from inside by the reﬂected light. Large-scale picture (top) from La Na-
ture, ﬁrst half year 1889, p. 408; cutaway (below) by author.

GUIDING LIGHT AND LUMINOUS FOUNTAINS
21
in voltaic arcs of great power and intensity, for if more than one arc is
maintained with the same current of electricity, the light generated becomes
rapidly less, and therefore dearer, as the number of arcs or lights is in-
creased. It is in the nature of the electric current, therefore, that for the
economical generation of light it should be used in great intensity in one
point instead of small intensity in many points.33
Wheeler examined every detail, down to the placement of screws holding
pipe segments together. At the heart of his idea were hollow glass pipes, clear
on the inside, coated with silver on the outside, then covered with asphalt to
prevent scratches and tarnish. They did not guide light by total internal re-
ﬂection, but instead relied on the strong reﬂection of light striking clear glass
surfaces at a glancing angle in air. Tilt a piece of glass as you look along its
surface, and you can see the effect. The glass doesn’t reﬂect all the light, but
neither do the shiniest metal mirrors. His drawing, shown in ﬁgure 2-4, is
an elegant masterpiece of Victorian patent art.
Solid glass rods didn’t enter the picture; Wheeler knew the clearest glass
on the market couldn’t carry light through a house. What he didn’t know
was that the incandescent bulb, invented the year before he ﬁled his patent,
would make small lamps practical. His light pipes never got off the ground,
but the Wheeler Reﬂector Company did and made street lamp reﬂectors until
the late 1950s.34
Illuminating Rods
A handful of other inventors tried guiding light short distances through glass
in the late 1800s. Most wanted to deliver light to hard-to-reach places. That
was difﬁcult with gas or oil lamps, and even with early incandescent bulbs.
All generated far more heat than light, making them dangerous to put close
to most objects.
That was a serious problem for surgeons and dentists. They needed light
to see but didn’t want a hot lamp to burn themselves or their patients. In
late 1888, two men in Vienna adapted ‘‘the well-known experiment for show-
ing total reﬂection of light in a jet of water or in a glass rod’’ to illuminate
the inside of the nose and throat. They attached an electric lamp to one end
of a glass rod, which carried the light but not the heat, and put the other
end against the side of a patient’s throat. Enough light passed through the
skin for them to examine the larynx, and they thought the same approach
could illuminate body cavities during surgery.35
A decade later, an Indianapolis man patented a dental illuminator that
used a curved glass rod to deliver light from a lamp into the mouth.36 Inter-
estingly, he designed versions for both incandescent and acetylene gas lamps,
a reminder that electric lighting had not become standard even by the turn
of the century. Scientists likewise illuminated microscope slides with bent
glass rods to avoid drying out their specimens. In the 1930s, DuPont devel-

Figure 2-4: William Wheeler’s light pipes, from his patent drawing. (US Patent
247,229, Figure 2, on sheet 1)

GUIDING LIGHT AND LUMINOUS FOUNTAINS
23
oped a clear plastic that quickly replaced glass and quartz illuminators be-
cause it is lighter, cheaper, more durable, and easier to bend.37
The light-guiding effect that Colladon had conceived as a thing of beauty
was evolving into a useful technology with mundane applications. That would
have pleased Colladon, who took pride in his practical inventions such as
compressed air. He probably intended his paper in La Nature and his autobi-
ography to ensure that future generations recognized his pioneering role. Yet
he would have been furious to see the pioneers of ﬁber optics assigned the
credit for light guiding in a water jet not to him but to John Tyndall, who
ﬁrst demonstrated it thirteen years after Colladon.
Professor Tyndall’s Performance
A small man with bright gray eyes, Tyndall joined the Royal Institution in
London in 1853. He quickly made a name for himself by giving informative
and entertaining talks in a long-running series of Friday evening lectures.38
However, he found himself in trouble as time came for his talk on May 19,
1854. The demonstration he had planned wasn’t ready for the talk, and as
the deadline approached he talked with his mentor, Michael Faraday, who
had given similar talks for years. Faraday suggested he demonstrate the ﬂow
of water jets and and how total internal reﬂection could guide the light along
the ﬂowing liquid.
In his handwritten notes, Tyndall apologized for not showing ‘‘something
entirely new,’’39 but published accounts of the lecture omit that apology. He
used the water jet to conclude his lecture by demonstrating ‘‘the total reﬂex-
ion of light at the common surface of two media of different refractive indi-
ces’’—water and air. Initially, the light emerged from a glass tube in the side
of a tank. Then he turned a valve so water could ﬂow through the tube.
Thanks to total internal reﬂection, he wrote, the light ‘‘seemed to be washed
downward by the descending liquid, the latter being thereby caused to present
a beautiful illuminated appearance.’’40
It must have been a good show, and Tyndall made it part of his repertoire.
But he saw light guiding more as a parlor trick than a new scientiﬁc concept
and made no effort to properly attribute it to Faraday or anyone else in his
published account. Indeed, total internal reﬂection was a well-known phe-
nomenon, and Tyndall may have considered light guiding too obvious an
application to be new. However, Tyndall also probably didn’t know whose
idea it was.
Faraday was one of the greatest scientists of his time, but about 1840 his
memory started to fail him, a problem that slowly worsened over the years.41
That fact that Tyndall didn’t credit him implies that Faraday remembered a
demonstration by someone else but that Faraday’s failing memory couldn’t
come up with the name and Tyndall didn’t want to embarrass him. It was a
common problem for Faraday by that time, especially on bad days. The name
Faraday forgot probably was Daniel Colladon.

24
CITY OF LIGHT
Total Internal Reﬂection:
What makes a diamond sparkle
The same effect that makes a diamond sparkle guides light along a jet of water
or an optical ﬁber. It also helps to create the rainbow. It’s called total internal
reﬂection, and it’s something we rarely recognize. Total internal reﬂection has
been known for hundreds of years; light guiding is a more recent discovery.
Total internal reﬂection is a side effect of refraction, the bending of light that
passes from one transparent material into another. Lenses depend on refraction,
for example, to focus the words from this page onto the back of your eye or to
focus a movie ﬁlm image onto a screen at the front of the theater.
Refraction occurs because the speed of light in transparent materials is less
than the universal speed limit of 299,792 kilometers per second in a vacuum.
In air, light is just a little bit slower, but in glass it slows to about 200,000
kilometers per second. In diamond, light is even slower, about 125,000
kilometers per second.
This slowing down causes light to bend as it passes from air into glass (ﬁgure
A) or vice versa. The light waves keep oscillating at the same frequency, but
they are closer together in slower materials. The degree of bending depends on
the refractive index, which is the speed of light in vacuum divided by the speed
in the material. The refractive index of air is 1.0003, of pure water 1.33, of
ordinary glass about 1.5, and of diamond about 2.4.
The amount of refraction at the surface depends on the difference in refractive
index; the bigger the difference, the more refraction. Light rays passing from air
Fig. A: Refraction of light waves going from glass into air (peaks are shown).
→

Fig. B: Total internal reﬂection occurs where light rays hit glass at a glancing
angle outside the critical angle. Light that hits the surface nearly straight on is
refracted into the air.
Fig. C: Diamond has an index of refraction much higher than glass, so total
internal reﬂection occurs over a much wider range of angles—making the gem
glitter. (The bright colors come from a related effect: the refractive index varies
strongly with wavelength, spreading out miniature rainbows in the diamond.)

26
CITY OF LIGHT
into glass bend into the glass, while light going from glass into air bends toward
the surface.
As light in the glass hits the surface at a steeper angle, it emerges into air
almost parallel to the surface. Eventually, it reaches a ‘‘critical angle’’ where it
cannot emerge into the air, as shown in ﬁgure B. (This critical angle is measured
from a line called the ‘‘normal’’ which is perpendicular to the surface.) All the
light outside the critical angle is reﬂected back into the glass.A For glass with a
refractive index of 1.5 in air, this angle is about 42 degrees. The higher the
refractive index, the larger the angle and the easier it is to see reﬂections
sparkling from within the glass.
Diamond has a refractive index of 2.4, so the critical angle is 25 degrees,
and much more light entering it undergoes total internal reﬂection as shown in
ﬁgure C. Diamond cutters take advantage of this effect and cleave the gems so
they collect light entering the top facet and reﬂect it back to the eye, making
them appear to shine. Because the refractive index changes with wavelength,
colors return at slightly different angles, making the stone glitter with color.B
(Zircon crystals have a refractive index of 2.1, so they glitter more than glass,
but not as brightly as diamond.) The variation of refractive index with wavelength
also breaks light passing through a prism into a spectrum and forms a rainbow
when sunlight strikes tiny water droplets.C
You can’t see total internal reﬂection in a window pane; you can only see it
in a large block of glass when you look at a surface at less than the critical
angle. Turn it in your hands and you can see total internal reﬂection start and
stop as you pass through the right angle. Fine crystal glass has a higher refractive
index than normal glass, so it shows total internal reﬂection more easily.
If you shine light along a glass rod or a jet of water, total internal reﬂection
will keep it within the glass or liquid. This light-guiding effect is the basis of ﬁber
optics.
A. This is a consequence of the law of refraction, which says the sine of the angle (I)
from the normal times the refractive index in one material (ni) must equal the sine of the
angle (R) from the normal in the other material times its refractive index (nr): (ni sin I  nr
sin R). Plug in numbers, and you ﬁnd that light trying to leave the high-index material at
large angles from the normal (I.e., small angles from the surface) would have to emerge
at an angle with sine greater than one. That’s impossible, so the light doesn’t get out. For
a more thorough explanation, see Chapter 2 in Jeff Hecht, Understanding Fiber Optics
3rd ed. (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J., 1999).
B. For a more complete explanation of how the high refractive index of diamond affects
its optical properties, see David Falk, Dieter Brill, and David Stork, Seeing the Light: Optics
in Nature, Photography, Color Vision, and Holography, Harper & Row, New York, 1985,
pp. 63–64.
C. For more on the rainbow and other atmospheric phenomena, see Robert Greenler,
Rainbows, Halos, and Glories (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1980).

GUIDING LIGHT AND LUMINOUS FOUNTAINS
27
The circumstantial evidence is strong. Faraday spent the summer of 1841
in Switzerland and was a friend of de la Rive, who duplicated Colladon’s
demonstration at exactly that time. Faraday probably saw either de la Rive
or Colladon perform the water-jet demonstration, and the physics would have
lingered in his memory longer than the name. According to Colladon, some-
one demonstrated the water jet in London about that time but the person is
unknown. It’s very unlikely it was Faraday, but it could have been de la
Rive.42 In addition, Tyndall cites the ﬂuid-ﬂow research of Felix Savart, which
Colladon mentioned. Faraday was not trying to steal the idea; he had been
involved in a nasty controversy earlier and was afterward very careful to
credit others. But poor Faraday couldn’t remember, and Tyndall diplomati-
cally ignored the issue.
An outspoken man of wide-ranging interests, Tyndall developed a strong
public persona and became a Victorian version of Carl Sagan, scientist, pop-
ularizer, and public ﬁgure. He described the water-jet demonstration in one
of his popular books, which circulated widely and stayed in print for many
years. When later physicists went back to look for the origins of light guiding,
they came upon Tyndall’s account. By then, Colladon’s papers were buried
on the back shelves of scholarly libraries, unreferenced and forgotten, so Tyn-
dall was credited with the invention over half a century after he and Colladon
had died.43

28
3
Fibers of Glass
I do not believe, if any experimentalist had been promised
by a good fairy that he might have anything he desired,
that he would have ventured to ask for any one thing with
so many valuable properties as these ﬁbers possess.
—Charles Vernon Boys, 18891
T
he difference between glass rods and glass ﬁbers is merely a matter of
diameter. Anyone who can be trusted with a chemistry set can draw a
ﬁber easily from a glass rod. Hold the two ends of a rod several inches long
and put the middle in a hot ﬂame. The heat softens the glass, melting the
rigid solid into a thick, viscous liquid. After the rod becomes ﬂexible, pull the
two ends apart while removing the rod from the ﬂame. The molten glass
stretches into a long, tapered thread, which solidiﬁes almost instantly as air
cools it. Although the material remains glass, the thin ﬁlament is ﬂexible and
seems much less brittle than the rod.
Glass is an unusual material; few others form thick liquids easy to stretch
into ﬁbers. Most liquids are like water, far too thin to make ﬁbers from. Only
if you load water with sugar and heat the mixture do you get a hot, thick
syrup that can be spun into threads of cotton candy.
It is the malleability of hot glass, as well as the transparency of the solid,
that have made it a material for the ages. The ancients probably made the
ﬁrst glass by accident, when they mixed sand, soda, lime, and ash in a ﬁre
and discovered their creation when the embers cooled. Ancient glass makers
learned how to mold and blow hot glass, shaping it into works of art and

FIBERS OF GLASS
29
things of utility. Generations of artisans, inventors, engineers, and scientists
have reﬁned glass technology, making it cheaper, clearer, and more durable.
The recipes for glass have changed, but it still surrounds us, taking many
forms including insulating ﬁberglass, ﬁne crystal, the transparent shells of
light bulbs, drinking glasses, and the transparent windows through which we
look upon the world.
A Long History of Short Fibers
Glass ﬁbers go back a long way. The Egyptians made coarse ﬁbers by 1600 BC,
and ﬁbers survive as decorations on Egyptian pottery dating back to 1375 BC.2
In the Renaissance, Venetian glass makers used glass ﬁbers to decorate the
surfaces of plain glass vessels. However, glass makers guarded their secrets so
carefully that no one wrote of glass ﬁbers until the early seventeenth century.3
The eighteenth century brought the invention of ‘‘spun glass’’ ﬁbers. Re´ne´
de Re´aumur, a founder of the French iron and steel industry, was trying to
make artiﬁcial heron feathers from glass.4 He made ﬁbers by rotating a wheel
through a pool of molten glass, pulling threads of glass where the hot thick
liquid stuck to the wheel. His ﬁbers were short and brittle, but he predicted
that spun glass ﬁbers as thin as spider silk would be ﬂexible and could be
woven into fabric.5
By the start of the nineteenth century, glass makers learned how to make
longer, stronger ﬁbers by pulling them from molten glass with a hot glass
tube. Inventors wound the cooling end of the thread around a yarn reel, then
turned the reel rapidly to pull more ﬁber from the hot glass. Wandering
tradesmen spun glass ﬁbers at fairs, and it became a novelty for decorations
and ornaments. Powdered wigs were fashionable at the time, and wigs made
of spun glass became novelties for the ‘‘naturalia cabinets’’ of royalty.6 How-
ever, the stuff was of little practical use; the ﬁbers were brittle, ragged, and
no longer than ten feet (three meters), the circumference of the largest drums
or reels. Others tried different approaches, such as forcing molten glass
through a tiny nozzle.7
By the mid-1870s, the best glass ﬁbers were ﬁner than silk and could be
woven into fabrics or assembled into imitation ostrich and egret feathers to
decorate hats.8 Cloth of white spun glass resembled silver; ﬁbers drawn from
yellow-orange glass looked golden when woven into fabric. Although the
glass fabrics looked alluring, even enthusiasts noted that ‘‘the spinning re-
quires extraordinary dexterity and constant attention . . . [and] is said to be
very trying to the sight.’’9
Hanging by a Thread of Glass
The properties of spun glass caught the eye of Charles Vernon Boys, a young
demonstrator of physics at the Royal College of Science in the South Ken-

30
CITY OF LIGHT
sington district of London. His passion was building sensitive scientiﬁc instru-
ments; the classes he had to teach were unwelcome interruptions. Writer
H. G. Wells, who suffered through them, called Boys ‘‘one of the worst teach-
ers who has ever turned his back on a restive audience, messed about with
the blackboard, galloped through an hour of talk, and bolted back to the
apparatus in his private room.’’10
In 1887, Boys was on the verge of a measurement breakthrough, the start
of a few brilliant years that would make him a giant of British physics. He
wanted to measure the effects of delicate forces on objects. He knew that one
way to sense weak forces was to hang an object from a thread. The problem
was that the thread had to be thin, strong, and elastic to measure the forces.
Silk and spider line were the best ﬁbers of the time, but they were not good
enough. Nor were metal wires, because they stayed bent if twisted too much.
Boys tested spun glass ﬁbers a thousandth of an inch (0.025 millimeter) thick
but found them wanting because they stayed bent after being twisted, making
accurate measurements impossible.11
After he had disposed of his classes, Boys retreated to his laboratory to try
drawing glass into strong, elastic ﬁbers. He wanted them long, thin, and
uniform, so he wanted to pull the molten glass very quickly along a straight
path. He built a miniature crossbow, and made light arrows made by fasten-
ing a needle to a piece of straw a few inches long. He stuck the arrow to one
end of a glass rod with sealing wax, and heated the glass until it softened.
Then he ﬁred the arrow through two long rooms with a foot trigger. The bow
propelled the little arrow so forcefully that it could pull a ﬁber tail from a blob
of molten glass that hung brieﬂy behind in mid-air before falling to the
ground. When the arrow landed, Boys found attached to it ‘‘a glass thread
90 feet long and 1/10,000 inch in diameter, so uniform that the diameter at
one end was only one sixth more than that at the other.’’12
The delighted physicist then tried his new toy on other materials. He had
started with ordinary glass, probably whatever lay readily at hand in his
laboratory, but like bread, glass can be made from many recipes. Strictly
speaking, glass is a solid inorganic material that never crystallized as it cooled
from molten form. Some materials form glasses when cooled quickly; many
others do not. The most important ingredient in common glasses is silicon
dioxide, a durable mineral known as silica. Nature can mold silica into clear
crystalline quartz, but we usually ﬁnd it as sand.
You can make glass from pure silica, but not easily; it melts at about
1600C (2900F). Since antiquity, glass makers have added other compounds
including soda, lime, and ash to lower the melting point and give glass other
desirable properties. Glass specialists have developed particular recipes for
many purposes: ﬁne glasses used in crystal ware, clear and uniform glasses
for precision optics, heat-resistant glasses for cookware, plate glass for win-
dows, and colored glasses for bottles. Silica is the key ingredient in all, but
glasses can be made in countless ways from innumerable mixtures of ingre-
dients.

FIBERS OF GLASS
31
Armed with a high-temperature oxy-hydrogen ﬂame, Boys tried a variety
of minerals that resembled glass in some ways. Some, like sapphire and ruby,
did not stretch into ﬁbers. Yet others did work. The best of these was natural
quartz, crystals of almost pure silica. Much thicker than molten glass, molten
quartz dragged heavily on the miniature arrows, so they usually fell far short
of their target. It took many tries before Boys could stretch quartz into ﬁbers,
but success proved exciting. Some ﬁbers were ‘‘so ﬁne that I believe them to
be beyond the power of any possible microscope,’’ he told the Physical Society
in London on March 26, 1887.13
The best of his threads were as strong as steel wires the same size, a marvel
for a material always considered fragile. Their thinness and strength made
the quartz ﬁbers ideal for suspending objects on torsion balances to measure
delicate forces. Boys used them in an instrument he called a ‘‘radio-
micrometer,’’ with which he could detect the heat from a candle nearly two
miles (three kilometers) away. He was utterly delighted with the ﬁbers and
with the measurements they let him perform.
Boys stretched quartz ﬁbers in front of him and found that in the right
light they glittered with colors. He stretched many ﬁbers parallel to each other
and they acted like a diffraction grating, an array of parallel lines that spreads
out a spectrum like a prism. He must have seen Sir Francis Bolton’s illumi-
nated fountains; the exhibit grounds were close to his college. Yet Boys did
not record for posterity any experiments with light guiding, even the results
of pointing one end of a ﬁber at a lamp and looking into the other end.
Perhaps he tried and saw nothing, because his ﬁbers were not clear enough.
Perhaps it was impractical with the ﬁne ﬁbers that fascinated him the most.
Or perhaps he thought the idea too trivial to mention at a time when anyone
could marvel at illuminated fountains displaying the same principle far more
spectacularly.
Glass Fabrics
A German immigrant named Herman Hammesfahr patented glass ﬁbers in
America, but it took him years to interest others in his vision of glass fabric.
He succeeded when the Libbey Glass Company wanted something spectacular
to show at the 1892 World’s Fair in Chicago. At ﬁrst, two young women
wove glass ﬁbers into fabric for lamp shades. Then the fabric caught the eye
of actress Georgia Cayven, who wanted a dress made of it. Hammesfahr suc-
ceeded by combining satin thread with the glass ﬁbers. Libbey showed the
dress at the fair, where it caught the eyes of many fairgoers, including Prin-
cess Eulalie of Spain, who paid $30,000 for a copy.14
Glass fabrics glittered brightly at the turn of the century, but they were
hardly practical. Many years later, Hammesfahr’s granddaughter recalled
modeling at the 1904 World’s Fair in St. Louis a glass dress her mother had

32
CITY OF LIGHT
made: ‘‘All that I remember is that it scratched, and I couldn’t sit down for
fear of breaking the glass threads.’’15
The real role of the glass dresses, neckties, and other fabrics was to pub-
licize new glass technology. Nineteenth-century industry had made glass a
better and cheaper product, commonplace from windows to whiskey bottles.
Glass fabrics promised new marvels for the twentieth century. Part of the
attraction was the way light glittered from the glass, but the very idea of
ﬂexible glass threads was itself a wonder.
Industry saw a host of uses for glass ﬁbers besides clothing. Glass ﬁbers
could withstand corrosive chemicals, so chemists and druggists used them to
ﬁlter solid particles out of liquids. Woven glass ﬁbers were used as bandages.
Industry realized that tangled glass ﬁbers, called glass wool, made a good
insulator, and packed them around steam pipes. Industry would pay more
per square inch for glass fabric than people would pay for clothing—and
didn’t worry if it was scratchy.
As interest grew in glass ﬁbers, engineers and scientists devised new ways
to make them. One was to suspend a glass rod vertically, heat the lower end
in a furnace, and draw a ﬁne ﬁlament downward from the molten zone. In
one early scheme, the experimenters hung a weight from the bottom of the
rod, which dangled below the hot zone of a cylindrical furnace. Rapid heating
softened the glass quickly, and the weight stretched it into a thin ﬁber. The
scheme also stretched glass tubes into ﬁne capillaries, allowing British sci-
entists to make 0.001 millimeter tubes with walls thinner than 0.0001 mm.16
Boys’s instruments interested other experimenters in quartz ﬁbers. A few
companies started manufacturing them, but they were expensive, so Scientiﬁc
American published a do-it-yourself recipe. Readers wanting long, ﬁne ﬁbers
were told how to make their own miniature catapults—a design that owed
much to Boys’s crossbow.17
Nonetheless, glass ﬁbers remained a specialty item for the ﬁrst three de-
cades of the twentieth century. Only in Germany did an industry develop,
and that only because Allied embargoes cut the country’s supply of asbestos
during World War I. Natural ﬁbers were better—and cheaper—for insulation
and ﬁltering, and in that innocent age the health hazards of asbestos were
unknown.
In December 1931 engineers at the Owens-Illinois Glass Company in New-
ark, Ohio, demonstrated the ﬁrst commercially viable technique for mass-
producing inexpensive glass ﬁbers. They abandoned the idea of drawing one
ﬁber at a time. Instead, they blew hot air into molten glass, splattering short,
coarse threads of liquid into the air, where they quickly solidiﬁed. The process
yielded a soft, ﬂeecy mass of ﬂexible ﬁbers—glass wool, the ﬁberglass used in
modern insulation.
The Corning Glass Works was also working on glass ﬁbers, and the two
companies formed a joint venture, the Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corpora-
tion.18 By 1935, they were producing ﬁbers so strong, ﬁne, and ﬂexible that
they could be woven into cloth, which could be bent and folded without

FIBERS OF GLASS
33
breaking the ﬁbers—as had worried the little girl in the glass dress 30 years
earlier.19 The ﬁberglass industry has been growing ever since.
Nobody paid much attention to the optical properties of glass ﬁbers, other
than when they glittered in fabrics on display. However, engineers did learn
about the mechanics of glass ﬁbers and the properties of molten glass. In time,
that would prove valuable knowledge for developers of optical ﬁbers.

34
4
The Quest for Remote Viewing
Television and the Legacy
of Sword Swallowers
(1895–1940)
No great pioneer invention has been made in the labora-
tory of a great corporation; and by pioneer inventions I
mean new mechanisms which started new industries.
—C. Francis Jenkins, American pioneer in
motion pictures and television, 19271
E
urope and America were fertile ground for new ideas at the end of the
nineteenth century. The great Victorian exhibitions illustrated the wonders
of the age. Their illuminated fountains displayed light guiding for all to see;
in the halls, visitors saw glass ﬁbers and fabrics. Scientists marveled at the
ﬁne quartz ﬁbers Charles Vernon Boys made for his instruments. Innovations
in lighting tickled the imaginations of inventors. They sought ways to make
moving pictures, and to view events remotely, by sending pictures as well as
the sounds they could hear on the telephone. A few realized that arrays of
many glass rods or ﬁbers could carry the patterns of light we call images.
With hindsight, the idea of image transmission seems simple. Hold a hand-
ful of drinking straws together such that they all point in the same direction
and look through the bundle at a picture a little beyond the tips. Each straw
shows one piece of the picture. In your mind’s eye, shrink the straws so that
each one shows a single spot on the page. Then replace them with thin glass
rods, stacked together the same way, but guiding light by total internal re-
ﬂection instead of through central holes. The bundle transmits an image point
by point. Replace the rods with ﬂexible ﬁbers, and the bundle can guide light
around bends, reaching into otherwise inaccessible places.

THE QUEST FOR REMOTE VIEWING
35
In practice, you need some reﬁnements. If a bundle of ﬁbers is to reproduce
an image, the ﬁbers must be arranged in the same pattern on both ends. If
the ﬁbers are not aligned, light collected from one spot on the picture ends
up somewhere else on the display end, scrambling the image.
The ﬁbers also must be small, because the light passing through them is
homogenized. Look through a single long thin, bent rod or ﬁber that covers
a printed letter and you see not the black-and-white pattern of the letter, but
a gray spot that mixes the black and white. If you want to read the letter,
you have to cover it with many ﬁbers, with each showing a dot representing
part of the letter. The thinner the ﬁbers, the smaller the dots and the clearer
the image. Specialists in printing and imaging call this resolution and measure
it in dots per inch. Pack small dots tightly and you don’t notice that the
letters or pictures are made of dots.
The Problem of Remote Viewing
From the Victorian era into the early twentieth century, inventors took many
approaches to achieving what they called remote viewing. They began with
a naive optimism. Telegraphs had been sending messages for decades; Alex-
ander Graham Bell had launched the telephone era in 1876. Sending pictures
from one point to another seemed just another logical step.
Still pictures are much simpler to send than moving ones, particularly if
you write on treated paper or photographic ﬁlm. The ﬁrst facsimile machine
was tested in the 1840s,2 although the image quality was awful. True remote
viewing of a constantly changing scene is a much bigger challenge. You need
a sensitive camera that responds quickly, a transmission medium to carry the
picture, and a screen that can display a changing image.
Ingenious inventors devised a host of schemes, quickly adapting the latest
scientiﬁc discoveries. They waxed enthusiastic over the 1870s discovery that
light made selenium conduct electricity better; the more light, the more read-
ily the material carried current. A single selenium cell could monitor changes
in a beam of light. A Boston inventor proposed building an array of selenium
cells to sense light intensity at different points on its surface.3 He thought
electrical signals from the selenium cells could reproduce an image by con-
trolling brightness of an array of incandescent bulbs.
Such a system would be simple to build today, but it was beyond 1880
technology. Selenium cells and incandescent bulbs were new; assem-
bling them in arrays would have been difﬁcult. Connecting them would have
required a complex tangle of wires—at least 10,000 to feed a display 100
bulbs wide and 100 high. Modern solid-state electronics can handle the prob-
lem by combining many signals into one, but even the vacuum tube was
decades away in 1880. William Wheeler’s light pipes were practical in com-
parison.

36
CITY OF LIGHT
An Array of Light Pipes
A host of other inventors also dabbled with remote viewing, including Henry
C. Saint-Rene´, who taught physics and chemistry at the agriculture school in
Crezancy, a town of about 500 people in the French district of Aisne. Most
of his ideas came from other inventors, but he proposed a novel display based
on moving tinted glass slides in front of lighted openings. Grading the tint
from top to bottom would control brightness, but Saint-Rene´ worried that
gaps between the moving slides would ruin the effect.
As he searched for a way to eliminate the gaps, he recalled the principle
of light guiding in fountains. He thought curved glass rods could collect light
from each opening and deliver it to a screen, where their other ends could
be packed together without gaps to form an image. He wrote:
A bent glass rod—its two ends cut perpendicularly to its axis—will receive
on its lower, vertical cross-section the light which it will conduct (acting
like the liquid conduit in an illuminated fountain) to the upper, horizontal
cross-section, where it is perceived by the eye.4
Saint-Rene´ realized that each rod homogenized the light passing through
it, so he needed rods with small ends to show details. He wrote: ‘‘The whole
array gives a complete illusion of the object if the diameter of each point does
not exceed 1/3 millimeter when the viewer is at a distance of one meter from
the image.’’5
It is unclear whether Saint-Rene´ built anything, but he liked the idea.
However, he evidently lacked the money to ﬁle for a patent, or doubted he
could earn back his investment. Instead, in the summer of 1895 he wrote a
description of his invention and sent it in a sealed packet to the French Acad-
emy of Sciences in Paris, which has a novel system for documenting claims
of priority. Inventors can wait years, then ask the Academy to open the packet
and publish a summary in Comptes Rendus to prove their priority. Saint-Rene´
bided his time for over 14 years before asking the Academy to publish his
summary.
No one else shared Saint-Rene´’s enthusiasm, even in 1910 when his idea
ﬁnally saw print. His display was the ﬁrst use of a bundle of glass rods or
ﬁbers to transmit images. Yet it remained obscure because his remote-viewing
system was impractical, one of countless schemes that came and went before
the new technology of television evolved at the hands of a new generation of
engineers and inventors. Saint-Rene´ himself vanished from the scene, and his
records probably were destroyed with those of the agriculture school when
World War I ground through the area.6
The Birth of Television
Invention and technology changed in subtle but crucial ways in the decades
between the Paris exposition and the 1920s. Corporate research labs emerged,

THE QUEST FOR REMOTE VIEWING
37
competing with inventor-entrepreneurs like Wheeler. General Electric and
AT&T recruited cadres of engineers and scientists to deal with increasingly
complex technologies. With large teams and healthy corporate bank ac-
counts, the new research labs had resources that old-fashioned inventors
couldn’t match. Even as lone inventors complained that the corporate labs
lacked the spark of genius, the new teams cranked out new developments.
The Radio Corporation of America, founded as a trust to hold radio patents,
developed increasingly powerful transmitters that spanned greater distances.
Television would prove a crucial battleground. By the early 1920s, elec-
tronic technology had brought radio broadcasting to the threshold of practi-
cality. When conditions were right, radio waves could carry voices across
oceans, and the technology was improving steadily. To a handful of men,
television seemed a logical extension of radio.
The early leaders were John Logie Baird in Britain and C. Francis Jenkins
in America. Their approaches shared many crucial features. They agreed that
images had to be built up by scanning the scene in a way that sampled light
intensity at one point at a time, then reproducing the image point by point
and line by line on a display. Baird and Jenkins gained early leads by building
mechanical scanners that looked through holes in spinning disks. Both men
were old-school inventor-entrepreneurs with enough charisma to raise money
to pursue their visions.
Born in Scotland in 1888, Baird was a blend of visionary engineer, entre-
preneur, and self-promoter, with perhaps a dash of crackpot to add spice. He
had made a series of inventions—none gloriously successful—before he
turned to television in the winter of 1922–23. Success took a while. His
landlord evicted him for failing to pay the rent the following year,7 but in
April 1925 he conducted the ﬁrst public demonstration of television, at Self-
ridge Department Store in London. The image showed only eight lines per
frame—but it was witnessed by the public, and Baird made the most of the
publicity to raise money for further development. Later he built the ﬁrst tele-
vision system used by the British Broadcasting Corporation, using a spinning
disk to scan a 30-line picture.8
Like many other inventors, Baird ﬁled patent applications proliﬁcally to
protect his ideas. He accumulated an impressive 178 patents from the start
of his television work until his death in 1946. Inevitably, most never proved
practical, but they covered a wide range of ideas. One was sending an image
through an array of parallel tubes, transparent rods, or clear ﬁbers.
Baird was groping for ways to scan images. His patent proposes a screen
that uses a honeycomb device assembled from a large number of short tubes
‘‘to produce an image without the use of a lens.’’ Collect the tubes like a
bundle of drinking straws and they can transmit images point by point. Baird
had learned the patent game well, so he wrote his application to cover many
variations on the idea. Among them were ‘‘thin rods or tubes of glass quartz
or other transparent material. . . . The rods . . . need not necessarily be
straight, but could be bent or curved, or in the case of very ﬁne quartz ﬁbers,
could be ﬂexible.’’9

38
CITY OF LIGHT
He never got that far. In 1927, he collected 340 metal tubes two inches
long and a tenth of an inch in diameter, and stacked them in a 17  20
array that he used to scan an image. He abandoned that approach without
trying ﬁbers or glass rods.10 The mechanical television system he pioneered
in Britain used spinning disks.11
C. Francis Jenkins: An American Inventor
Born on an Ohio farm in 1867, C. Francis Jenkins began thinking about
television in 1894 and dabbled with it most of the rest of his life. A founder
and the ﬁrst president of the Society of Motion Picture Engineers, Jenkins
helped develop early motion picture projectors,12 but his most proﬁtable in-
vention was a spiral-wound waxed paper container.13 He was neither rich
nor beyond embellishing his achievements, but nobody was about to throw
him into the streets. Compared to the impoverished Baird, he had made a
successful business of invention, and turned to television with a solid track
record behind him.
In late 1923, he brought two leading radio-magazine editors14 to his Wash-
ington, D.C. laboratory, where they saw the shadow of Jenkins’s hand waving
on the screen. However, Jenkins fell behind Baird. His ﬁrst public demonstra-
tion came two months after Baird’s, and Jenkins transmitted only black-and-
white silhouettes while Baird showed shades of gray.
Thanks to his years of movie experience, Jenkins knew more about optics.15
He tested several types of television cameras and receivers, and one of the
receivers used quartz rods to carry light.16 He mounted 48 three-inch rods in
a screw-thread pattern around the inside of a cylinder that spun 3600 times
per minute. As they spun, they collected light from a central stationary bulb
with four ﬁlaments turned on and off by radio signals. The other ends swept
by the viewer’s eyes, creating 15 new images every second. A magnifying
lens and mirror showed a ﬂickering silhouette about six inches square made
up of one line per quartz rod. The images weren’t very good, but at the time
any image was impressive.17
The rotating drum receiver proved impractical; the quartz rods transmitted
only 40% of the lamp light, and the lamps lasted just a few hours. Full of
energy in his sixtieth year, Jenkins quickly devised a different receiver, which
he used to transmit ‘‘Radio-Movies’’ across a room on May 5, 1928. He
boasted to the New York Times that he would soon be able to project pictures
on the wall.18 Jenkins coaxed vacuum-tube pioneer Lee De Forest and New
York bankers to invest $10 million in the Jenkins Television Company. The
company made some receivers and built television stations in Washington,
D.C., and Jersey City, but soon ran out of money. In September 1929, a month
before the stock market crash, De Forest Radio took over Jenkins Television.
Ill with heart trouble, Jenkins sold his laboratories at the end of 1930. De
Forest Radio and Jenkins Television both failed during the Depression, and
Jenkins died in 1934.19

THE QUEST FOR REMOTE VIEWING
39
By then, Baird had become a reluctant convert to a newer technology,
electronic television, in which electron beams instead of spinning disks
scanned images. The impetus came from America, where a young inventor-
businessman named Philo Farnsworth was struggling to stay ahead of a well-
funded team at RCA.
C. W. Hansell Sees the Problem Clearly
The magical allure of radio attracted a host of bright young engineers after
World War I. Many of the best of them joined the fast-growing RCA. It was
a golden opportunity to ride the breaking wave of a new technology at a
company with ample resources to support innovative engineers. Among them
was Clarence Weston Hansell, who went by his initials C. W. He was in the
ﬁrst generation of engineers trained in electronics, a man with a gift for in-
vention and a wide-ranging mind. Pondering the problem of reading an in-
strument dial that was annoyingly out of sight in late 1926, Hansell realized
that a ﬂexible bundle of transparent glass ﬁbers could do the job.
That was a vital step. Colladon, Babinet, Saint-Rene´, Baird, and Jenkins all
saw the potential of light guiding by total internal reﬂection. But none of
them grasped the elegant simplicity of image transmission through a ﬂexible
bundle of thin glass ﬁbers. Align the ﬁbers in the same way on both ends of
the bundle, and they should carry a pattern formed on one end point by
point, ﬁber by ﬁber, to the other end. Bend the bundle, and you could see
into otherwise inaccessible places—from automobile gas tanks to the human
stomach.
Born January 20, 1898, in Medaryville, Indiana, Hansell was the oldest of
eight children in a poor farm family.20 After earning a degree in electrical
engineering at Purdue in an Army training program, he worked brieﬂy for
General Electric before it divested its radio business to the newly formed RCA.
In 1922, he developed and installed the ﬁrst vacuum-tube transmitter for
commercial wireless telegraphy across the Atlantic.21 In 1925, the young
engineer founded the RCA radio transmission lab at Rocky Point, Long Island,
which he headed for over 30 years. He bought a house on Long Island Sound
and raised a family there.
Short and stocky, Hansell had a mind that bubbled with new ideas.22 In
his 44-year engineering career, he collected over 300 US patents, plus many
more issued overseas. His specialty was radio transmission, and he was good
at it, helping perfect short-wave radio antennas and building the world’s larg-
est radio transmitter at Rocky Point. Like other forward-looking radio engi-
neers, Hansell hoped to adapt radio technology to sending pictures, including
the ‘‘wirephoto’’ services that evolved into what we now call facsimile, as
well as television.
Sometimes his inventive mind wandered. On December 30, 1926, he ﬁlled
two pages in his engineer’s notebook tight to their edges with a concise pro-
posal, neatly written with a fountain pen: ‘‘Method for transferring a dial

40
CITY OF LIGHT
reading to a distance.’’ He started with his initial goal: ‘‘reading the dial of
an instrument from points at some distance away and from points obstructed
for vision. It would be a great help if the vision of such an instrument could
be piped from one place to another around corners, curves, etc.’’
He did not say where he got the idea of piping light. It could have been a
decorative lighting ﬁxture or fountain, or perhaps an illuminator he saw at
his dentist’s ofﬁce. He must have seen curved glass rods guide light; his patent
application says ‘‘experimentally, the remote end of such a rod may be used
to ignite paper even though the conductor is quite cool along its surface, and
may be held without any sensation of heat.’’23 It’s easy to imagine him fo-
cusing sunlight into a bent glass rod to burn holes in pieces of paper.
The inspiration added up to a simple solution to his problem:
It is only necessary to make up a cable of parallel laid quartz hairs or strands
of similar material, the ends of which can be cut off plane. One end of this
cable can face the instrument and another can face toward the observer.
The light from the instrument will fall on the ends of the quartz ﬁbers and
be transmitted through them coming out as an image in the other end
visible to the observer. No light will pass from one quartz hair to the other
due to the total reﬂection from the walls of the quartz. Of course, the area
corresponding to the cross section of each hair will have its particular part
of the image mixed up so that its detail is lost, but the image as a whole
can be made quite good by using a great many very small hairs.24
Except for one crucial detail, Hansell had nailed dead-on the idea of bun-
dling glass ﬁbers together to transmit an image. His agile mind saw many
other ways to use imaging bundles. He jotted a few in the notebook. One was
‘‘a ﬂexible periscope, which could be quite useful in the army and navy.’’ He
proposed relaying ‘‘the reading of a gasoline meter from the tank on the back
of an automobile to the dashboard.’’ The same idea could be extended to
airplanes and ships, though in some cases a lamp might have to illuminate
the meter to get enough light. Surgeons could thread similar cables down the
throat to examine the stomach.
By the time RCA’s patent department ﬁled an application the following
August, Hansell had added another potential use that was a closer match to
RCA’s electronics business—a ‘‘picture transfer cable’’ for facsimile transmis-
sion. Newspapers were the main customers; they wanted to transmit news
photos around the globe, just as they could wire articles by telegraph. RCA,
AT&T, and telegraph giant Western Union had demonstrated wirephoto sys-
tems in 1924.25 Hansell thought he could speed image scanning by using
several ﬁbers instead of a single light collector. Scanning with 20 ﬁbers spaced
along a straight line delivering light to 20 separate detectors could collect
information 20 times faster than a single detector. Likewise, 20 ﬁbers in the
receiver could deliver light from separately modulated bulbs and write 20
times faster. In addition to speeding the system, Hansell hoped to simplify
alignment.
(Hansell’s patent also contains another prescient concept. He realized that
the signal transmitted depended on how the ﬁbers were arranged in the bun-

THE QUEST FOR REMOTE VIEWING
41
dle. If they were scrambled at the transmitter, they would have to be scram-
bled in the same way at the receiver or different lines would appear in the
wrong places, jumbling the entire image. He suggested that intentional scram-
bling could prevent nonpaying customers from ‘‘stealing’’ pictures by picking
up RCA’s radio-facsimile transmissions.)
Yet despite Hansell’s uncanny vision, there is no evidence he went much
further than writing down his ideas for the RCA patent department. Col-
leagues recall him as more likely to sketch new ideas on paper than to build
anything.26 He was an energetic man but a busy one; not yet 30, he directed
research at the RCA Rocky Point Lab. Imaging was peripheral to his job of
developing new radio transmission systems, and the often-modest Hansell
never worked up enough enthusiasm to push it. But by the time his patent
was issued in 1930, he was on to new inventions.
Fiber optics wasn’t the only bright idea that Hansell never found the time
to pursue. When Edwin Land showed him the young Polaroid Corporation’s
plastic polarizing material, Hansell suggested it might make good sunglasses.
His family recalls that Land rewarded him with the ﬁrst pair off the production
line.27 And Hansell was the ﬁrst person to write on paper by controlling the
ﬂow of an ink jet. His prototype printer could record 7500 words per minute
from a radio telegraph—an astounding speed in the 1930s. It was far too
fast for RCA’s radio-transmission manager, who took one look and decided
the miles of paper tape would overwhelm his operation.28 Hansell reluctantly
put the idea on the shelf. Today, millions of low-cost inkjet printers are used
with personal computers.
Heinrich Lamm and the Legacy of Sword Swallowers
As Hansell and RCA moved on to other things, a medical student in Germany
came upon the same idea from a different direction. Heinrich Lamm wanted
to build a ﬂexible gastroscope that a physician could thread down a patient’s
throat to peer into the stomach.
Physicians had tried to build instruments to look into the human body
since the early nineteenth century, with no real success. The feats of sword
swallowers inspired one physician to try looking down the throat through a
rigid tube, but it wasn’t a viable approach.29 The esophagus is reasonably
straight, but the entrance and exit are not, so thrusting an inﬂexible tube
through delicate body passages could be catastrophic. One physician later
called the rigid gastroscope ‘‘one of the most lethal instruments in the sur-
geon’s armamentarium.’’30
Some progress came after World War I. Rudolf Schindler, a specialist in
gastrointestinal disease, spent a decade developing a semiﬂexible gastroscope
that could be bent up to 30 degrees.31 It was an improvement, but not much
from the patient’s viewpoint.32 Lamm took a course from Schindler at the
University of Munich and decided the instrument wasn’t ﬂexible enough after
watching Schindler use it.

42
CITY OF LIGHT
Lamm decided a bundle of glass ﬁbers would be much more ﬂexible. That
would be a boon both to physicians and to patients, few of whom took well
to having a slightly bendable pipe thrust down their throats. Lamm probably
had seen bent glass rods guide light; it was a common physics demonstra-
tion.33 He knew about total internal reﬂection in rods and knew it also oc-
curred in ‘‘a very thin rod, e.g., a glass or quartz thread.’’
Like Hansell, Lamm realized a bundle of ﬁbers could carry an image point
by point if the ﬁbers were arranged so they sat at corresponding points at
each end. He wrote:
If we then project upon one terminal surface of this bundle a real image,
this image will be transmitted point by point (or more exactly, minute area
by minute area) to the other terminal surface of the bundle. There one can
view it directly or through an ocular lens. It will be a halftone image. If the
threads get all jumbled in the middle part of the bundle (as they invariably
do if the bundle is bent), the transmission of the image remains unchan-
ged.34
The medical student then went a step further than the engineer had.
Lamm liked to tinker with instruments, so he talked Schindler out of enough
money to test his idea. It was a brash and ambitious project for a third-year
medical student, but Lamm was bright, enthusiastic, and independent
minded. The busy Schindler didn’t work much on the project, but Lamm got
help and laboratory space from Walther Gerlach, a prominent physicist later
involved in the abortive German atomic bomb program. He bought glass ﬁbers
from the G. Rodenstock Optical Works (curiously, the name means ‘‘clear
stick’’ in German).
Lamm painstakingly combed the glass threads into a fat, awkward bundle
a few inches long, aligned them and clamped them together at each end. He
bent the bundle to show the light could follow a curved path. He probably
tried looking through the bundle, but it wasn’t very transparent, so little light
emerged. To show the idea worked, he focused the bright light from the V-
shaped ﬁlament of an unfrosted bulb onto one end of the bundle. It’s an easy
optical trick, like focusing an image of the label on top of a light bulb onto
the ceiling with a lens held above the bulb. Looking through the other end
of the bundle, Lamm saw a faint V, an image of the ﬁlament. He recorded
the image on photographic ﬁlm for posterity and his professor, with dark
regions showing the areas exposed by the light (see ﬁgure 4-1).
The 22-year-old medical student had high hopes and was somewhat dis-
appointed by the results. ‘‘I have not succeeded in my attempts to transmit
adequately bright and sharp images,’’ wrote Lamm. ‘‘Nonetheless the pictures
. . . show that one can transmit pictures through a ﬂexed bundle, even with
variable degree of bending.’’35 Although the glass was not very clear, the
ﬁbers were not perfectly aligned, and the ends probably were not polished
smooth, the image is recognizable. Heinrich Lamm had transmitted the ﬁrst
ﬁber-optic image. The year was 1930.

Figure 4-1: Heinrich Lamm assembled an awkward bundle of glass ﬁbers (top)
and showed it could carry the V-shaped image of a light-bulb ﬁlament around a
bend. The image at left is the bare ﬁlament; at right is the ﬁlament viewed through
the ﬁber bundle. If you look closely you can see the spots where light emerged
from individual ﬁbers in the bundle. The ﬁlament is dark because the image is a
photographic negative. (Copyright Michael Lamm; reproduction courtesy of Corn-
ing Glass Center)

44
CITY OF LIGHT
He hurried to the German patent ofﬁce, where he was astounded to learn
that a British version of Hansell’s patent had just issued.36 The disappointed
Lamm wrote to the British licensee, the Marconi Company, who told him
neither they nor Hansell ‘‘have tried to utilize this principle.’’37
Most students in his position would have given up, but not Heinrich
Lamm. He wrote a paper, which the journal Zeitschrift fur Instrumentenkunde
published in its October 1930 issue. It appears under Lamm’s name alone,
unusual at a time when European professors typically insisted they share
credit for student work. Indeed, Schindler thought Lamm’s experiment had
failed.38
Lamm insisted ‘‘the experimental proof of the possibility to transmit images
through a ﬂexible multi-ﬁber conductor of radiant energy . . . justiﬁes this
communication.’’ However, he knew he could go no further by himself, con-
cluding: ‘‘I also hope that some optical ﬁrm possessed of more means, sources
of supply, and experience than I have, could be induced by this report to build
a serviceable ﬂexible gastroscope.’’39
Two Decades of Stillness
Lamm’s hopes were in vain. His paper and Hansell’s patent sank without a
trace. Crucial pieces of the technological puzzle were still missing. Only a
feeble, fractured image had emerged from Lamm’s bundle. His glass ﬁbers,
like Jenkins’s quartz rods, absorbed too much light, and although no one
realized it at the time, they didn’t conﬁne light well either. Other technologies
seemed far more practical for looking inside the body, for television, and even
for displaying meter readings in more convenient locations.
The rise of Adolf Hitler brought trouble for Lamm, a Jew.40 Survival became
more important than following up an old experiment. He and his physician
wife ﬂed Germany after their residencies at the Jewish Hospital in Breslau
(now Wroclaw, Poland). They reached America in 1937, where an uncle got
Heinrich a job at a psychiatric hospital in Kansas City.41 The next year, Lamm
traveled through Texas, New Mexico, and Oklahoma with a salesman friend,
seeking an exotic place to settle down as a surgeon. He found it in a town of
1500 in the southern tip of Texas, where the old town physician was retiring.
The town lacked a Jewish community, but the native prejudices didn’t include
antisemitism.42 It was a welcome relief from Germany.
Lamm tinkered a bit, and his restless mind explored many areas, but
mostly he practiced medicine. He was an early and enthusiastic crusader for
automobile seat belts.43 He put on weight and his wavy hair thinned, but he
retained his intelligence and passions, and kept a reprint of his paper from
Zeitschrift fur Instrumentenkunde.
The Radio Corporation of America had the resources Lamm lacked, but
the company ﬁled Hansell’s patent and forgot it. No company can do every-
thing. Broadcast radio was a tremendous success; television was promising
but costly to develop. Fiber optics was but a footnote to the work at Rocky

THE QUEST FOR REMOTE VIEWING
45
Point, and the importance of Rocky Point faded as other RCA ventures grew
much faster.
The use of light-guiding rods continued to spread slowly. In the 1930s,
DuPont invented the transparent plastic called Lucite in America and Perspex
in England, and the durable, lightweight material replaced quartz. Dentists
used lamps with curved Lucite rods to illuminate mouths; doctors used Lucite
tongue depressors. Yet the idea of imaging through bundles of thin ﬁbers was
stillborn. While Hansell conceived of the idea at RCA, the company did noth-
ing with it. In that sense, Jenkins was right in saying no ‘‘great pioneer
invention’’ could come from a giant corporation. RCA—and perhaps Hansell
himself—never saw the potential of ﬁber optics, and wandered away, leaving
its development to others.

46
5
A Critical Insight
The Birth of the Clad Optical Fiber
(1950–1955)
Genius is one per cent inspiration and ninety-nine per cent
perspiration.
—Thomas Alva Edison
H
einrich Lamm and C. W. Hansell lacked not merely resources but one
crucial bit of inspiration. They didn’t realize that light was leaking be-
tween bare glass ﬁbers where they touched each other. The solution was
disarmingly simple: cladding the light-carrying ﬁber with a transparent ma-
terial that had a lower refractive index. However, like most other critical
insights, it’s obvious only in hindsight. Two decades after Hansell and Lamm,
the idea sprouted separately in the fertile minds of two very different men.
One was an eminent professor, a maker and shaker in mid-century American
science. The other was a Danish inventor laboring in a small home workshop.
A Fateful Cocktail Discussion
Optics was a quiet backwater of physics in October 1951,1 when two of the
biggest ﬁsh in that small pond shared cocktails in the large living room of a
stucco-tile house at the end of Harwood Lane in East Rochester, New York.
The host was Brian O’Brien, president of the Optical Society of America and
director of America’s leading school of optics at the University of Rochester.
His guest was Abraham van Heel, president of the International Commission
for Optics and professor of physics at the Technical University of Delft in the
Netherlands.

A CRITICAL INSIGHT
47
Born at the close of the nineteenth century, both men were in their early
ﬁfties, near the peaks of eminent careers. Although not close friends, they
shared the camaraderie of long-time workers in the same small ﬁeld. When
van Heel toured American optics labs, it was natural for O’Brien to invite
him for dinner at his large two-story house, build just before World War I
and tastefully ﬁtted with mahogany furniture and heirloom oriental rugs.2
They expected to relax and chat about optics in postwar Europe and America.
The Cold War military research that deeply involved both men also was
on the agenda. The West was in a technological arms race with the Soviet
Union, still ruled by Josef Stalin. Holland was trying to rebuild a submarine
ﬂeet that had been among the world’s largest before World War II, and they
wanted better periscopes. The German companies that had supplied Holland
before the war lay in ruins; America and Britain wanted to keep their latest
technology for their own subs. Knowing how curved glass or plastic rods
could carry light, van Heel thought a bundle of thin ﬁbers might relay the
image in a periscope.3
Van Heel’s assistant Willem Brouwer had suggested that ﬁber bundles
could scramble images as well as transmit them—an idea that excited the
Dutch security agency. As for image transmission, the ﬁbers ﬁrst would be
aligned to form the same pattern at both ends. The trick was to scramble the
ﬁbers in the middle, ﬁx them in place with glue, then cut the bundle in half
at the scrambled point. Each half would convert an image into an unintel-
ligible pattern, but mating the severed halves properly would reassemble
the image. You could encode a message by taking a photograph through one
half of a scrambler, because only the person with the matching half could
decode it.
The ideas sounded good, but van Heel was making little progress. The
Dutch government asked its American allies to recommend a well-qualiﬁed
and highly cleared US scientist who could help.4 American ofﬁcials picked
O’Brien, whose work on military optics during the war had earned him the
Medal for Merit, the nation’s highest civilian award, from President Harry
Truman.5 It was a singularly prescient choice.
Van Heel explained that bare glass ﬁbers didn’t work well. If two ﬁbers
touched, light leaked between them because total internal reﬂection didn’t
work. The ﬁber surface scratched easily, causing even more losses. Plastic
ﬁbers suffered the same problems. Seeking an alternative to total internal
reﬂection, van Heel coated ﬁbers with a reﬂective silver ﬁlm. Yet almost no
light emerged from the bundle of silver-coated ﬁbers he showed to O’Brien.6
O’Brien was surprised van Heel was working on light guides, but was not
surprised his approach didn’t work. The American was studying single ﬁbers
himself and knew metal coatings would not work. A shiny metal surface
always absorbs a little incident light, and losses build up with each reﬂection.
Bounce light 100 times off a 99 percent reﬂective surface, and only 36.6
percent of the light remains; after 1000 reﬂections, only 0.0043 percent is
left. You might think so many reﬂections unlikely, but the thinner the ﬁber,
the more times light bounces off its walls—and you need thin ﬁbers to carry

48
CITY OF LIGHT
Figure 5-1: Total internal reﬂection at the boundary between core and cladding
guides light along a clad optical ﬁber (bottom); light can leak from unclad ﬁbers
where they touch other objects (top).
recognizable images. In fact, over 1000 reﬂections are likely in a single meter
(39 inches) of ﬁber.7
‘‘That’s not the way to do it, Bram,’’ O’Brien said, surprised van Heel had
not recognized the limits of metal coatings. The trick was to use total internal
reﬂection in a way subtly different than everyone else had since Daniel Col-
ladon demonstrated light guiding a century earlier. Total internal reﬂection
works as long as the surrounding material has a lower refractive index than
the light guide. Those who followed Colladon thought automatically of the
outside material as air, but other materials also have refractive indexes lower
than glass or plastic. Coating a bare ﬁber with such a low-index material (see
ﬁgure 5-1) would maintain total internal reﬂection while protecting the op-
tical surface. The secret to making ﬁbers transmit light well, O’Brien said, was
to clad them.8
Van Heel immediately realized O’Brien had a good idea, although neither
knew quite how good it was or how hard it would be to implement. Total

A CRITICAL INSIGHT
49
internal reﬂection requires a virtually perfect surface—clean, smooth, and
touching nothing. The surfaces of bare glass or plastic ﬁbers were far from
perfect after they were assembled into a bundle. The ﬁbers touched, and every-
where they touched light could pass from ﬁber to ﬁber. The ﬁbers also rubbed
each other, forming surface scratches that scattered light out of the ﬁbers.
Dirt and ﬁngerprints on the surface also let light leak out.
The cladding offered a simple and elegant way around those problems
because it protected the surface where total internal reﬂection occurred. At a
stroke, it kept light from leaking between the light-guiding cores and protected
the vital reﬂecting surface from scratches and ﬁngerprints. The trade-offs were
added complexity and a slight reduction in how much light the ﬁber could
collect.9 Van Heel probably was annoyed that he hadn’t thought of the idea,
but that didn’t stop him from embracing the crucial conceptual breakthrough
that launched modern ﬁber optics.
An Insight from Vision
The idea of cladding did not come instantly to Brian O’Brien. It grew from
his study of an esoteric visual effect discovered in the 1930s. The visual center
of the eye responds more strongly to light if it comes through the center of
the pupil than if it enters at an angle near its edge.10 Specialists were puzzled
until O’Brien found the reason lay in the structure of the light-sensing cells
in the retina, a layer of cells at the back of the eyeball.
The retina contains two types of light-sensing cells, cones concentrated
near the center that give us color vision, and rods spread over a larger area
that provide night vision. Both are long and thin, with one end exposed to
light and the other attached to nerve ﬁbers. Light must travel through the
whole cell to reach the sensing elements at the back. As far back as 1844, a
German physiologist had suggested that total internal reﬂection might guide
light along rods and cones, perhaps inspired by Colladon’s demonstration.11
A century later, O’Brien recognized that was exactly what was happening.
Light arriving from the center of the pupil was guided to the back of the cones
more efﬁciently than light coming from the sides of the pupil. This made light
coming from the center of the pupil look brighter.
To test his theory, O’Brien made a model cone cell from plastic foam. His
model was 20,000 times larger than a cell, so he tested it with microwaves
20,000 times longer than visible light. That’s how physicists think. Both vis-
ible light and microwaves are electromagnetic waves; they should behave
similarly if you multiply all the dimensions by the same factor. The log-sized
blocks of lightweight plastic drew some surprised stares at Rochester, but the
experiments validated O’Brien’s model.12 It was an elegant example of scien-
tiﬁc deduction, and earned O’Brien the Optical Society’s highest award.13
O’Brien had not stopped with the microwave experiments. He had seen
transparent plastic rods guide light for illumination, and wondered what
would happen in thin transparent ﬁbers. He tested clear glass ﬁbers from the

50
CITY OF LIGHT
Corning Glass Works. To see what would happen in a two-layer structure,
like the retina, he had coated them with a transparent layer of instrument
lacquer, which has a lower refractive index than glass. That was about all
he had done when van Heel arrived, but it was enough to get the idea.
Before they sat down to dinner, the two men agreed that each would
contact the other before publishing anything.14 Each thought he had made
an important contribution. Van Heel had brought the ideas of image trans-
mission and scrambling in ﬁber bundles. O’Brien contributed the idea of clad-
ding the ﬁbers.
Their discussion might have become the basis of a fruitful collaboration,
but transatlantic communications were limited at mid-century. In 1951, only
radio-telephones could carry voices across the Atlantic, and people had to
book channels in advance. Most people had to rely on the mails and an
occasional telegram. Busy men like O’Brien and van Heel could easily fall out
of touch, and they soon did.
An Independent Inventor
Brian O’Brien was not the only person thinking of applying a clear cladding
to guide light along transparent ﬁbers in 1951. On April 11, Holger Møller
Hansen applied for a Danish patent on a ‘‘ﬂexible picture transport cable.’’
Like Heinrich Lamm, Møller Hansen thought that a bundle of parallel glass
or plastic ﬁbers would make a much more ﬂexible gastroscope than rigid tubes
and lenses. Unlike Lamm, he was trained in engineering. That helped Møller
Hansen realize that bare ﬁbers would not work well. He thought that circular
ﬁbers would minimize points of contact where the light could leak out. His
application also showed he realized the importance of a cladding: ‘‘Eventually
the threads will be coated with a substance whose index of refraction ap-
proaches one.’’15 In essence, Møller Hansen had come close to the same idea
that O’Brien suggested to van Heel six months later.
The Danish inventor had a background very different from the two emi-
nent professors of physics. The son of a machinist, Møller Hansen was born
in 1915 in Assens on the Danish island of Funen. He spent only ﬁve years
in school before starting work as a farmhand at 12. He apprenticed as an
electrician, then as a gardener, before joining the Danish army. There the
young man showed his bent for invention, improving a cryptographic ma-
chine used to code secret messages. Code machines were important for a small
country bordering Nazi Germany, and the invention earned newspaper head-
lines for the 23-year-old soldier. A rich mill owner saw the articles and paid
Møller Hansen’s way to engineering school in Copenhagen. It was a struggle
for a man with little formal education, but Møller Hansen takes pride in being
one of four from a class of 23 who ﬁnished the program.16
The Danish subsidiary of Philips N. V. hired Møller Hansen to develop
telephone systems, and he continued tinkering in a small home workshop. In
late 1949,17 the segmented eye of the ﬂy18 inspired him to consider using a

A CRITICAL INSIGHT
51
ﬂexible array of transparent ﬁbers to look into inaccessible places. He strug-
gled to draw his own glass ﬁbers but found it too hard to keep their size
constant. He tested other glass and plastic ﬁbers and found the best were
ﬁbers made by a company called Extrusion to insulate undersea cables. How-
ever, he had trouble bundling them together for image transmission.
He also had trouble ﬁnding the right coating material. Like van Heel,
Møller Hansen tried metal coatings, but the coated ﬁbers didn’t transmit light.
He then tried coating ﬁbers with materials having a lower refractive index.
There aren’t many solids, so he tried oils and got much better transmission.
Canada balsam oil worked, but he got the best results with margarine, which
he knew was impractical.19
By 1951, he had made enough progress to seek a patent. His application20
is short, but it shows he had thought carefully about making an instrument
to look inside the body. He realized illumination was needed, and suggested
delivering light through some ﬁbers in the bundle. He also realized the need
to seal the ends against contamination.
Enthusiastic about his new idea, Møller Hansen talked to reporters. The
press loved him; bright, colorful, and outspoken, he still makes a good inter-
view. In May, the story hit some European newspapers; the following month,
the Los Angeles Times carried a Reuters report.21 He had experimented mostly
with glass, but he envisioned making future ﬁbers of clear plastics. A maga-
zine photographed him looking into a bundle inserted into his ear,22 but
Møller Hansen says the photo was faked because that bundle could not trans-
mit an image.23 He accumulated a fat ﬁle of Danish and German clippings.
That was the high point of his ﬁber-optic career. The Danish patent ofﬁce
rejected Møller Hansen’s application after discovering the Hansell patent,
which anticipated most—but not all—of his claims. Møller Hansen should
have had a clear priority on the crucial idea of applying a low-index cladding
to the ﬁber. His wording was vague by modern standards, but at the time
O’Brien had made no move to publish or patent his idea. Unfortunately, nei-
ther Møller Hansen nor the Danish patent ofﬁce realized the importance of
the cladding, and his patent claims died.
With limited resources, Møller Hansen could not go much further. He
lacked the equipment to make good ﬁbers and to investigate better cladding
materials. He couldn’t buy good ﬁbers. He couldn’t convince British or Danish
companies that anyone wanted ﬁber-optic bundles to look inside the body.
Frustrated, in 1952 he turned to another idea he could better pursue in his
cluttered workshop—plastic-bubble ‘‘shock absorbers’’ for mailing envelopes.
He did patent that idea, but it didn’t make him rich.24
An Urbane European Professor of Optics
Abraham Cornelis Sebastiaan van Heel was a cultured member of the Euro-
pean professoriat, in marked contrast to the ingenious Danish farm boy. Born
in Java in 1899, when it was a Dutch colony, van Heel earned a doctorate

52
CITY OF LIGHT
in 1925. He was a lively, cheerful man whose interests reached well beyond
physics. He fell in love with the French language and literature while working
in Paris,25 knew Latin and Greek, and was ﬂuent in English. He also became
fascinated with optics.
The study of optics was hardly fashionable in the 1920s, but van Heel was
keenly aware of its deep roots in Holland. A Dutch spectacle-maker built the
ﬁrst telescope in the early seventeenth century, and a Dutch scientist for-
mulated the laws of refraction.26 Van Heel collected early books on optics; on
one American trip, he made a point of visiting a Library of Congress exhibit
that showed four early volumes on optics missing from his personal library.27
Bram van Heel was not a trailblazing superstar of science; you must dig
deep to ﬁnd his name today, although former students remember him fondly.
His genius lay in the demanding ﬁelds of precision optical measurement and
lens design.28 He helped build the Dutch optical industry in the 1930s. After
the war, he salvaged old mechanical telephone relays to build one of the
world’s ﬁrst computers, which he used for the complex calculations needed
to design lenses.29
Dutch ofﬁcials sought his help to rebuild the country’s war-shattered op-
tical industry and to develop new military optical systems. Willem Brouwer,
a Resistance ﬁghter who had returned to school after the war, joined van
Heel on the periscope project. In late 1949, they intially considered an array
of thin reﬂective tubes, but soon decided transparent ﬁbers with mirror coat-
ings would be more efﬁcient.30 In January 1950, Brouwer ﬁred arrows at-
tached to drops of molten glass down a long hall, drawing their ﬁrst glass
ﬁbers the same way Boys had done 60 years earlier. They also made plastic
ﬁbers. Initially, none of them transmitted much light.
Van Heel returned from America enthusiastic about transparent clad-
dings.31 He and Brouwer ﬁrst pulled plastic ﬁbers through liquid beeswax, a
material common in mid-century laboratories. It improved ﬁber transmission
more than they expected.32 Next they pulled bare ﬁbers through liquid plastic,
stringing them around the lab so the plastic could cure and painting them
black to keep light from leaking between them.
They made imaging bundles by winding a single long ﬁber around and
around a reel, and cementing the ﬁbers together at one spot. Cutting the
cemented area gave them a ﬂexible bundle with ﬁbers in matching positions
at both ends. An image focused on one end appeared on the other end. By
April 1952, they had sent images through bundles of about 400 ﬁbers as
long as 20 inches (half a meter).33
Progress was interrupted in early 1953 when Brouwer left for America.
Young, impulsive, and without strong ties to Holland, Brouwer had applied
to immigrate during a moment of frustration in 1950. When approval ﬁnally
came in early 1953, it was good for only three months. Van Heel asked him
to stay, but with Europe still recovering from the war, Brouwer saw more
opportunity in America. On the other side of the Atlantic, he abandoned ﬁber
optics to work on military reconnaissance cameras, and the aerial sextant for
the U2 spy plane.

A CRITICAL INSIGHT
53
With Brouwer gone, van Heel turned ﬁber work over to two other stu-
dents.34 Meanwhile, a Dutch colleague who later that year would win the
Nobel Prize in physics, Fritz Zernicke,35 returned from England with disturbing
news. Harold H. Hopkins, an optics specialist at Imperial College in London,
claimed he had invented a way to send images through bundles of glass ﬁbers.
There’s nothing like competition to get scientists moving. Van Heel decided
to rush a paper into print to establish priority over Hopkins.36 He must have
gotten approval from the Dutch National Defense Research Council. He also
air mailed a letter to O’Brien.37 With transatlantic phone calls out of the
question, van Heel could only wait for a reply by air mail or telegram. He
didn’t know O’Brien had been distracted.
Major Distractions in America
If European culture marked Bram van Heel, American drive and restless en-
ergy were the hallmarks of Brian O’Brien. Tall, thin, and bespectacled, O’Brien
was a master grantsman before the word was coined, who moved in the
highest circles of American government science. Born January 2, 1898, in
Denver, he grew up in Milwaukee, the son of a prominent mining engineer.
He attended Yale, receiving an undergraduate degree in electrical engineering
in 1918 and a doctorate in physics in 1922. He arrived at the University of
Rochester in 1930, initially specializing in vision. In 1938 the university
named him the ﬁrst permanent director of what was then America’s only
institute of optics.
O’Brien made pioneering measurements of atmospheric ozone from high-
altitude manned balloons, sending one to a then-record height of 72,000 feet
(21.8 kilometers) in 1935.38 He applied his engineering talent to an ingenious
system that enriched the vitamin D content of milk by ﬂowing the liquid past
an ultraviolet lamp. World War II brought new challenges. O’Brien designed
an instrument that produced visible images from invisible infrared light, so
pilots and soldiers could see at night. He built another instrument that al-
lowed soldiers to spot bombers trying to hide their attack by ﬂying out of the
sun. After the war, he built a camera that could record an image in one ten-
millionth of a second and used it to photograph the Able atom bomb test at
Bikini Atoll.39
Intense, energetic, and adventuresome, O’Brien kept many irons in the
ﬁre. His students recall his technological eloquence. He ‘‘had this wonderful
way with his hands. He would show you an instrument and caress it’’ as he
described its workings, says one.40 His energy was remarkable; another re-
calls, ‘‘He never walked but he ran.’’41 The Saturday Evening Post, then one of
America’s biggest magazines, proﬁled him as a colorful wizard of optics who
delighted in ﬂying military planes while testing his equipment.42
Optical ﬁbers were only one of many projects O’Brien juggled at the uni-
versity and in his home laboratory. Inspired by plastic illuminating rods43 and
by his discovery of light guiding in the eye,44 he concentrated on transmission

54
CITY OF LIGHT
in single ﬁbers. He drew glass ﬁbers about the same diameter as cells in the
eye and had a student dip them in liquids to study light guiding. He coated
ﬁbers with instrument lacquers, which dried to a clear plastic with lower
refractive index than glass.45 After talking with van Heel, O’Brien told his
military and security contacts about the possibilities of ﬁber-optic imaging
and encoding.
Impatience came with O’Brien’s driving energy. He liked to explore new
ideas and develop new instruments, but he rarely got around to writing pa-
pers about them and couldn’t be bothered with details. A thick layer of papers
covered his desk.46 The head of Rochester’s physics department praised
O’Brien’s intelligence, but told the Post: ‘‘He won’t ﬁll out expense accounts.
His reports get in late or not at all. He never gets around to answering his
mail.’’47
Growing restless at Rochester, O’Brien was open to an offer from American
Optical Company, then one of the country’s three largest optics companies.
He agreed to join the century-old maker of spectacles and microscopes as a
vice president and head of a new research division at its headquarters in
Southbridge, Massachusetts, in early 1953, after Rochester completed a fund-
raising drive. Well versed in patent law, O’Brien retained rights to inventions
in progress, including optical ﬁbers. However, before he got to Southbridge,
O’Brien met an unexpected distraction—the ﬂamboyant promoter Mike Todd,
best remembered today as Elizabeth Taylor’s third husband.48 The impresario
needed an expert on the ‘‘optical dodge.’’49
Born Avrom Hirsch Goldbogen in 1907, Todd had ‘‘the soul of a carnival
pitchman and the ambition of a Napoleon’’ in the words of a contemporary
writer.50 His formal education stopped when he was caught running a school-
yard crap game and expelled from the sixth grade, but he was bright and
energetic. A born salesman, he made and lost fortunes, produced Broadway
musicals, and had ties to Hollywood.
In 1950, Todd decided the future of motion pictures lay in wide-screen
pictures that put the audience into the action. The idea dated back to the
1920s, but in the 1950s the movies needed a new gimmick to compete with
television. The industry also needed to solve an old optical problem—the dis-
tortion inevitable when projecting a small image onto a big screen. Todd
found a little company called Cinerama that used three cameras and three
projectors to ﬁll a huge screen that wrapped partway around the audience to
cover the whole ﬁeld of vision. Cinerama was broke, but Todd became a
partner and almost single-handedly revived it. He raised money, sent crews
around the world to ﬁlm a documentary, and booked theaters around the
country. Audiences ﬂocked to This Is Cinerama after its September 1952 open-
ing.51
However, by then Todd had been eased out after clashing with the other
owners. He also saw Cinerama’s limitations. Its three projectors left two seams
in the picture, and occupied valuable theater space. A complete installation
cost $75,000,52 big money then, so only 17 theaters around the world showed

A CRITICAL INSIGHT
55
the ﬁlm. Todd wanted a better, cheaper system, ‘‘Cinerama out of one hole.’’
The night after This Is Cinerama opened, he asked his son Michael Todd, Jr.,
to ﬁnd the ‘‘Einstein of optics.’’ The trail led to Brian O’Brien.53
O’Brien didn’t know what to make of the promoter, who called insistently,
typically in late evening. He ﬁnally agreed to meet Todd, who chartered a
plane to Rochester and explained what he wanted. When O’Brien said such
a system was probably possible, Todd tried to hire him. The physicist de-
murred; he thought the job belonged at a big optical company. After three
weeks of calls failed to persuade O’Brien, Todd chartered a plane to meet with
O’Brien and Walter Stewart, the president of American Optical, in South-
bridge. After shaking hands, Todd laid a certiﬁed check for $60,000 on Stew-
art’s desk and said, ‘‘Let’s talk business.’’54
The result was a joint venture called Todd-AO. American Optical supplied
optical designers, engineers, and manufacturing expertise. Todd applied his
considerable persuasive powers to secure ﬁlm rights to the Broadway musical
Oklahoma!, the ﬁrst time Rogers and Hammerstein allowed anyone to ﬁlm one
of their shows. It seemed a golden opportunity to make money and rub shoul-
ders with the rich and famous. Todd-AO preempted O’Brien’s working hours,
leaving little time to establish a research division. The company put its best
engineers on the project, where they worked at a frantic pace.
The little project on guiding light in glass ﬁbers couldn’t compete with the
movie business. Except for asking company lawyers to work on a patent,
O’Brien almost forgot about ﬁber optics in the months after he arrived in
Southbridge. Nothing seemed urgent; he expected van Heel to warn him in
plenty of time of any developments that might affect the patents.
Few people realized something else was draining O’Brien’s tremendous per-
sonal energy. His wife of 30 years, Ethel, was seriously ill and dying.55
A Controversy over Publication
In the midst of this chaos, van Heel’s letter arrived in early May 1953, an-
nouncing his plans to publish on image transmission through clad ﬁbers.56
The fate of that crucial document is unclear. Although O’Brien was notorious
for not replying to letters, van Heel’s should have been an exception. Perhaps
the letter never reached O’Brien’s attention. Perhaps O’Brien saw it, asked
military clearance to respond, and never got a reply. Perhaps he set it aside
for a moment, only to be distracted by some other emergency. It may have
slipped through the cracks at a time made difﬁcult by joining American Op-
tical, launching Todd-AO, and dealing with his wife’s illness. Or perhaps
O’Brien did reply but his letter was lost in the international mail. In any case,
something went wrong.
After a brief wait for a response that never came, van Heel sent a short
letter to the prestigious British weekly Nature, which received it May 21,
1953. He also sent a longer article to De Ingenieur, a Dutch-language weekly

56
CITY OF LIGHT
little known outside Holland. He heard nothing from Nature for months, but
De Ingenieur rushed his article into the June 12, 1953 issue, documenting
van Heel’s priority.
Van Heel didn’t call his invention ﬁber optics. His article was titled ‘‘Optical
representation of images without use of lenses or mirrors,’’ and his English
summary called the ﬁbers ‘‘wires coated with a substance of lower refractive
index.’’57 He described cladding ﬁbers and sending images through bundles
up to 8 inches (20 centimeters) long. He wrote that plastic ﬁbers58 0.1 to
0.13 millimeter thick worked best, and cited potential uses in medicine and
image encoding.
With the resources of a university and some military funding, the little
group at Delft59 went further than Møller Hansen, Lamm, or Hansell. Indeed,
van Heel had not heard of the others. Lamm’s paper and Hansell’s patent
were hidden in the oblivion of dusty archives, and Møller Hansen never pub-
lished a scientiﬁc paper. Van Heel’s report in De Ingenieur could have suffered
the same oblivion because almost no one saw it outside Holland.
With its global circulation and prestigious reputation, Nature was a bid for
much more attention. However, the journal dawdled an exceptionally long
seven months before publishing van Heel’s letter on January 2, 1954.60 Barely
a column long, it covered the same ground in much less detail, but it was
visible around the world. So was a longer paper by Hopkins. Brian O’Brien
saw both and was furious that van Heel failed to mention O’Brien had sug-
gested the cladding.
Why didn’t van Heel credit O’Brien? Remembered by all as a man of in-
tegrity, van Heel held to high standards and was not one to steal ideas. His
Dutch paper carefully lists the three men who worked for him and credits
Brouwer with suggesting image scramblers. His omission of O’Brien is odd.
Did he expect the American to write his own paper? Did he think O’Brien’s
contribution was not crucial? Did he omit O’Brien’s name to avoid upsetting
American security ofﬁcials? Had he taken O’Brien’s failure to respond as a
sign he didn’t want credit? Or did he omit O’Brien’s name at the American’s
request, as Brouwer believes?61
The most likely answer is that van Heel asked O’Brien to tell him if he
wanted credit. Eager to beat Hopkins, and probably aware of O’Brien’s poor
correspondence habits, van Heel may have written that he would publish
unless he heard otherwise from O’Brien. When no reply came, van Heel may
have decided O’Brien didn’t care, or didn’t want his name mentioned because
he lacked clearance to discuss the idea in public. Perhaps O’Brien’s careless-
ness about correspondence annoyed the more meticulous European. Van Heel
may have decided that if O’Brien didn’t get around to writing, the American
would have only himself to blame.
In retrospect, O’Brien deserves credit for the cladding, which helped launch
modern ﬁber optics. Yet that was only a ﬁrst step. As Thomas Edison testiﬁed,
genius is only one percent inspiration. Many others would supply the perspi-
ration.

A CRITICAL INSIGHT
57
A Surprise from Britain
Another unsolved puzzle is Nature’s juxtaposition of van Heel’s paper with
one that Hopkins submitted six months later.
Harold Horace Hopkins was a young rising star in the little world of Eu-
ropean optics. Born December 6, 1918, in Leicester, England, the son of a
bakery worker, his quick intelligence earned him a university scholarship.
When World War II started shortly after his graduation in 1939, the gov-
ernment sent Hopkins to work for an optics company, diverting his interests
from theoretical physics to optical design. During the war he earned a doc-
torate from the University of London, and soon afterward he was named to
the faculty at the Imperial College of Science and Technology in London.
Brilliant, well read, and strong-minded, Hopkins thrived in the rich intel-
lectual atmosphere of the postwar British capital. When he was a student in
the 1930s, ‘‘any physicist worth his salt was a member of the communist
party,’’ he recalled.62 He left the party after the war, but his politics remained
leftist, and he avoided the entanglements of Cold War military work. He
earned accolades from the optical world by designing the ﬁrst zoom lens that
worked as well as a standard ﬁxed-focus lens. That was no mean feat because
the design required elaborate calculations at a time before electronic com-
puters.
Hopkins also developed a taste for ﬁne wines and London social life.63 At
a 1951 dinner party, he met a physician who had just performed what Hop-
kins called ‘‘a particularly distressing endoscopy using the old rigid type of
gastroscope.’’ When the physician learned that Hopkins specialized in optics,
he asked if more ﬂexible instruments could be made to look into the stom-
ach.64
Intrigued, Hopkins ﬁrst thought of inserting a single glass ﬁber down the
throat, and moving it to look around the stomach. He soon realized that was
as impractical as mechanical television cameras that looked through holes in
moving disks; the physician could see only if there was a bright lamp in the
patient’s stomach. Then he decided to try a ﬂexible bundle of ﬁbers. He had
every reason to think the idea was new. Baird’s and Hansell’s patents and
Lamm’s paper were buried in dusty archives, and van Heel’s work initially
was classiﬁed. The major London newspapers ignored Møller Hansen,65 al-
though Hopkins might have heard of his work through other channels.
To test his idea, Hopkins got glass ﬁbers made for other purposes; they
were only 20 micrometers (0.8 thousandth of an inch) thick, so ﬁne he could
hardly see them. His ﬁrst experiments were the simple ones a curious child
will do with an optical ﬁber today. He made loops in the ﬁber and pointed
one end at a lamp while looking at the other end through a microscope. The
ﬁber tip was bright until he put his hand between the other end and the
lamp. The light was still visible after passing through 4 feet (1.2 meters) of
ﬁber. Delighted, Hopkins adjourned with friends to the local pub and cele-
brated with several pints of beer.66

58
CITY OF LIGHT
Hopkins knew he needed more time and money to make image-
transmitting bundles, so in July 1952 he asked the Royal Society for a grant
of £1500 a little over half earmarked to pay a graduate assistant. He got the
grant in three months and offered the assistantship to Narinder S. Kapany,
an ambitious Indian national who had asked earlier about graduate study.
The selection was as much political as academic; Hopkins felt ‘‘very much
motivated, as indeed were many liberal-minded people at that time, by sym-
pathy for someone who had come from part of Britain’s imperial past.’’67 It
would prove a fateful choice.
Born in 1927 in Moga, Punjab, Kapany still wears the untrimmed beard
and turban traditional for followers of the Sikh religion. Raised in a well-
educated upper-class family, he grew interested in optics after his father gave
him a box camera in high school. He had attended an Indian university and
worked in a military optics factory, then studied optics for a year at Imperial
College, and worked for a Glasgow optics company. He hoped eventually to
return to India to start his own optical business.68 He jumped at the chance
to work with Hopkins.
The two started with 25-micrometer (0.001-inch) glass ﬁbers that had
been made for glass cloth. The ﬁbers carried light only 75 centimeters (30
inches), but Hopkins thought that would sufﬁce for a demonstration. Neither
he nor Kapany thought of cladding the ﬁbers.
The biggest challenge, to Hopkins’ mind, was assembling 10,000 to
20,000 ﬁbers into a bundle with their ends aligned to carry an image.69 It’s
the sort of task that sounds mundane until you try it. The idea was simple.
First he and Kapany wound a ﬁber thousands of times around a spool, then
clamped the looped ﬁber at several points and unscrewed one side of the spool
to remove the loop. Next they cut the loop at the clamps, yielding bundles
four inches (ten centimeters) long, with ﬁbers clamped at the ends but loose
in the middle. They checked the bundles by looking through them at a razor
blade; if they saw a straight line, the ﬁbers were in the right places. They
spent months assembling equipment to wind ﬁbers and getting it to function
properly.
In November 1953, they sent a letter to Nature,70 which published it on
January 2, 1954, just below van Heel’s long-delayed letter. It’s not uncom-
mon for journal editors to group papers on the same topic—the mystery is
the timing. The journal received van Heel’s letter May 21, and normally it
would have appeared months before the one from Hopkins and Kapany was
received on November 22. Suspicious minds suspect Hopkins was asked to
referee van Heel’s paper and delayed it until he could submit his own. In fact,
Brouwer says that when van Heel asked about the delay, the journal referred
him to Hopkins as its letters editor.71 (Nature has no records from that pe-
riod.)72 Yet before his death, Hopkins denied responsibility, saying he did not
see van Heel’s paper until shortly before it appeared, when Nature noted the
similarities and sent each author copies of the other’s paper.73
The two Nature papers do not reference each other and take rather different
approaches. Van Heel concentrated on transparent coatings, mentioning im-

A CRITICAL INSIGHT
59
age transmission only in passing. His bundles contained only several hundred
ﬁbers, enough to demonstrate the idea without elaborate winding machines.
In contrast, Hopkins and Kapany assembled bundles containing many more
ﬁbers, but their ﬁbers were unclad.
Neither paper was quite sufﬁcient by itself. Yet taken together, the two
papers in one of the world’s most widely read scientiﬁc journals launched
modern ﬁber optics.
Aftermath
In America, the angry O’Brien realized that van Heel had set the clock run-
ning on his patent claims; he had to ﬁle within a year of the ﬁrst publication
of the idea. He pressed American Optical lawyers to ﬁle. Shortly after the
Nature paper appeared, van Heel belatedly sent reprints of the Dutch article,
which the Americans had never seen. An American Optical engineer trans-
lated it, conﬁrming what O’Brien could see from the English abstract and the
illustrations, that van Heel had written about clad ﬁbers.74 The reprints had
‘‘De Ingenieur, No. 24, 1953’’ printed on the cover but were undated inside.
Someone hand-wrote the publication date on O’Brien’s copy: ‘‘12/6/53.’’
Thinking the paper had appeared late in the year, the lawyers ﬁled O’Brien’s
application November 19, 1954, and in due time he received a US patent.75
Hopkins consulted a London law ﬁrm about patenting image transmission.
However, an elderly partner recalled Baird’s 1927 patent, which he thought
would preempt Hopkins. With little money to waste on a losing battle, Hop-
kins gave up on patents.76 He and Kapany worked on ﬁber bundles through
1954, eventually making a 30-inch (75-centimeter) bundle.77 They developed
faster winding machines, a practical necessity when one bundle included 30
miles (50 kilometers) of ﬁber. They analyzed light collection and transmission,
but never tested claddings.
Even without a patent, Hopkins sought an industrial partner that could
offer the resources needed for further development: ‘‘glass technologists, pre-
cision machinists, and cooperation with a traditional endoscope maker.’’
However, the eminent young professor had no more commercial success than
Møller Hansen, and he concluded the companies were ‘‘dead from the neck
up.’’78
Kapany and Hopkins fell to quarreling even before the ink was dry on
Kapany’s 1955 dissertation on ﬁber optics. Hopkins complained that Kapany
claimed too much credit for the concept.79 Kapany admits he did not contrib-
ute to the original grant proposal that suggests imaging bundles,80 although
his vita claims he is ‘‘widely acknowledged as ‘the Father of Fiber Optics.’ ’’81
Years did not abate the feud. Months before his death in October 1994, a
feisty Hopkins told me Kapany ‘‘contributed nothing to the brains of the pro-
ject; he was a pair of hands.’’82 For his part, Kapany says the professor was
too much a theorist to appreciate his practical skills.83

60
6
99 Percent Perspiration
The Birth of an Industry
(1954–1960)
The deﬁnition was good enough to read large print, but
the color was green, and light loss was so great as to make
long ﬁber bundles impractical. Nevertheless, it was ﬂexible
and did transmit an image, and that was enough to set
one dreaming.
—Basil Hirschowitz, recalling his ﬁrst look into a bundle
made by Hopkins and Kapany.1
A
good idea is not enough to launch a new technology, as the cases of
C. W. Hansell, Heinrich Lamm, and Holger Møller Hansen testify. It takes
a critical mass of credible evidence to get the idea rolling, careful engineering
and a technological infrastructure to make practical devices, and money and
marketing savvy to sell them.
The two Nature papers provided the critical mass of evidence, along with
an important new idea, the transparent cladding. Lamm had hit only the
easiest of targets, recording a jagged image of a bright light-bulb ﬁlament.
Hopkins and Kapany made a better bundle that showed the letters GLAS.2
Lamm was a medical student writing in an obscure journal; van Heel and
Hopkins were prominent scientists writing in one of the world’s most widely
read journals. Moreover, 1954 was a better time to launch new ideas than
1930, when Europe and America were in economic crisis and the ugly tide
of Nazism was rising in Germany.
Yet the Nature papers represented only a ﬁrst step. They didn’t mention
unpleasant realities such as the rapid degradation of transmission when bun-

99 PERCENT PERSPIRATION
61
dles of ﬁbers were handled. Much more work was needed to translate labo-
ratory demonstrations into practical devices, but the pioneers ran out of
steam. Unable to get industrial backing, Hopkins went on to other projects.3
Van Heel stopped after the Dutch National Defense Organization lost interest,4
and he could not interest the Dutch giant Philips N. V. in commercial appli-
cations.5 Europe was full of ideas but slow to apply them.
Narinder Kapany, full of enthusiasm, saw better opportunities in America
and headed across the Atlantic. Two others also picked up the new idea. One
was Basil Hirschowitz, a young surgeon excited by the idea of a ﬂexible gas-
troscope. The other was an anonymous spook deep in the bowels of the Cen-
tral Intelligence Agency who thought image scramblers might solve some
American security problems.
‘‘Enough to Set One Dreaming’’
A native of South Africa born in 1925, Hirschowitz studied gastroenterology
in London, then began a fellowship at the University of Michigan in Ann
Arbor in mid-1953. Hirschowitz was so intrigued by the Nature papers6 that
he arranged a 1954 London vacation that included a visit to Hopkins and
Kapany at Imperial College. Looking through one of their bundles, Hirscho-
witz saw the possibility of truly ﬂexible gastroscopes that could be threaded
easily down the throat into the stomach, and of ﬂexible endoscopes that would
use the same technology to inspect the intestines and other parts of the body.7
Well aware of the drawbacks of semirigid gastroscopes, Hirschowitz
wanted an instrument that was thin, ﬂexible, easy to handle, sealed against
body ﬂuids, and able to deliver enough light for the physician to see clearly.
He knew that he couldn’t build it alone. He sold the idea to his Michigan
supervisor, Marvin Pollard, and the two started to assemble a team. The
physics department pointed Hirschowitz to C. Wilbur ‘‘Pete’’ Peters, a 36-
year-old optics professor. Pollard invited Kapany to join them when he ﬁn-
ished in London. As a ﬁrst step in the spring of 1955, Hirschowitz ordered
$12 worth of the same glass ﬁbers used by Hopkins and Kapany.
Kapany disrupted their plans when he landed a better offer from Bob Hop-
kins, O’Brien’s successor at the University of Rochester. That job included
consulting for Bausch & Lomb, a big Rochester optics company with much
more research money than Pollard and Hirschowitz.8 It was an offer too good
to pass up for the ambitious and energetic 28-year-old, recently married and
with a new doctorate.
Peters suggested they ﬁll the void by hiring a physics student and rec-
ommended Lawrence E. Curtiss. Hirschowitz sat down with the student, ex-
plained his ideas, and demonstrated a rigid gastroscope. ‘‘That put the fear
into me,’’ Curtiss says.9 The young physician probably did not realize that
Peters didn’t consider the project very challenging. Hirschowitz deﬁnitely did
not know that Larry Curtiss was still in his teens and about to start his
sophomore year in the fall of 1955. Curtiss had spent the summer after high

62
CITY OF LIGHT
school building equipment for a small Michigan hospital, developing an in-
terest in medical instruments that left him full of questions in freshman phys-
ics class. When Hirschowitz asked for help, Peters remembered the bright kid
who kept asking medical questions.
Curtiss recognized an opportunity that went beyond earning much-needed
college money. He read the papers by van Heel, Hopkins, and Kapany. It
seemed a straightforward matter of following Kapany’s detailed recipes for
making bundles, once he untangled the ﬁbers, which had become badly
snarled en route from England. Curtiss trusted Kapany’s instructions so com-
pletely that he didn’t even try to measure ﬁber characteristics. He was dis-
mayed to ﬁnd that his ﬁrst short bundle transmitted almost none of the light
that entered it.10
The failure of the published recipe gave Curtiss a problem to solve, making
the project much more interesting. Kapany’s published articles gave no clues;
the student had to ﬁgure out what had gone wrong for himself. He found
that unclad ﬁbers transmitted light better after he cleaned them with chromic
acid. However, ﬁve percent of the light vanished each time he touched them
afterward. That enigma had a deceptively simple explanation. Touching the
ﬁbers left behind ﬁngerprint oils, which after drying have a refractive index
close to the 1.5 value of the glass in the ﬁbers. From an optical standpoint,
each ﬁngerprint roughened the surface of the glass such that total internal
reﬂection did not work in that region. In addition, the ﬁbers Hirschowitz had
bought were little more than window glass stretched into ﬁne threads, so they
were not very clear and even had the same green tint that’s visible at the
side of a sheet of window glass.
The Michigan team thought they could solve those problems by drawing
their own ﬁbers from clearer glass with a higher refractive index. They found
the rods they wanted at the Corning Glass Works, made of optical glass with
a refractive index of 1.69. That was enough higher than ﬁngerprint oil that
touching the glass would not stop total internal reﬂection.
With a tiny budget, the little group scrounged equipment to make ﬁbers.
Their jury-rigged apparatus cost them less than $250.11 They mounted the
glass rod vertically in a four-inch tubular furnace, heated it, and pulled ﬁber
from its molten bottom. They wound their ﬁbers onto the cardboard cylinders
of two-pound boxes of Mother’s Oats, which Curtiss picked after rejecting rug
rolls. Peters collected the oatmeal in a corrugated box and took it home to
feed his children.12 Fortunately, the kids liked the cereal, though they still
joke that eating it was their contribution to ﬁber optics.13
Pulling ﬁbers proved easy, although freshly drawn ﬁber had to be handled
carefully. The ﬁrst bundle Curtiss made from homemade ﬁbers transmitted
images well, as long as the ﬁbers were loose on the table. However, the images
faded when he put the ﬁbers inside a protective rubber tube. Kapany had
written that there was little crosstalk between ﬁbers, but Curtiss found that
light leaked freely between bare ﬁbers when they were packed together. More
losses came from surface scratches, where the ﬁbers rubbed each other. Once
again the recipe didn’t work, and it was back to the drawing board.

99 PERCENT PERSPIRATION
63
Figure 6-1: Larry Curtiss made a glass-clad ﬁber by melting a glass tube onto a
rod, heating the tip, and stretching a ﬁber from it.
In the summer of 1956, after ﬁnishing his sophomore year, Curtiss took
the problem to an informal committee of the physics faculty, a group of pro-
fessors who played bridge at lunch in the laboratory basement. They unani-
mously agreed the best solution was to apply a transparent cladding of plastic
or lacquer, just as van Heel had suggested. Curtiss tried to convince Peters
and another professor that a glass cladding would be better,14 but the older
men doubted it could be applied uniformly, and worried that the glass might
crack or craze.
Curtiss wondered if he could solve the problem by putting a tube of low-
index glass around a rod of higher-index glass, melting them together, and
stretching the assembly into a ﬁber (ﬁgure 6-1). But he spent the rest of the
summer and the early fall making bare glass ﬁbers and dipping them in plastic
and lacquer. That reduced crosstalk, but only at the cost of reducing light
transmission. Nonetheless, they made progress, assembling a three-foot bun-

64
CITY OF LIGHT
dle, the longest yet. Peters thought it was good enough to share at the annual
meeting of the Optical Society of America, held in October 1956 at Lake
Placid, New York. He asked Curtiss to write a brief report, and the two drove
in the professor’s old Packard to save money.
They barely made it. The Packard blew a universal joint near Utica at
midnight, so they had to stop for repairs. When they ﬁnally reached Lake
Placid, Kapany was speaking eloquently about the simplicity of ﬁber optics.
Curtiss followed with a down-to-earth report that lacquer coating could cure
crosstalk, although transmission remained poor. Later at the meeting he met
a physicist a decade older who had already spent nearly two years working
on similar problems at American Optical.
A Project for the CIA
Brian O’Brien’s work on clad ﬁbers should have given American Optical a
commanding head start. However, his genius lay in ideas, not administration.
American Optical had all the inertia of a big company, and its best engineers
were busy with Todd-AO. Image scramblers remained an idea stuck in the
piles of paper on O’Brien’s desk.
They might have remained buried there if O’Brien had not told the CIA
about the potential of image scramblers. The spy agency could use one half
of the bundle to make ciphers that only the spy with the matching half could
decode. The spy, in turn, could send messages back that only the spy masters
could decode. Diplomats could use them to send secret messages back home.
Each pair of encoders would have a unique pattern, so loss of one scrambler
would not break security for people using others. With the theft of atomic
secrets and the Cold War fueling fears of Soviet spies, the CIA made security
devices a high priority. Yet American Optical was doing nothing about image
scramblers because its best engineers were busy with Todd-AO, and van Heel
had leaked the idea in Nature: ‘‘Coding and decoding of two-dimensional pic-
tures proved to be practicable.’’15
Frustrated CIA ofﬁcials sought new talent to launch the American Optical
project. They found Will Hicks, a 30-year-old physicist from Greenville, South
Carolina, studying textiles for the Milliken Research Trust. His background
looked good, but the CIA didn’t realize that Hicks had neither worked on
ﬁbers nor completed a course in optics.16 In the long run, that lack of back-
ground may have been a blessing because it helped him take a fresh approach.
Hicks also brought incisive insight, tremendous energy, a quick mind, and a
stubborn and independent nature.
The son of a judge, John Wilbur Hicks, Jr., had thought of becoming a
pianist but majored in physics at Furman University in Greenville. After work-
ing brieﬂy on the Manhattan Project at the end of World War II, he spent
four years in graduate school at Berkeley, studying quantum mechanics. He
excelled in coursework but never settled down to write a dissertation. Home-
sick, and married with one small child and another on the way, Hicks re-

99 PERCENT PERSPIRATION
65
turned to South Carolina in 1950. When the CIA contacted him in 1954 he
was restless, unhappy with the conservative South, and ﬁghting with the state
over taxes.
Hicks arrived at American Optical in September 1954. The ﬁrst day,
O’Brien briefed him on ﬁber optics and gave him a couple of plastic-clad ﬁbers
O’Brien had made in Rochester. O’Brien told Hicks that his assignment was
to make and clad ﬁbers and assemble them into an image scrambler. The
busy O’Brien then sent Hicks off to work in a building separate from the main
research lab and had little more to do with the project.
In theory, Hicks reported to associate research director Steve MacNeille
and later to Walt Siegmund, a prote´ge´ of O’Brien’s from Rochester. In prac-
tice, he was largely on his own while everyone else concentrated on Todd-
AO, an arrangement well matched to his independent nature. Not one to
merely follow the boss’s lead, Hicks began by convincing himself that low-
index claddings were essential before the Michigan group reached the same
conclusion. Then he tackled scrambler development, a job much tougher than
merely demonstrating a crude imaging bundle because it essentially required
a whole new technology.
The security-conscious CIA used gastroscopes as a ‘‘cover’’ project to con-
ceal work on image scramblers. At a simple level, the two applications share
the need for ﬁber bundles that transmit intact images from end to end. To
make an encoder, you scramble the loose ﬁbers in the middle, glue the mixed
region solid, then saw through it.
Look closely, however, and you ﬁnd quite different requirements. A gas-
troscope must be long, thin, and ﬂexible to examine the stomach. A scrambler
should be at least a couple of inches across to encode pictures or signatures,
and short, fat, and rigid to handle easily. These differences are crucial and
lead to quite different devices. Whatever American Optical thought about the
potential of medical instruments, their customer was the CIA, and the spy
agency wanted image scramblers. Although both applications required ﬁbers,
the overall goals were different, ultimately leading Hicks and American Op-
tical along a path different from the Michigan team.
Hicks ﬁrst tried drawing ﬁber from a hole in the bottom of a platinum
crucible full of molten glass and then coating it with plastic.17 The process
was quick and fairly easy, but plastic-clad ﬁbers did not transmit light well.
When several months of reﬁnements did not solve the problem, Hicks started
work on glass cladding, without completely abandoning plastic.18 His ﬁrst idea
was a logical extension of drawing ﬁbers from a single crucible. He nested
two crucibles together, melting low-index glass in the outer one and a high-
index glass in the inner one. Then he pulled ﬁbers through concentric holes
at the bottoms of the crucibles, so glass in the outer crucible formed a cladding
around a core of glass from the inner crucible.19 The technique worked but
did not yield good ﬁbers.
Hicks took a break in October to attend the Lake Placid meeting. He
met Peters and Curtiss and was impressed by the progress they were mak-
ing on a minimal budget. Their discussions led Hicks to visit Ann Arbor

66
CITY OF LIGHT
some weeks later, but both sides knew a race was on and guarded their
secrets.
Taking a Chance on Glass Tubes
The poor results with lacquer left Curtiss itching to try making a ﬁber from
a glass tube collapsed onto a glass rod. After one or two preliminary tests, he
ﬁnally got his chance on December 8, 1956, when the professors were away
at a conference. He bought tubes of soft glass, with a refractive index lower
than the Corning rods, from the chemistry supply ofﬁce. Then he put a rod
of the high-index Corning glass inside a tube, melted the two together in a
furnace, and drew a ﬁber from it.
‘‘It was probably the most exciting day of my life,’’ he recalls. He walked
down the hall, pulling the ﬁber. ‘‘I was 40 feet down the hall and I could still
see the glow of the furnace. I knew it was good.’’20 His glass-clad ﬁber trans-
mitted light far better than any other ﬁber ever made. The college junior had
broken through his professors’ conceptual logjam.
In part, Curtiss was lucky, as he readily admits today. But his was the luck
that comes to the intelligent and observant. His lacquer experiments made it
clear that plastic claddings would not work well. It seemed logical to try glass
cladding instead. Like any science student of the time, Curtiss had seen plenty
of glass tubing. He had stretched rods into ﬁbers. Why not slip a rod into a
tube, melt the two together, and see what happened when he stretched the
composite into a ﬁber?
Later research identiﬁed the big problem with plastic claddings. Tiny in-
homogeneities about the size of a wavelength of visible light, 0.0005 milli-
meter (500 nanometers), form as a liquid plastic ﬁlm solidiﬁes. They make
the glass-plastic boundary irregular, so it scatters light instead of guiding it
along the core. These losses limit transmission efﬁciency. Glass has its own
inhomogeneities, but drawing it into a ﬁber stretches them to many wave-
lengths long. They become so large that light doesn’t ‘‘see’’ them at the core-
cladding boundary. The same effect happens in plastic, but you can’t stretch
a plastic-clad glass rod into a ﬁber, because the two materials melt at much
different temperatures.
The Michigan team also did not initially realize the importance of rod
preparation. Their search for rods of high-index glass happened upon some
that Corning had ﬁre polished to form a very clean, smooth surface. American
Optical took the tried and true approach of mechanically grinding and pol-
ishing their rods down to the right shape. Mechanical polishing produces
exceptionally smooth optical surfaces but leaves behind residual surface con-
tamination that can ruin the core-cladding layer.21 Fire polishing removes
contaminants, but nobody knew that in 1956.
Once Curtiss showed Peters and Hirschowitz his clear glass-clad ﬁbers, the
project went into high gear. They fused tubes and rods together, mounted
them upright in a four-inch-long furnace, and drew ﬁbers from the molten

99 PERCENT PERSPIRATION
67
bottom. Curtiss built a system that measured ﬁber diameter as it was drawn,
without touching the glass. They controlled the rate of ﬁber drawing by hand,
averaging about ﬁve miles (eight kilometers) an hour. Like Hopkins and Ka-
pany, they made bundles with ends aligned in the same position by looping
the ﬁbers, ﬁxing one part of the loop in place, and then cutting carefully
through the ﬁxed spot. They needed 25 miles (40 kilometers) of good ﬁber to
make a single bundle of 40,000 ﬁbers.22 The freshly drawn ﬁbers were only
about 0.04 millimeter thick, so thin that plastic had to be coated on top of
their glass cladding before they could be handled. Hirschowitz and Peters paid
the physics shop $800 to $900 to build a machine to wind ﬁber off the
oatmeal boxes into bundles, but almost everything else was homemade.
Unlike O’Brien, Hirschowitz wasted no time ﬁling for patents; his ﬁrst ap-
plication, covering the gastroscope, was ﬁled December 28, 1956, with rights
shared with Peters and Curtiss.23 Curtiss applied for a patent on glass-clad
ﬁbers on May 6, 1957, assigning part interests to Hirschowitz and Peters.24
The glass-clad ﬁber was the last piece needed to build a gastroscope. Hir-
schowitz knew exactly what he wanted, and it took the three men just two
months to assemble the ﬁrst working model. The tip that went inside the
stomach included a little illuminating lamp and optics to collect and focus
light onto the end of the bundle in the stomach. Hirschowitz himself swal-
lowed it ﬁrst.25 A few days later, February 18, 1957, he tested it on his ﬁrst
patient, a small woman who had an ulcer. The instrument went down suc-
cessfully, and the moment seemed triumphant—until Marvin Pollard arrived.
Academia has its pecking orders, and Marvin Pollard had thought he was
at the top. He had not been deeply involved in development; Curtiss hadn’t
realized he was involved at all until Pollard invited him to a reception. How-
ever, as the senior researcher, Pollard wanted to try the new instrument ﬁrst.
Furious that Hirschowitz hadn’t waited for him, he conﬁscated the new en-
doscope and locked it in his safe, so no one else could use it.26 Tensions
between Pollard and Hirschowitz escalated rapidly when Pollard demanded a
share of patent rights.27 He never got them, but he later blocked Hirschowitz
from getting a permanent job at Michigan.28
Curtiss, who had thought the project was over, had to make a second
gastroscope 5/16 inch (0.8 centimeter) thick and a meter long for Hirschowitz
to show at a meeting of the American Gastroscopic Society in Colorado
Springs.29 A May snowstorm disrupted transportation, so fewer than 40 peo-
ple attended his 10-minute talk, but those who attended were impressed.
Kapany was there and claimed Bausch and Lomb had almost completed an
instrument, but it never appeared.30 Rudolf Schindler, by then a grand old
man of gastroscopy, recalled that Heinrich Lamm had the same idea but
thought Lamm had failed to assemble a bundle of ﬁbers.31 A few people asked
for a demonstration, so Hirschowitz took them to the nearest phone booth
and showed them ﬁne print in the telephone directory.
The whole project cost about $5500 over two years, nearly $4000 of
which went to pay Curtiss. American Optical, the CIA, and Bausch & Lomb
probably spent far more.

68
CITY OF LIGHT
A Problem with Image Scramblers
When progress stalled at American Optical in the fall of 1956, the company
started looking for alternatives. Lee Upton, an AO glass specialist, had worked
in a plant that collapsed glass tubes onto electrical components to insulate
them, and he suggested adapting that idea to making ﬁbers. In October, Steve
MacNeille brought in an outside consultant, a retired MIT professor named
Frederick H. Norton. Norton ﬁrst proposed coating bare ﬁbers with molten
glass, but later also suggested a rod-in-tube approach.32
Norton also borrowed an idea from ancient makers of miniature glass
portraits. They stacked rods of colored glass in the desired pattern, heated the
assembly until the edges of the rods melted together, and stretched the bundle
into a single fused cylinder. Slicing the fused rod like a salami yielded disks
bearing portraits or abstract patterns. The method is called milleﬁori, for
‘‘thousand ﬂowers,’’ and is still used today to make paperweights. Norton
realized that many clad ﬁbers could be assembled together in the same way
and stretched into a rigid ‘‘multiﬁber.’’ This avoided the need to draw many
ﬁne, separate ﬁbers and assemble them into a bundle, because a single op-
eration stretched all the ﬁbers at once. The trade-off was the loss of ﬂexibility;
the many ﬁbers emerged fused together in a solid rod. That rigidity made
them useless for gastroscopes but was ﬁne for image scramblers, which were
much fatter and thus needed many more ﬁbers.
It took Hicks time to assemble the equipment he needed to test the new
ideas. The big company’s advantage in resources was more than offset by its
ponderous bureaucracy. By November, Hicks had found thin-walled tubing
but not rods of high-index glass suitable for the core of the ﬁber. American
Optical had the right kind of glass, but it came in rectangular blocks, and
Hicks couldn’t persuade anyone at AO to grind them down to the cylindrical
shape that he needed. He ﬁnally ordered polished cylinders from another com-
pany. While he waited for the rods to arrive, he hand-built a glass-melting
furnace in the AO shop, because he couldn’t get the company to pay its
machinists to do the job for him. It was January 1957 before Hicks had the
equipment to try Upton’s approach to drawing glass-clad ﬁber.
By this time, development of the Todd-AO optical system was winding
down, and American Optical was shifting some of those engineers to the ﬁber
project. However, they and Hicks faced tough problems debugging ﬁber pro-
duction. Contaminants from mechanical polishing remained at the core-
cladding interface, causing troublesome losses that made the glass-clad AO
ﬁbers poorer than those Curtiss drew from ﬁre-polished rods. These problems
helped keep plastic-clad ﬁbers alive at American Optical; although they trans-
mitted less light than good glass-clad ﬁbers, loss was not as critical for short
image scramblers as it was for longer gastroscopes.
Hicks’s group made a demonstration scrambler by looping single ﬁbers
many times around a drum, gluing one region, and sawing through that
spot. After they showed that the ﬂexible bundle could transmit an image, they
scrambled the loose ﬁbers in the middle, glued them, and sawed through that

99 PERCENT PERSPIRATION
69
region to make an encoder/decoder pair. Then they took photos of the scram-
bled and unscrambled images, packed them up with the bundles, and sent
them to the CIA.
Hicks, feeling satisﬁed, took his ﬁrst vacation in three years at American
Optical. As his body relaxed on the sand at Myrtle Beach, his mind began to
analyze the coding theory behind the image scrambler, and Hicks came to
an unpleasant realization. Using the same scrambler many times could ‘‘wear
out’’ the code, so someone who intercepted enough scrambled images could
decode them by comparing the patterns. ‘‘You wear it out in a hurry, too,’’
recalls Hicks, because the ﬁxed ﬁbers made each device scramble the picture
in exactly the same way each time it was used. He ﬁgured breaking the code
would take only 18 images scrambled by the same device and access to a
‘‘fairly large computer’’—by 1957 standards.33 That meant image scramblers
could not offer the security the CIA wanted.
Most people try to avoid concluding their own work is futile, and very few
willingly reveal that unpleasant truth. Not Will Hicks. He wrote to the CIA,
explaining why image scramblers would not work and suggesting they in-
stead use one-shot keys, which are simpler but unbreakable. ‘‘The people I
was working with weren’t very knowledgeable about coding theory, and it
was news to them. It may have been to everybody at the CIA,’’34 Hicks says.
But he convinced them, and they canceled the project.
American Optical management was rather less pleased with Hicks’s insight
and considered ﬁring him. However, cooler heads prevailed. He still had the
‘‘cover’’ project of the endoscope and was already working on another mili-
tary ﬁber-optic program. ‘‘I was sort of a pain in the ass when I was young,’’
Hicks says. ‘‘Maybe I am still.’’
The Odyssey of Narinder Kapany
Narinder Kapany was far from idle at the University of Rochester. He built
some devices, did some contract research, and spoke and wrote proliﬁcally.
By 1957, when he moved to the Illinois Institute of Technology Research
Institute, he was the best-known spokesman for ﬁber optics. Self-conﬁdent
and secure in his Sikh traditions, the solidly built Kapany was a striking and
exotic ﬁgure in white-bread America. Nearly six feet tall, he was well dressed
in western suits but his turbaned head and bearded face stood out in a crowd.
Charming and articulate, he made the case for ﬁber optics with a voice carry-
ing hints of his years in India and England.
His energy, enthusiasm, and dash of ﬂamboyance left a vivid impression.
While attending a faculty Halloween party in Rochester, he volunteered to
answer the door, knowing that to Americans he was already in costume.35
He called sending an image through a knotted bundle of optical ﬁbers his
‘‘Indian optical rope trick.’’36 He also wrote a series of sober, scholarly papers
in the Journal of the Optical Society of America37 that outlined the basic prin-
ciples of ﬁber optics. As Curtiss discovered, Kapany’s papers were not infalli-

70
CITY OF LIGHT
ble—among other things, he was slow to realize the need for a cladding—
but they were the best introduction to a promising new ﬁeld.
In fact, they were the only readily available introduction because nobody
else wrote much. O’Brien was too busy with new ideas.38 H. H. Hopkins and
van Heel abandoned ﬁber optics soon after their early papers. Hicks wrote
little but patent applications, and much of his early military work was clas-
siﬁed until the late 1960s.39 Curtiss found himself in a bitter patent battle
that lasted until 1971, and his lawyers discouraged him from writing about
technical details.40 Hirschowitz wrote about building and using medical in-
struments, not about ﬁber properties.
From 1955 to 1965, Kapany was the lead author on 46 scientiﬁc papers
and coauthor of 10 more—an average of over ﬁve a year. That represented
a staggering 30 percent of all the papers published on ﬁber optics during
those years, including reports on medical treatment.41 It was Kapany who
wrote a 1960 Scientiﬁc American cover story on ﬁber optics,42 and the ﬁrst
book on ﬁber optics,43 based partly on his earlier papers.44
Kapany’s writings spread the gospel of ﬁber optics, a highly visible role
that cast him as a pioneer in the ﬁeld. However, his technical innovations
are widely regarded as less crucial than those of men like Curtiss and Hicks.
Through 1969, he collected a respectable 10 ﬁber patents, but Hicks earned
22.45 His greatest gift may have been for promotion, though he dislikes the
word. ‘‘I was just doing what came naturally, which is to go and get the
resources to work on the crazy ideas I come up with, and talk about it in
conferences and publish.’’46
Finding a Market for Gastroscopes
By the spring of 1957, Hirschowitz, Peters, and Curtiss had a working gas-
troscope and patent applications in the works. Hirschowitz, the salesman of
the group, went hunting a company to make commercial instruments. Amer-
ican Optical turned him down because the instrument division didn’t think
they could sell enough endoscopes.47 American Cystoscope Makers Inc. even-
tually licensed the technology on the condition that the Michigan group help
them start production. As the expert ﬁber maker, Curtiss found himself shut-
tling back and forth to New York to lecture American Cystoscope production
engineers while still an undergraduate.48
Building machinery for industrial production was far more difﬁcult than
jury-rigging equipment at the university. American Cystoscope could not bor-
row glass samples and wind ﬁbers on oatmeal boxes. To mass-produce bundles
reliably, they had to buy special machinery, ﬁnd reliable sources of the right
kind of glass, and assure quality of their product.49 That took time. Curtiss
got into graduate school at Harvard, then took off a semester to help start
production. The interruption became a career, and he never returned to
Harvard.50

99 PERCENT PERSPIRATION
71
Hirschowitz tested the ﬁrst commercial gastroscope in 1960 at the Uni-
versity of Alabama Hospital in Birmingham, where he had moved after leav-
ing Michigan. Other doctors quickly adopted them.51 They were a dramatic
advance, the ﬁrst instruments that allowed doctors to see inside the stomach
with little risk to the patient. Only a handful of specialists mastered the deli-
cate techniques of using semirigid lensed gastroscopes; many more physicians
could use thin, ﬂexible ﬁberscopes. By the late 1960s, they almost totally
replaced lensed gastroscopes, quickly becoming important new tools in treat-
ing many internal conditions. Only recently have tiny electronic cameras
begun to replace ﬂexible ﬁber bundles.
Fiber Optics Brighten Military Images
Shortly before the CIA gave up on image scramblers, an old Berkeley friend
at the MIT Lincoln Laboratory near Boston asked Hicks for help. Bill Gardner
was working on image intensiﬁers, tubes that sense weak visible or infrared
light and turn it into brighter images, so soldiers and pilots can see better.
The Pentagon thought that using one tube to amplify the output of another
should yield even brighter images. However, the output faces of the tubes
were curved so sharply that ordinary optics couldn’t focus light from one tube
onto another. Gardner asked Hicks if ﬁber optics could do the job.52
The tube’s input was a ﬂat screen, which released electrons when light hit
it. An electric ﬁeld inside the tube accelerated the electrons so that they hit
a phosphor screen like a black-and-white television, producing a brighter im-
age. That screen had to be curved outward to collect electrons in the right
places to replicate the image accurately. Standard optics could not focus light
from the curved phosphor screen onto the ﬂat input face of another tube
without losing light and distorting the picture.
Gardner and Hicks decided the solution was to mount a short, fat bundle
of parallel ﬁbers between the tubes. They ground out one side so that it ﬁt
perfectly over the curved end of the tube. The other end was ﬂat. The array
of short ﬁber segments, called a ‘‘faceplate,’’ carried light straight from the
curved face to the corresponding point on the ﬂat face of the next tube.53 The
idea was a logical extension of Baird’s 1927 television patent. (A mineral
known as ulexite forms similar structures naturally—see box, page 74.)
It was also a natural application for the fused multiﬁber technology Amer-
ican Optical had started developing for image scramblers. Faceplates sealed
the end of the tube, so they had to be rigid and vacuum tight. The early tubes
had screens a couple of inches across, and the faceplates were disks, which
could be sliced from a fused bundle of multiﬁbers like a salami—or milleﬁori
paperweights.54
American Optical charged ahead, fueled by ample Pentagon funding and
its new ﬁber-optic skills. AO engineers mastered the practical techniques of
making large bundles, drawing them into large multiﬁbers, and slicing the

72
CITY OF LIGHT
bundles into faceplates. As they made progress, the strong-willed Hicks began
to clash with straight-laced company management. Annoyed when a guard
insisted he sign in with an excuse for arriving late at 8:30 one morning,
Hicks wrote: ‘‘I was on the potty. Sorry.’’ Hicks had worked past midnight
the night before, but research director Steve MacNeille had to save him from
being sacked by an offended company ofﬁcial.55
Ironically, the ﬁnal blow came after Hicks had done what he thought
American Optical wanted—developed the ﬁber-optic faceplate into a viable
product. He and MacNeille visited division managers but couldn’t interest
them in producing faceplates. American Optical remained a stodgy century-
old maker of spectacles and microscopes, disconnected from its new research
lab and unwilling to venture into a new ﬁeld.
Furious that AO didn’t care about the technology he had spent four years
developing, Hicks quit in 1958, telling MacNeille he was taking the technol-
ogy with him. ‘‘I walked out the front door at noon with everybody watch-
ing,’’ he recalls. With friends from American Optical, he immediately started
a company called Mosaic Fabrications.56 Military customers for faceplates
soon arrived, starting with an Army engineer who heard Hicks give a talk at
an Optical Society meeting. In the classic style of small companies, he started
the company in his barn but soon moved to a building at the nearby South-
bridge Lumber Company. With no money for new equipment, he scrounged
junked car parts to build ﬁber drawing machines. Soon he was making pro-
totypes, and military agencies were coming back for more.
Full of energy and ideas, Hicks proved a hard-driving hands-on entrepre-
neur who pushed himself and the technology relentlessly. In no position to
turn down business, Hicks took a Navy order for a 12-inch faceplate when
the standard width was one inch—a daring leap, but one that he made
work.57 He battled AO management over patent rights58 but collaborated with
company scientists on research. He was tough on competitors but generous
to employees. Once the company was doing well, Hicks handed out raises to
everyone—and when another local business owner complained he was driv-
ing wages up, Hicks deﬁantly handed out a second raise. He ran things him-
self, building Mosaic Fabrications into a thriving business as a military con-
tractor and developing a loyal following among his employees with his
unconventional style.
Patent Problems at American Optical
Things did not go as well at American Optical. O’Brien retired at 60 in early
1958 but kept very busy as a consultant to industry, government agencies,
and the National Research Council.59 Mike Todd died March 22, 1958, in a
plane crash, sealing the fate of Todd-AO wide-screen ﬁlms as an artistic suc-
cess but commerial failure.60 Walt Siegmund, a gentlemanly O’Brien prote´ge´
from Rochester and Todd-AO veteran, took over ﬁber optics, but muddled
corporate management gave little support to the new technology.

99 PERCENT PERSPIRATION
73
The most daunting blow may have been the collapse of American Optical’s
vaunted patent position. O’Brien and American Optical lawyers thought they
had an airtight case for priority on the crucial concept of the clad ﬁber.
Hansell’s 1930 patent covered imaging, but by the time O’Brien’s patent was
issued on March 4, 1958,61 it was clear that imaging needed clad ﬁbers.
O’Brien had licensed American Optical, so the company turned its lawyers
loose on potential competitors. American Cystoscope Makers was at the top
of the list.
An American Cystoscope lawyer did some legwork and found a copy of
the issue of De Ingenieur containing van Heel’s paper. That was something no
one at American Optical had seen. Van Heel had sent American Optical only
a reprint, with ‘‘De Ingenieur, No. 24, 1953’’ printed on the cover and the
handwritten date ‘‘12/6/53.’’62 The sharp-eyed lawyer saw the crucial pub-
lication date on the magazine cover: June 12, 1953. He must have chortled
with glee as he copied it to send to American Optical.
It is not enough for an inventor to show that he or she was the ﬁrst to
have an idea. The inventor must apply for a American patent no more than
a year after the idea is ﬁrst described in public anywhere in the world. The
American Optical legal department had interpreted the handwritten date in
American style as December 6, 1953, which gave them plenty of time to ﬁle
their application. They didn’t remember that Europeans write dates differ-
ently, with the date before the month. When the lawyers ﬁled the patent
application November 19, 1954, they had missed the proper deadline by over
ﬁve months. ‘‘We knew the game was up’’ when the copy of the cover arrived,
recalls Siegmund.63 An angry Brian O’Brien felt cheated.
American Optical did not give up easily. With its star patent worthless,
the company pressed an application Norton had ﬁled on glass cladding. How-
ever, Curtiss had ﬁled his application earlier in 1957. A determined attack by
a horde of American Optical lawyers made the Curtiss patent one of the most
litigated in history, but it survived to issue in 1971—a delay that ironically
increased royalty payments.64
More Uses for Fibers
While the lawyers battled, the young ﬁeld grew. The Michigan group, Amer-
ican Cystoscope Makers, Mosaic Fabrications, and American Optical concen-
trated on making practical instruments. Both Mosaic Fabrications and Amer-
ican Optical found new uses for fused ﬁber optics. They made fused bundles
in which a special glass ﬁlled the space between ﬁbers; etching away the ﬁller
glass left loose ﬁbers. They twisted bundles of hot glass ﬁbers in the middle,
so when they cooled the image appeared upside down. They interleaved sheets
of ﬁbers into Y-shaped bundles that could combine or split images. They ta-
pered bundles so that they shrank or magniﬁed images, a wonder Dave Gar-
roway demonstrated on his nationwide television show, Today.65

74
CITY OF LIGHT
Ulexite: A natural ﬁber bundle
Nature makes its own bundles of optical ﬁbers: a mineral called ulexite. It’s a
complex boron compound formed where mineral-rich lakes evaporate, found in
Boron, California. As the mineral crystallizes, long, thin crystals grow parallel to
each other and eventually merge into a solid block. Slice the block perpendicular
to the ﬁlaments and polish the faces smooth, and it acts like a ﬁber-optic
faceplate. Toy and rock shops sometimes sell it as ‘‘television stone.’’
Although ulexite was discovered around 1850, nobody took a close look at
its optical properties until roughly a century later. It inspired no ﬁber-optic
pioneers; some had never heard of it until I mentioned it. Only in 1963, several
years after the faceplate was invented, did Bob Potter recognize ulexite as a
natural ﬁber bundle.
Parallel ﬁlamentary crystals in ulexite guide light along their lengths like ﬁbers in
a faceplate. (Courtesy Dan Garlick, from G. Donald Garlick and W. Barclay
Kamp, ‘‘The strange optical properties of ulexite,’’ Journal of Geological
Education 39, pp. 398–402, 1991)
Some applications were quite speciﬁc. Lured to IBM by a handsome salary
offer after earning America’s ﬁrst doctorate in ﬁber optics from Rochester,66
Bob Potter put ﬁbers to work reading the punched paper cards that symbolized
computers in the 1960s. Early card readers used an array of 12 small and
short-lived ‘‘grain of wheat’’ bulbs, one to illuminate each row of holes in the
moving card. Potter replaced them with a ﬁber bundle that collected light
from one long-lived bulb and split into 12 smaller bundles, one going to each
hole. Before it became the ﬁrst ﬁber-optic system to march into obsolescence,
it earned American Optical some money on its ﬁber-optic investment.
Flexible bundles soon spread beyond medicine. American Optical developed
bundles 9 and 15 feet long for NASA testing of the Saturn boosters used in
the Apollo program. An American security agency investigated ﬂexible bun-
dles for surveillance.67

99 PERCENT PERSPIRATION
75
Other developers tried less serious uses like decorative lamps, where a bun-
dle of plastic ﬁbers splays out sparkling light at their tips. Will Hicks threaded
plastic ﬁbers through a plastic Christmas tree, trying to sell them as decora-
tions at a trade show in New York. When a potential customer visiting his
hotel room asked if the ﬁber was ﬁreproof, Hicks lit a match to see—and
ignited both the tree and the ﬁbers, getting himself tossed out of the hotel.
Nobody gave much thought to communicating through optical ﬁbers, al-
though the invention of the laser in 1960 brought optical communications
into the spotlight. It was intuitively obvious to any physicist worth his salt
that no solid material could be as clear as air, and communications should
go through the clearest material possible. Hicks made some rough calcula-
tions, but the results were discouraging; other frontiers seemed much more
promising. He didn’t realize until later that he had made a big mistake.68

76
7
A Vision of the Future
Communicating with Light
(1880–1960)
In the region that includes the visual spectrum [and] the
near infra-red, there is about nine hundred million mega-
hertz of bandwidth waiting to be used. This is enough for
seven thousand million speech channels of present-day
standards, using a digital method such as PCM [pulse
code modulation]. . . . It would be enough too for the
PCM transmission of one and a half million individually
used TV channels, with color and stereo-type 3-D features,
of standards that the future will require. If the trafﬁc loaded
it at all fully, even one percent of this bandwidth per con-
ductor could easily make all lower frequency methods that
are now foreseeable as obsolete eventually as the stage-
coach.
—Alec Harley Reeves, 19691
A
t ﬁrst glance, communicating through optical ﬁbers seems simpler than
imaging. You only need a single ﬁber to carry a light signal between two
points. Yet anyone who looked closely at the idea in the late 1950s saw a
much different picture.
The ﬁrst and most obvious problem was transparency. Larry Curtiss, Will
Hicks, and the engineers who worked with them had made tremendous pro-
gress, but their clearest bundles carried images only a few yards or meters.
Six feet of ﬁber is more than enough to look into the stomach, but it may not

A VISION OF THE FUTURE
77
reach from your desk to the wall jack for a telephone line. No one knew how
to make ﬁbers carry light over the much greater distances needed for com-
munication lines.
A second problem was the tremendous success of radio and electronics
technology. Wires and radio links reached around the globe; satellites were
on the horizon. Optical communication through the air had been tried in the
nineteenth century but lost the race to the electrical telegraph and telephone.
Radio transmission was pushing to higher frequencies; semiconductors were
opening new possibilities in electronics. Optics seemed a backwater in com-
parison.
Moreover, communications engineers knew their task had become far
more complex than carrying voices from one room to the next, as Alexander
Graham Bell had done in 1876. Telephone signals traveled circuitous paths,
following wires from one home to a switching center, which routed them to
another switch, and another, until they ﬁnally reached their destination. The
system was as vast and complex as the network of tiny streams that ulti-
mately combine into the mighty Mississippi River. The switches represented
another crucial level of complexity, because they had to work together to
make connections between any pair of telephones. A whole infrastructure of
electrical, mechanical, and electronic technology supported the telephone sys-
tem and seemed destined to dominate in the future.
You had to be a little crazy to challenge that conventional wisdom, and
Alec Harley Reeves had a dash of the requisite madness about him. He was
an idealistic and eccentric British bachelor whose hobby was investigating
the paranormal. Yet he was not just another dotty, aging gentleman. The
cognoscenti of communications knew him as a genuine visionary, an intuitive
engineer who had seen the potential of digital electronics in the 1930s. In
the 1950s, Reeves started looking to light. Initially, ﬁber optics were not part
of the picture.
An Array of Pipes and Switches
The job of the telephone network is to carry signals from your phone to any
other phone. In recent years, the network has expanded to carry many signals
besides voices, and mobile as well as ﬁxed phones, but the principles remain
the same. The network that does the job is, in essence, an array of pipes and
switches. The pipes carry the signals from point to point; the switches direct
the signals. You need both pipes and switches to have a working phone sys-
tem. Either one or both can be bottlenecks that limit how well the system
operates.
When the phone system began, telephone companies ran wires from every
phone to a central ‘‘ofﬁce’’ where people did the switching needed to complete
calls. Operators sat at switchboards with arrays of holes, one for each phone,
and people signaled them when they wanted to place a call. The operator
responded by connecting an instrument to the hole leading to the caller’s

78
CITY OF LIGHT
phone, and asking for the phone number being called. Then the operator
plugged the proper wires into the corresponding holes on the switchboard
and listened to see if the person on the other end picked up the phone. This
worked for a town with only a few phones, but it didn’t scale very well. Think
of it as a manual system, like making calculations by writing numbers on
pieces of paper.
As the number of phones grew, phone companies added more operators
and switchboards. They also set up extra ofﬁces or switching centers to serve
different parts of larger cities. To complete calls from one part of town to
another, the operator would patch a call through to a second central ofﬁce,
where another operator would make the connection. The same principle
worked for long distance.
The more phones, the more complex the network grew and the more
operators were needed. Eventually, telephone engineers started to replace op-
erators with mechanical switches that moved in response to electrical signals,
making and breaking connections. A simple switch might rotate to one of ten
positions (the digits on a dial) and stay in that position while the next switch
in line rotated to the proper position. One of the most popular switches was
designed by a Kansas City undertaker, Almon B. Strowger, who wanted to
automate the phone system because he feared that operators were routing
business elsewhere.2 Dial phones automated the system, the click of each digit
of rotation telling the mechanical switch to take another step. Think of me-
chanical switches as adding machines, clanking, chattering, and clunking
away to route phone signals.
Expansion of the phone system meant more people could be calling from
one town to the next at the same time. That required ever bigger ‘‘pipes’’ to
carry more and more signals between local switching ofﬁces. The more trafﬁc,
the bigger the pipe was needed. Switches were expensive, so they were used
only where trafﬁc was heavy and the task not too complex. All long-distance
calls had to be placed through operators until long-distance direct dialing was
introduced in the 1950s,3 and for many years afterward smaller towns still
routed long-distance calls through operators.
At the same time, phone companies were developing all-electronic switches
that routed signals without mechanical motion. Mechanical switches had sim-
ply reached their own limits; solid ranks of them ﬁlled brick buildings in town
after town across the country, and they couldn’t keep up with system growth.
The search for all-electronic switches led Bell Laboratories to develop the tran-
sistor, which not only could amplify signals, but also could turn them ‘‘off’’
and ‘‘on’’ in response to a control input. That let transistor circuits serve the
same function as electromechanical switches. Put enough circuits together
and you have a special-purpose computer that decodes the numbers you dial
and routes your phone signals accordingly. These electronic switches are in-
deed computers, far more powerful than the electromechanical switches that
were the adding machines of the telephone world.

A VISION OF THE FUTURE
79
The Quest for Capacity
Both the switches and the pipes determine the capacity of a telephone system.
Reeves focused on developing a new family of pipes with higher capacity.
Engineers had been heading in the same direction for decades, although they
didn’t always express their goals in those terms. Two trends pushed the de-
mand for higher capacity. One was the sheer volume of trafﬁc; the other was
the shift toward carrying signals that carried more information and thus
needed more capacity per signal. The voices carried on a telephone line rep-
resented more information than the dots and dashes that represented letters
in the telegrapher’s Morse code. The tiny black-and-white pictures John Logie
Baird and Francis Jenkins sent over their ﬁrst television transmitters carried
more information than voices. Standard color television channels carry more
information than those ﬁrst television transmissions.
Even back in the Victorian era, engineers tried to pack as much informa-
tion as they could onto a single communications line. The ﬁrst electrical
telegraphs could carry only one set of dots and dashes along their wires at a
time. As telegraph trafﬁc increased, engineers realized it would be much
cheaper to send multiple signals down the wire than to string more wires. A
host of inventors turned to the task of multiplexing telegraph signals; among
them was Alexander Graham Bell, who extended his ideas to sending voices
along wires and made the telephone.4 As telephone service spread and forests
of overhead wires threatened to darken cities, engineers invented ways to
send multiple conversations through one set of wires.
Along the way, engineers developed a framework that helped them un-
derstand the process of communication, and how to extend their technology.
A simple telegraph works by letting current ﬂow through a wire for short
(dot) and long (dash) periods. Thus, the telegraph key modulates the current.
Step back, and you see a more general process—a signal that carries infor-
mation modulates a steady ‘‘carrier’’ that can be an electrical current, an
audio tone, a radio wave, or a beam of light (ﬁgure 7-1). In a telephone, a
voice modulates the electrical current, which varies at the same frequency as
the voice.5
At ﬁrst, the carrier was a steady electric current. Then engineers realized
they also could modulate the intensity of a wave. An oscillator generated a
particular frequency, while a separate signal modulated the strength of the
carrier at that frequency. This is the basis of AM (amplitude-modulated) radio
transmission. Later, engineers discovered they could modulate the frequency
of a radio signal, used in FM (frequency-modulated) radio and television
broadcasting.
The transmission capacity or ‘‘bandwidth’’ of a system depends on the
frequency of the carrier; the higher the frequency, the greater its bandwidth.
Since radio transmission began, engineers have moved to higher and higher
frequencies to increase transmission bandwidth. They started at frequencies
of thousands or tens of thousands of hertz (cycles per second), then moved

80
CITY OF LIGHT
Figure 7-1: Modulation of light waves.
to millions of hertz, megahertz. By World War II, they were testing microwave
frequencies, at billions of hertz or, equivalently, gigahertz.
As Alec Reeves watched the radio spectrum grow crowded in the 1950s,
he considered the possibility of moving to even higher frequencies. He knew
that radio waves and microwaves are part of the broad spectrum of electro-
magnetic waves. All are essentially the same phenomenon, waves composed
of oscillating electric and magnetic ﬁelds.6 Their properties differ with their
frequency. Move beyond the microwave spectrum and you reach millimeter
waves, infrared radiation, and visible light; ultraviolet light, X rays, and
gamma rays have even higher frequencies. For visible light, the frequencies
approach 900 trillion hertz, or 900 million megahertz in Reeves’s terms. He
estimated maximum possible bandwidth as roughly the carrier frequency, and
that meant visible light had a truly staggering capacity.
The years around 1960 were the heyday of technological optimism, when
the space frontier seemed within reach, nuclear power promised a glittering
future, and pollution was unknown. Any down-to-earth engineer could have
done the same calculations, but it took a visionary like Reeves to believe them.
Optical Telegraphs and Photophones
When Reeves turned to light, he was putting a new spin on an old idea. The
ﬁrst telegraphs were optical, part of a system developed in France at the end
of the eighteenth century and copied by many other countries but now largely

A VISION OF THE FUTURE
81
forgotten. The optical telegraph was essentially a series of relay towers, where
operators peered through telescopes to spot semaphore signals from a tower
on one side, then displayed the same signals for the next operator to read.
The signal schemes were ingenious, but the technology was crude—men
looked through telescopes and pulled ropes to set ﬂaps and ﬂags.7 Labor-
intensive, expensive to run, and unusable at night or in bad weather, the
optical telegraph was replaced by the electrical telegraph. (Semaphores and
signal ﬂags survived to send messages between ships at sea.) Electricity could
send telegraph signals farther through wires than people could see through
the air.
The telephone followed over wires, but after the dust and the patent law-
suits had settled, Alexander Graham Bell wasn’t quite satisﬁed with the re-
sults. He wanted to send signals without wires, and at the time the only
wireless transmission he could imagine was by light. On an earlier trip to
England, Bell had seen that exposure to light changed how much current
could pass through the element selenium. In early 1880, he realized that
selenium might detect changes in a beam of light modulated by voices. He
doubted the idea would prove practical but was nonetheless intrigued.8 Tho-
mas Edison also envisioned a wireless optical telephone about the same time
but never built one, perhaps because he was more practical.9
Within a month, Bell demonstrated his ‘‘photophone,’’ which operated by
focusing sunlight onto the surface of a ﬂat mirror that vibrated when moved
by sound waves from voices (ﬁgure 7-2). The vibrations modulated the
amount of sunlight reﬂected onto a selenium cell in a telephone receiver
circuit, reproducing the voice. The excited Bell wrote: ‘‘I have heard articulate
speech produced by sunlight! I have heard a ray of the sun laugh and cough
and sing. . . . I have been able to hear a shadow, and I have even perceived
by ear the passage of a cloud across the sun’s disk.’’10 He dispatched his ﬁrst
photophone to the Smithsonian Institution in a sealed box, and packed off
another several weeks later after reaching a distance of 700 feet (213 meters).
He proudly described his invention to the then-young American Association
for the Advancement of Science at the end of August.11
Yet the photophone came to naught. Wires were messy, but they carried
signals in fair weather or foul, day or night, farther than Bell could send light.
He talked some about the idea in later years but never worked seriously on
it again, and it was soon forgotten.12 In the decades that followed, the only
serious work on optical communications was by military agencies worried
about enemy eavesdropping. Those systems never got very far.13
The Triumph of Radio
It was radio that ﬁlled the need for wireless transmission and it did the job
so well that dictionaries still deﬁne wireless as another word for radio. The
ﬁrst radio signals were sparks spanning so many frequencies that they blocked
each other, sometimes with disastrous consequences for ships frantically tele-

82
CITY OF LIGHT
Figure 7-2: Alexander Graham Bell’s photophone modulated reﬂected sunlight
with sound vibrations, then detected the sound by using the light to illuminate a
piece of selenium. It carried voices without wires, but not very far. (Courtesy
Lucent Technologies)
graphing ‘‘SOS’’ for help. Progress came with the advent of electronic circuits
tuned to oscillate at speciﬁc frequencies so that several transmitters could
share the spectrum.
Radio began at low frequencies, then moved relentlessly higher. In the
early 1920s, Hansell helped build the ﬁrst radio transmitter to send voices
reliably across the Atlantic.14 It oscillated 57,000 times a second—57 kilo-
hertz in radio parlance—generating what were called ‘‘long waves’’ because
each one stretched 5.26 kilometers (3.27 miles). At night, both the iono-
sphere and the ocean reﬂect long waves, so they could carry whole speeches
across the Atlantic, something not possible with earlier transmitters.15
Vacuum tubes soon made it possible to generate higher frequencies re-
ﬂected better by the ionosphere. Soon after Hansell established the RCA Rocky

A VISION OF THE FUTURE
83
Point Laboratory in 1925, he built a 20-megahertz (million-cycle) transmitter
emitting ‘‘short waves’’ 15 meters (50 feet) long. Not only did the signals
reach South America in daytime, but the short waves did not require the
gigantic antennas needed for long waves, so the short-wave transmitter cost
a mere $15,000, compared to $1.5 million for a long-wave transmitter that
didn’t work as well.16 International broadcasters and amateur radio operators
still transmit short-wave signals around the world. Higher frequencies fol-
lowed as electronic circuits improved, and radio broadcasts claimed chunks
of the spectrum.
As electronic circuits improved, telephone engineers learned how to mul-
tiplex many voices, using each one to modulate a different frequency, and
sending them all through the same wires. Multiplexed 24-phone channels
require 24 times the bandwidth of a standard phone line, but it’s much
cheaper than stringing 24 separate pairs of wires. Further improvements in
electronics allowed multiplexing hundreds of telephone channels. National
telecommunications networks spread around the world, often carrying the
voices for radio networks as well as telephones.
Increasing demand, and prospects for future television systems, pushed
engineers to ever higher frequencies. Above about 10 megahertz, the only
reliable radio transmission is in the line of sight, so Hansell’s team at Rocky
Point developed chains of radio towers to relay experimental television signals.
They started at 80 megahertz and by 1939 had reached 500 megahertz.17
Although they built the system for television experiments, the same equip-
ment could carry radio and telephone signals.
Radio frequencies passed a billion hertz (a gigahertz) with the development
of microwave radar during World War II. However, ordinary vacuum tubes
were not fast enough to amplify gigahertz signals. Reaching those frequencies
required complex new tubes, called klystrons, magnetrons, and traveling-
wave tubes, that were much bulkier and costlier than ordinary thumb-sized
vacuum tubes.
The continued spread of telephones and the advent of commercial televi-
sion broadcasting put new demands on the postwar communications net-
work. After the war, chains of microwave relay towers operating at a few
gigahertz (billion hertz) sprouted across Europe and America. They were the
biggest information pipelines money could buy in the 1950s, but the towers
could be no more than about 50 miles (80 kilometers) apart or the Earth’s
curvature would block the microwave beam.
To bridge the Atlantic, an international consortium of public and private
telephone companies turned to coaxial cable, a copper wire separated from a
metal sheath by a plastic insulator, like modern television cables. Submarine
telegraph cables had been in service across the Atlantic since the 1860s, but
they did not need ampliﬁers. Telephone cables did, and only in the 1950s
were electronic ampliﬁers up to the job of working on the ocean ﬂoor for the
25-year period needed to make the cables economical to operate. The con-
sortium spent $37 million on undersea equipment to replace radio telephones
dating from the 1920s and 1930s. AT&T supplied the cable from Scotland to

84
CITY OF LIGHT
Newfoundland, while Standard Telephones and Cables built the shorter seg-
ment from Newfoundland to Nova Scotia. The new cable, called TAT-1, could
carry 36 simultaneous conversations across the Atlantic when it started serv-
ice in 1956. Work started almost immediately on a second transatlantic cable,
linking Newfoundland to France.18
The growth of television and telephone trafﬁc on land threatened to choke
microwave relay towers in densely populated areas. Coaxial cables were an
alternative where there wasn’t room for microwave towers, but their capacity
also was limited. Color television was coming; phone companies expected
video telephones to follow. Communication networks needed a new genera-
tion of technology with even higher capacity. Most engineers thought the
next logical step was higher microwave frequencies. Initially Alec Reeves was
among them.
A Man Ahead of His Time
Born March 10, 1902, in Redhill, Surrey, Reeves began his career as elec-
tronics was starting its spectacular rise after World War I. Like Hansell,
Reeves spent virtually his whole career at a single large communications
company, a typical pattern for successful engineers of their generation. During
that career, Reeves accumulated over a hundred patents.
Some engineers ponder with mathematical formulas, but Reeves had an
intuitive feel for electronics. He sometimes built complex mechanical contri-
vances to demonstrate his inventions. His vision was not unerring and often
ahead of its time, but the International Telegraph and Telephone Corporation
recognized his gift and put him in charge of exploratory research at its Stan-
dard Telecommunication Laboratories north of London. His work was not
day-to-day paperwork and administration, but developing ideas and pro-
grams. His inﬂuence was strongest behind the scenes, where one colleague
recalls ‘‘he could always get someone to pull strings.’’19
Reeves had earned that inﬂuence. Working at ITT’s Paris laboratory in
1937, he had devised an elegant and powerful technique to keep noise from
building up in a long telephone line. He proposed measuring signal strength
at regular intervals—eight thousand times a second—and converting that
measured value to a number between 0 and 31, depending on its strength.
Those numbers could be transmitted in digital form, as a series of ﬁve binary
pulses separated by 1/40,000th of a second, and converted back into speech
at the other end.20
The idea grew from a crucial insight. Electronic noise blends with signals
transmitted in the continuously varying analog format of speech so the two
can’t be separated, and the noise becomes part of the signal. Add too much
noise, and you can no longer understand the words. However, electronics can
recognize a series of digital pulses in a background sea of noise. Convert the
pulses carrying the digitized sound back into an analog signal, and the noise
is gone.

A VISION OF THE FUTURE
85
Engineers call that technique pulse code modulation, and today it’s the
standard way to transmit digitized voice and video signals around the world.
Yet when Reeves ﬁled his patent application, the state of the telephone art
was big black Bakelite phones with rotary dials, connected by clattering me-
chanical switches and banks of switchboards into which operators plugged
wires by hand. The ﬁrst transistor was a decade in the future; the vacuum-
tube electronics of the time were too slow to make Reeves’s idea work. ITT
never collected a penny in royalties on his patent, but they recognized his
genius.
Reeves’s colleagues fondly remember him as unfailingly open and honest,
even ‘‘saintly.’’21 He served as a scoutmaster, worked for charities, and tried
to help delinquent boys. He also was eccentric. He worked from midday to 3
A.M., often in a spare bedroom that served as a home laboratory, and would
call co-workers at 2 A.M. to share his bright ideas. He sometimes appeared at
work wearing a tie in place of a belt, and a crocodile clip—used to clamp
electronic wires together temporarily—as a tie clasp.22 In his spare time, he
experimented with the paranormal, trying to understand dowsing, mental
telepathy, and psychokinesis.23 He was not a true believer, but his restless
mind liked to explore unconventional ideas.
Invading German troops chased Reeves from Paris in 1940. Back in En-
gland he was slow to embrace war work, but eventually devised the Oboe
radar system, the most precise tool for guiding Allied bombers to their tar-
gets.24 After the war, ITT moved him to its new Standard Telecommunication
Laboratories, a subsidiary of Standard Telephones and Cables. At STL, Reeves
developed a family of semiconductor devices, later eclipsed by transistors,25
and remained heavily involved in military systems. He also looked to the
future of civilian communications.
The Pipe Dream
By 1950, the telecommunications establishment thought the next logical step
was to use microwave frequencies above 10 gigahertz, called millimeter waves
because their waves are millimeters long. Wires were the local streets serving
home and ofﬁce phones; coaxial cables and microwaves were the main roads
linking local telephone switching ofﬁces in urban areas. But long-distance
trafﬁc was growing steadily, and the industry wanted to replace its aging
microwave relays with a higher-capacity intercity backbone network, like
America wanted high-speed interstate highways to carry trucks and cars
across the country. Multiplying the carrier frequency by a factor of 10 prom-
ised the extra communications capacity, as well as beams that could be fo-
cused more tightly toward relay receivers.
Unfortunately, the shorter the wavelength, the more often weather gets in
the way. Radio waves an inch or more long don’t see clouds, rain, and fog,
but water droplets can block millimeter waves. That wouldn’t work for phone
companies; their customers don’t want to wait until the rain stops to call

86
CITY OF LIGHT
long distance. They decided to shield millimeter waves inside hollow pipes
called waveguides.
The workings of waveguides are more subtle than those of William
Wheeler’s light pipes or early optical ﬁbers. Waveguides started as the sort of
abstract problem that intrigues theoretical physicists facile with advanced cal-
culus. They wondered what would happen to an electromagnetic wave inside
various structures, such as long tubes made either of electrically conductive
materials or of nonconductive insulators.
Waveguide behavior depends on ‘‘boundary conditions’’—how the walls
affect the electric and magnetic ﬁelds that make up radio waves, light, and
other electromagnetic waves. Conductive metal walls reﬂect electromagnetic
waves, so metal tubes guide waves along their lengths. Grind through the
mathematics, and you ﬁnd that waveguides don’t work for wavelengths
longer than a particular cutoff value. In essence, those waves don’t ﬁt inside,
although the details are more complicated and depend on the waveguide
shape. The minimum wavelength is half the wider dimension of rectangular
waveguides, and a little longer for round ones. Filling the waveguide with
plastic or something else more substantial than air increases the cutoff wave-
length further.
This restriction meant that waveguides were strictly of academic interest
in the early days of radio. A 100-megahertz signal has waves three meters
long, so it would require an impractical 1.5-meter (5-foot) waveguide. Only
when engineers pushed frequencies to several gigahertz, where wavelengths
are ten centimeters (four inches) or less, did waveguides become practical.
The technology spread quickly with the development of radar during World
War II, and with postwar advances in microwave communications, making
waveguides seem attractive for the new generation of high-capacity long-
distance systems.
In America, Bell Telephone Laboratories settled on circular hollow wave-
guides with inner diameter of ﬁve centimeters (two inches) to carry signals
at 60 gigahertz, with wavelength of ﬁve millimeters (0.2 inch). In 1950,
management put Stewart E. Miller in charge of millimeter waveguide devel-
opment.26 In England, Harold E. M. Barlow, a professor at University College
London, proposed a slightly different circular millimeter waveguide.27 The
British Post Ofﬁce, which ran the country’s phone system, began work at its
Dollis Hill Research Laboratory in London. Standard Telecommunication Lab-
oratories quickly followed, the ﬁrst British company in the ﬁeld.
The technical challenges didn’t daunt mid-century providers of telephone
service. They were government or private monopolies, and regulations as-
sured that customers or the government would pay the bill. AT&T led the
way in America, generously funding basic research at handsome Bell Labs
facilities scattered about suburban New Jersey. In 1956, Bell Labs put the
new technology to the test at its Holmdel development lab, burying 3.2 kil-
ometers (2 miles) of a millimeter waveguide made by embedding a tightly
wound coil of copper wire in protective plastic. The experiment conﬁrmed one
growing concern—signals leaked from any kinks or bends, even small ones

A VISION OF THE FUTURE
87
caused by uneven settling of the soil. Like a high-speed railroad line or inter-
state highway, it required broad, sweeping curves. That would make instal-
lation costly, but AT&T could accept that. Waveguides promised tremendous
capacity, and they were to run mostly between cities, not within them.
After two years of tests, Bell Labs settled on a design for 50.8 millimeter
(2-inch) waveguides each carrying 80,000 conversations at frequencies be-
tween 35 and 75 gigahertz. The signals would be digitized and transmitted
by pulse-code modulation, as Reeves had proposed 21 years earlier.28 The
overall data rate would be a then-staggering 160 million bits per second.
Meanwhile, Bell Labs was also pursuing another long-distance alternative,
the communications satellite. Arthur C. Clarke, a British engineer and writer,
had come up with the idea during World War II as an alternative to radio
relays and coaxial cables. Both of those systems required chains of repeaters
to span long distances. However, Clarke realized that a satellite with an orbit
lasting exactly one day would stay continually over the same place on the
equator, so a transmitter on board could relay signals between any two points
on its side of the Earth.29 John R. Pierce, a top Bell Labs communications
engineer who also worked on millimeter waveguides, picked up on the idea
in the 1950s and pushed it as the Space Age emerged. Like Clarke, Pierce
had published science-ﬁction stories, but Pierce was primarily an engineer
and saw the practical potential of satellite communications, which became
the ﬁrst important civilian use of space technology.30
Standard Telecommunication Labs concentrated on millimeter wavegui-
des, but Reeves was not impressed by early trials. Congested Britain didn’t
have room to bury pipes with sweeping curves, small irregularities caused
disturbing losses, and no technology was available for the ampliﬁers needed
to compensate for the inevitable losses. He didn’t like the costly, brute-force
approach, so he considered a bolder alternative—moving all the way to light.
The gap between microwave and optical frequencies is a factor of 100,000.
That seemed overwhelming to most, but Reeves realized the difference was
the same as the gap from long waves to microwaves he had seen crossed in
his 35 years of engineering. He had a hunch light would work better, and
he was a man who listened to his hunches because they often were right.31
Reeves hoped that mental telepathy might be the ultimate communications
technology,32 but he didn’t know how to tame that, so light would have to
sufﬁce.
A Pioneering Effort
Reeves knew little about light until STL landed a military contract in the ﬁeld
in 1952. The contract required a working knowledge of optics, so he hired
Murray Ramsay, a young physics graduate from University College London,
who had been a scout in Reeves’s troop before the war. The ever-curious
Reeves pumped the young Ramsay for information and pondered the pros-
pects for optical communications in his smoke-ﬁlled ofﬁce at STL. He tested

88
CITY OF LIGHT
ways to modulate and guide light from special high-performance lamps.33
About 1958, he assembled a small team to study optical communications,
including Ramsay, an older engineer named Charles C. Eaglesﬁeld, and four
others who reported to Len Lewin, a senior manager.34 Reeves monitored their
work and added his own ideas, although he had many other projects to dis-
tract him.
The millimeter waveguide project continued under Lewin, developing a 7-
centimeter (2.8-inch) waveguide Barlow had proposed. In 1958, Lewin put
that project under Antoni E. Karbowiak, a microwave engineer who had
earned a doctorate under Barlow. Born in 1923 in Poland, Karbowiak fought
with British troops during World War II, earning British residence and an
education.35 Quiet and reserved, he combined a mastery of mathematicalwave-
guide analysis and a fertile imagination with a solid physical intuition missing
in many theorists.36 His grasp of advanced mathematics complemented nicely
Reeves’s less mathematical intuition, enthusiasm, and drive.
Working in the same department as the millimeter waveguide project, the
little optics team began thinking of optical waveguides. That was an inno-
vation. Since the days of Alexander Graham Bell, most people had automat-
ically assumed optical communication would go through open air. Yet living
near London, notorious for its murky smogs, the STL team needed only look
out their windows to see the problems of sending light through the atmo-
sphere.
A few people had had similar ideas before, but none had gotten far. Both
Bell Labs37 and RCA38 had patented schemes for sending light signals through
transparent rods or hollow pipes, but neither did anything with the idea.39
At the end of the war, R. V. L. Hartley, a Bell Labs scientist, concluded that
transparent rods did not transmit light well enough for communications, and
that hollow reﬂective metal pipes were too sensitive to bends.40 Those were
reasonable conclusions in 1945, but times were changing.
Light Pipes
At STL, Eaglesﬁeld proposed a disarmingly simple idea: an optical ‘‘pipeline’’
of one-inch steel pipe coated inside with silver, the most reﬂective metal avail-
able. ‘‘It is a little strange that this subject has received apparently no pub-
lished treatment,’’ he wrote,41 evidently unaware of the patent William
Wheeler had received 80 years earlier.
On paper the idea looked good. If light passing down the pipe spread out
at an angle of no more than half a degree, in theory only about 0.05 percent
would be lost at each reﬂection. Eaglesﬁeld calculated the loss in terms of
decibels, a logarithmic scale handy for measuring loss because you can add
the decibel losses of two segments to get total loss, or multiply the transmis-
sion distance by the loss per unit length to get total loss. The lower the loss
in decibels, the better the transmission line (see box, pages 115–116). Eagles-
ﬁeld calculated that loss should be 2.5 decibels per mile, meaning 56 percent

A VISION OF THE FUTURE
89
Figure 7-3: A confocal waveguide guided light from lens to lens without hitting
the walls of the pipe.
of the light that entered a one-mile length would emerge from the other end.
(In metric terms, loss was 1.6 decibels per kilometer, and 70 percent would
emerge from a one-kilometer length.) That was about 10 times better than
the theoretical loss of Wheeler-style light pipes under the same conditions.42
Eaglesﬁeld estimated his optical pipeline could carry light around very gradual
bends, with a radius of about half a mile (0.8 kilometer).
To test the idea, STL assembled 35 four-foot (1.2-meter) segments, coated
inside with epoxy resin to provide a smooth base for the silver ﬁlm. After
considerable trouble joining the pipes, STL technicians stretched them along
eight concrete posts sunk deep into the ground to give a sound footing. The
assembly was within 1/16 inch (1.6 millimeters) of being perfectly straight,
but the results were disappointing. Eaglesﬁeld had predicted 97 percent of the
light should emerge after a 276-foot (84-meter) round trip, but the measured
amount was under 9 percent, corresponding to a loss of more than 200
decibels a mile.43 That meant that only 1020 of the input light would have
emerged from a mile-long pipe. Eaglesﬁeld complained that the measurements
didn’t do his idea justice, and a few years later Czech engineers did somewhat
better.44 However, Reeves held out little hope and went looking for other
ideas.
One came from Ramsay, who suggested arranging a series of lenses along
the inside of a pipe such that each one focused an image of the previous lens
onto the next lens (ﬁgure 7-3). Such a ‘‘confocal lens waveguide’’ could relay
light along the pipe such that none was lost by hitting the sides.45
The little team also began looking at optical analogs of a less common
kind of microwave waveguide made out of a nonconductive material like glass
or plastic. The edges of such ‘‘dielectric’’ materials also can guide electro-
magnetic waves. The materials absorb microwaves, so thick rods that guide
microwaves inside themselves do not work well. However, in the late 1940s,
engineers at RCA Laboratories in Princeton found they could do much better
with plastic rods thinner than about a quarter of the microwave wave-
length.46 In that case, most of the microwaves travel along the outside of the
waveguide, not inside where the material can absorb it. That means that thin
plastic waveguides have very low loss, but only if they are perfectly straight;
like many other waveguides, they radiate energy at bends. This was a serious
practical problem at microwave frequencies, but it didn’t keep STL engineers
from considering making dielectric waveguides of transparent materials for
optical communications.

90
CITY OF LIGHT
Fibers as Dielectric Waveguides
To a theorist, an optical ﬁber is a dielectric waveguide for light. The process
classical optics sees as total internal reﬂection is the optical equivalent of the
process that guides microwaves along the inside of a thick plastic rod. Brian
O’Brien probably was the ﬁrst to recognize an optical ﬁber as a waveguide,
but he never settled down to document the idea. In practice, it didn’t matter
much as long as the ﬁber core was much bigger than the wavelength of light.
The traditional optical view of total internal reﬂection works, and the concept
is simpler.
Differences arise when ﬁber cores are shrunk close to the wavelength of
light, restricting the number of modes, or paths the light can follow through
the core. That didn’t happen until the late 1950s, when Will Hicks wondered
how ﬁne he could stretch optical ﬁbers in a fused bundle. It was a natural
experiment to try, and one with practical import because the core size limits
resolution of a ﬁber bundle (bundled ﬁbers use very thin claddings). The
smaller the cores, the ﬁner the details you can see. As Hicks shrank the cores,
he saw a strange phenomenon: Geometric patterns and different colors began
to appear in individual ﬁber cores. He eventually decided it must be a wave-
guide effect but didn’t settle down to document it before he quit American
Optical.
The topic was still a hot one at American Optical in early 1959, when
Steve MacNeille, Walt Siegmund, and Lewis Hyde interviewed Elias Snitzer
over lunch. Siegmund pulled out a photograph and asked the young physicist
if he could explain it. Snitzer asked what it was and grew excited after Sieg-
mund said it was very ﬁne ﬁbers. ‘‘That’s waveguide modes in the visible
region of the spectrum. I don’t believe anybody’s ever seen that before!’’ His
response passed the test, helping convince MacNeille to hire him despite a
blot on his record. The Lowell Institute of Technology had recently ﬁred him
because he refused to cooperate with an investigation of left-wing student
politics by the House un-American Activities Committee.47
Snitzer recognized the phenomenon because he had worked on microwave
systems. It appears when core diameters approach the wavelength of light,
leaving only a few modes, which form curved geometric patterns inside the
ﬁber cores. The patterns and colors varied from ﬁber to ﬁber because slight
differences in core shape and diameter gave them different mode patterns.
Shrink the ﬁbers far enough, and only one mode remains. Once he started
work at American Optical, Snitzer teamed with Hicks to experiment on ﬁber
modes, analyze their structure in detail, and report the results.48
American Optical was not in the communication business, but Snitzer and
Hicks knew microwave waveguides were used in telecommunications. Before
they published anything, they applied for a patent, suggesting that the ability
to transmit light in ‘‘separate well-deﬁned and readily detectable and distin-
guishable electromagnetic modes . . . may be used advantageously in various
ways’’ to transmit ‘‘data, information, signals and the like.’’49 They didn’t
worry too much about how far their ﬁbers transmitted light; their main con-

A VISION OF THE FUTURE
91
cern was controlling the mode structure, because that was important in
microwaves.
Word about ﬁber modes spread quickly. Narinder Kapany duplicated the
experiment, and Scientiﬁc American used his photograph of the effect on its
November 1960 cover.50 However, the idea of ﬁber optic communications
stalled in America. Kapany’s article didn’t mention communications. Hicks
had a business to run; he turned to other ideas after a rough calculation
indicated atoms would scatter too much light for practical communications
even if the glass was perfectly clear.51 American Optical lacked the clean room
needed to make ultrapure materials, and Snitzer’s attention was diverted to
a hot new idea—the laser. That left the matter of ﬁber-optic waveguide com-
munications to Alec Reeves and the others at STL.

92
8
The Laser Stimulates the
Emission of New Ideas
(1960–1969)
Usable communication channels in the electromagnetic
spectrum may be extended by the development of an ex-
perimental
optical-frequency
ampliﬁer
announced
by
Hughes Aircraft a few days ago.
—Electronics magazine, July 22, 19601
E
li Snitzer was not the only person distracted by the laser. Its invention was
big news in 1960. Military planners and science-ﬁction fans saw it as the
ray gun of their dreams, but engineers and physicists recognized it as the ﬁrst
optical oscillator, and the ﬁrst practical source of coherent light.2 They im-
mediately recognized its development as a milestone on the road to optical
communications, although it was far from clear where the road was going.
Radio engineers use oscillators to generate the pure carrier frequencies that
are modulated to transmit radio signals. Radio oscillators drive antennas so
they radiate coherent radio waves, which share the same frequency and stay
in phase with one another, like a troop of identical soldiers marching in step
on parade. That frequency must be pure so that radio receivers can essentially
cancel it out to recover the transmitted signal.
When Reeves started looking at optical communications, there were no
practical sources of coherent light. Light bulbs, stars, and virtually all other
common sources emit light spanning much of the spectrum that spreads un-
synchronized across the universe like a crowd leaving a baseball stadium after
the game is over. You can switch a light bulb off and on, but it doesn’t

THE LASER STIMULATES THE EMISSION OF NEW IDEAS
93
generate a very ‘‘clean’’ signal. To realize the tremendous theoretical capacity
of optical communications, you need an oscillator that generates light. Back
in 1951, Bell Labs had concluded that the only way optics could match the
capacity of the millimeter waveguide was with a coherent light source.3 With
no coherent light in sight, Bell Labs pursued the millimeter waveguide. The
emergence of the laser got Bell Labs and many others to take optical com-
munications seriously.
First-Generation Lasers
The laser was years in the making, and like many other new ideas of the
time, it grew from microwave research. Charles H. Townes, then a physics
professor at Columbia University, took the ﬁrst step in 1951 when he realized
how to make a new type of coherent microwave oscillator. He called it the
‘‘maser,’’ for microwave ampliﬁcation by the stimulated emission of radia-
tion.4 His idea was to collect a group of molecules excited so that they pos-
sessed extra energy, and stimulate them to emit that extra energy in the form
of microwaves. Three years later, he had a working maser.
Other masers followed, and Townes realized he could expand the principle
to make an optical oscillator. He teamed with his brother-in-law Arthur L.
Schawlow,5 then working at Bell Labs, to work out the details. Their theo-
retical proposal6 started a race to build the device, later christened the laser.
On May 16, 1960, Theodore Maiman won the race by ﬁring pulses of red
light from a small ruby cylinder at Hughes Research Laboratories in Malibu,
California.7 After the editors of Physical Review Letters summarily rejected
Maiman’s paper reporting his discovery,8 he ﬁred a 300-word letter to Nature,9
and Hughes called a press conference on July 7. Some observers were skep-
tical, but Schawlow soon duplicated Maiman’s feat from newspaper accounts.
The laser era was off and running.
Electronics magazine put communications at the top of its list of potential
uses for the new invention.10 Laser beams were focused much more tightly
than microwaves (a consequence of their shorter wavelength), so they looked
promising for sending signals long distances through space or the atmosphere.
Rudolf Kompfner, head of transmission research and director of Bell’s Craw-
ford Hill Laboratory, was quick to see the possibilities. In October, Electronics
showed two Bell Labs scientists ﬁring their new ruby laser through 25 miles
(40 kilometers) of clear air.11 In reality, the laser ﬁred only one pulse at a
time, so it could not send useful information, but the experiment showed that
the potential was there. So was the demand for communications, as the mi-
crowave spectrum and existing cables were ﬁlling. Millimeter waveguides
were set to be the next technological generation, but lasers might follow them
on the ground, and perhaps replace microwave links in space. Looking farther
into the future, Townes suggested interstellar communications might be pos-
sible with highly directional, high-power laser beams.12
First, however, scientists needed better lasers.

94
CITY OF LIGHT
Maiman used ruby because he understood its properties, but it is not an
ideal laser material. It only ﬁres pulses, and converts only a small fraction of
the input energy—supplied by a ﬂashlamp—into laser energy. Bell Labs
wanted a laser that oscillated continuously, emitting a steady light beam that
could be modulated with a signal like a radio carrier frequency. Bell had a
young Iranian-born physicist hard at work toward that goal, Ali Javan, who
had studied under Townes at Columbia.
Javan was trying to generate a laser beam by passing an electric current
through a gas. Others used the vapors of alkali metals like sodium and po-
tassium as the gas, but Javan picked the rare gases helium and neon, which
are simpler to study and much easier to handle. He ﬁlled glass tubes with
helium, to capture energy from electrons passing through the gas, and a dash
of neon, which borrowed energy from the helium and turned it into light. He
mounted highly reﬂective mirrors on both ends, with one allowing a small
fraction of light to escape. On a snowy Monday afternoon, December 12,
1960, he was elated when his helium-neon laser emitted an invisible infrared
beam at 1.15 micrometers.13 It was the ﬁrst laser to emit a continuous beam,
and the ﬁrst laser to operate in a gas. Management, which was growing
impatient, thought it was about time.
The helium-neon laser proved as important as Javan hoped; it soon became
the standard laboratory laser and remains the most common gas laser. How-
ever, it did need some modiﬁcations. Other Bell Labs scientists developed a
version that emitted at 633 nanometers in the red part of the spectrum. That
was much better for communication experiments, because the beam was vis-
ible as well as stable, and very coherent. Output powers were milliwatts to
tens of milliwatts, ﬁne for research; external devices could modulate the beam
by changing their transparency over time. Few developers thought the
helium-neon laser was ideal for communications, but they didn’t have ideal
millimeter-wave sources either, and they thought laser technology had plenty
of time to grow.
If they had an ideal laser, it was the solid-state semiconductor type, ﬁrst
demonstrated in the fall of 1962. The transistor age was on a roll; semicon-
ductors were swiftly replacing vacuum tubes in electronic circuits. But doubts
remained about how far semiconductor technology could go, and progress on
semiconductor lasers soon stalled, leaving the best devices able to operate for
only a short time at the 196C (321F) temperature of liquid nitrogen. A
few were used in experiments, but helium-neon lasers remained far more
practical.
Clouds in the Picture
Communications engineers started sending laser beams through the atmo-
sphere as soon as they got their hands on lasers. Air looked like an ideal

THE LASER STIMULATES THE EMISSION OF NEW IDEAS
95
transmission medium; the eye could see it was clear, and it carried radio and
microwave signals easily.
Experiments soon revealed it wasn’t quite as simple as pointing the pencil-
thin laser beam at a distant target. A couple of Bell Labs engineers hauled an
early ruby laser to the top of a microwave tower at Murray Hill, New Jersey,
and aimed it at the Holmdel lab 25 miles (40 kilometers) away, where a third
engineer watched a movie screen for signs of the red pulses. They hooked
up phone lines, and the two in the tower phoned their partner in Holmdel
each time they ﬁred the laser. ‘‘He didn’t see the pulse very often,’’ recalls
one.14
Helium-neon lasers followed as soon as they were available. Bell put one
on the roof of its main development building in Holmdel and another atop
the smaller and more research-oriented Crawford Hill Lab 1.6 miles (2.6 kil-
ometers) away. In clear weather, the red laser spot spread as wide as a dining-
room table on its journey and glowed like a ﬁreplace.15 Yet thick New Jersey
fogs blocked the beam when they rolled in from the shore.16 So did rain, snow,
sleet, and haze. It should not have been a surprise, but no one had thought
about it. Reference books gave no warning because scientists always had
measured air transmission in clear weather. No one had systematically stud-
ied how weather affected light transmission, much less laser beams, and most
Americans had yet to recognize air pollution.
Poor transmission in bad weather wasn’t a showstopper for all laser com-
munications. Some companies merely wanted to send laser beams between
buildings on opposite sides of a street; their signals didn’t have far to go, and
they could wait if they had to. Nor did it discourage NASA or the Air Force
from thinking of laser communications above the atmosphere. They had
money and energy to burn in the salad days of the space race, and hoped
tightly focused laser beams would be both more efﬁcient and more secure
than microwaves. (They eventually proved too narrow to hit distant receivers
reliably.)
However, unreliable transmission was a big issue for phone companies that
made network reliability a matter of pride—especially when convincing reg-
ulators to approve expensive new projects. AT&T wanted optical communi-
cation systems to be out of service no more than one hour per year.17 Early
tests showed that would not be easy in open air. Fog, rain, or snow could
attenuate a laser beam by more than a factor of one million over the 2.6
kilometers between Holmdel and Crawford Hill.18
British engineers, accustomed to murky air, were quicker to recognize the
problem. One military engineer bluntly told a 1964 conference: ‘‘The atmo-
sphere is completely inimical to laser transmission systems.’’19
Bell Labs didn’t give up as easily on air. As soon as they got the ﬁrst high-
power lasers, Bell researchers used them to burn holes through fog, but new
fog ﬁlled the holes as fast as the laser beam opened them.20 Fortunately, the
telephone monopoly had vast resources and applied some of them to an al-
ternative, optical counterparts of microwave and millimeter waveguides.

96
CITY OF LIGHT
Waveguides for Light
American research on optical waveguides began at the Army Electronics
Command in Fort Monmouth, New Jersey, about a half-hour drive from
Holmdel. It was the brainchild of Georg Goubau, a former engineering pro-
fessor at the University of Jena in Germany, who came to America after World
War II with German rocket scientists as part of Operation Paper Clip.21
Goubau began with what he called a ‘‘beam waveguide,’’ in which uni-
formly spaced lenses or iris-like openings guided a beam of coherent micro-
waves along a pipe. It was a subtle innovation that worked differently than
the usual waveguide. When people started talking about lasers in the late
1950s, Goubau realized his concept also should work for coherent light. He
ﬁrst tested it with millimeter waves in 1958, before any lasers were availa-
ble.22 When the laser arrived, he shifted his attention to the different scale of
optical wavelengths. (The version with lenses was equivalent to Ramsay’s
confocal lens waveguide in England.)
For his optical experiments, he built a beam waveguide inside six-inch (15-
centimeter) aluminum irrigation pipe that hung above ground. It stretched
970 meters, over half a mile, ‘‘the total length . . . of available real estate.’’23
Ten internal lenses relayed light from one lens to the next inside the guide,
but the beam did not follow the straight path it was supposed to. On clear
days, sunlight heated the pipe, creating a temperature gradient that bent the
beam off course. Army engineers tried mounting a smaller plastic pipe inside
the metal pipe, but eventually despaired, ‘‘it still appears questionable whether
operation during sunlight is possible or whether further shielding of the light
channel is required.’’24 Over the next couple of years, they managed to get
up to 80 percent of the optical signal through the pipe by pumping air out
of the tube and carefully aligning lenses to within 0.1 millimeter.25 However,
they couldn’t maintain that demanding alignment very long.26
Meanwhile, the idea migrated down the road to Crawford Hill, where it
caught the eager eye of Kompfner. Born in Austria in 1909, Kompfner was
one of those rare engineers gifted with both technological vision and man-
agement skills. Originally trained as an architect, Kompfner emigrated to En-
gland in 1934 and worked there until interned as an enemy alien at the
outbreak of World War II. The pragmatic British moved him to the other side
of the barbed wire when he showed his engineering skills, and he justiﬁed
their deed by inventing the traveling-wave tube, an important microwave
ampliﬁer. He came to Bell in 1951, where he founded the Crawford Hill lab—
using his architectural training to design the building.27 Dynamic and out-
going, Kompfner was a charismatic ﬁgure who freely scattered the seeds of
new ideas.28
He had divided transmission research at Crawford Hill between two groups,
each of about 30 people. Leroy Tillotson headed one on atmospheric trans-
mission, which tested laser links through the air as well as microwave relays.
Stew Miller headed guided-wave research and had been developing millimeter
waveguides since 1950. Kompfner added optical waveguides to his charter.

THE LASER STIMULATES THE EMISSION OF NEW IDEAS
97
It was a logical choice on a couple of levels. There are inherent similarities
in the physics of millimeter and optical waveguides, so skills should be trans-
ferable. Moreover, millimeter waveguide development had reached an awk-
ward stage in late 1962. Bell had made reasonable progress on the wave-
guides themselves, but they suffered some losses, so signals would have to be
ampliﬁed as they crossed the wide open spaces of America. Because millimeter
waveguides were expensive to build and install, they would have to carry a
tremendous signal volume, so the ampliﬁers would have to handle signals
with a bandwidth of 11 gigahertz. That was beyond the state of the art for
ampliﬁers. Special vacuum tubes could reach that frequency, but they didn’t
last long enough for practical use. Solid-state semiconductor electronics were
much more reliable, but they had yet to come close to the required frequency.
Miller’s group had done their job; somebody else would have to develop the
ampliﬁers. While AT&T waited for semiconductor researchers to develop fast
electronics, they shifted the millimeter waveguide project to another group,29
and shifted Miller’s group to optical waveguides in 1963.
Like most electrical engineers at the time, Miller had little experience with
light. Nearly a decade younger than Kompfner and much more reserved,
Miller had a solid record of technical innovation in radio transmission, wave-
guides, and coaxial cables. He joined Bell Labs after receiving a master’s de-
gree from MIT in 1941, but never ﬁnished the doctorate that was a hallmark
of the research staff. Adept at working within the AT&T corporate bureauc-
racy, he rose up the management ladder, but retained a keen eye for the
technology.
Like Goubau, Miller’s group used their mastery of arcane mathematics to
develop theoretical models of optical waveguides. Bell Labs soon took the lead
in the ﬁeld; unlike the Army lab, they had a clear application for optical
guides. They also hired Detlef Gloge, a young West German who as a graduate
student tested similar lens waveguides in old heating tunnels under the Uni-
versity of Braunschweig.30
A major worry with confocal waveguides was the fact that every lens
surface inevitably reﬂects some light. Sit in a lighted room at night and you
can see reﬂections on the dark windows. Clean, uncoated glass reﬂects 4
percent of the light that hits the surface from air, but coatings can reduce
that reﬂection if they have a refractive index between that of air and glass.
Kompfner had to make some very optimistic assumptions when he predicted
that a confocal-lens transmission line could carry signals 650 kilometers (400
miles) before they had to be ampliﬁed.31 To test those predictions Bell Labs
buried a waveguide with six lenses spaced along 840 meters (2750 feet).
Gloge bounced a laser beam back and forth 150 times through it and was
happy to ﬁnd that the beam quality remained good, and the loss was only
about 9 percent (0.4 decibel) per kilometer.32 However, meeting Kompfner’s
goal required reducing loss below 0.08 decibel (1.8 percent) per kilometer.
On paper, confocal waveguides offered tremendous capacity. External mod-
ulators could vary the strength of the laser beam at high speeds, although
the technology was not well developed. In addition, their large diameters held

98
CITY OF LIGHT
the potential of carrying many separate beams. Gloge calculated a 20-
centimeter (8-inch) guide could carry some 300 separate beams.33
Unfortunately, there were a plethora of practical problems. Temperature
variations, ground vibrations, and mechanical instabilities perturbed the
beam even when the waveguide was buried to isolate it from the environ-
ment, so low loss was very hard to maintain. Bends are inevitable on any
communications route, but they presented serious problems because bending
the waveguide required moving the lenses much closer together than straight
segments. The more lenses, the more their reﬂection losses accumulated, even
when reduced to about 0.5% per surface. The bends had to be gradual; it
took about 3⁄4 kilometer (2500 feet) of lensed waveguide to turn 90 degrees,
and even then only 1/1000th of the light got through, a loss of 30 decibels.
Engineers hoped to reduce that loss by replacing lenses with pairs of focusing
mirrors like those used in some periscopes, but the mirrors posed other prac-
tical problems.34
Gas Lenses
Meanwhile, Kompfner went looking for help on the problem of surface reﬂec-
tion. His typical approach was to scatter ideas among other Bell Labs scien-
tists, trying to catalyze them to make innovations. He mentioned the problem
to managers at the Murray Hill lab, whose mission was basic research. One
of them mentioned the idea to a young scientist working for him as they
stood talking in the hall. Remembering how mirages form, Dwight Berreman
suggested making lenses of air.35
Temperature gradients in air bend light to form mirages because of a sim-
ple principle of physics. Heat a gas and it expands, thinning out; cool it, and
it becomes denser. The refractive index of air changes with its density, so
heating and cooling change its refractive power. You can see the effects if
you look over a stretch of asphalt road on a hot sunny day, or across the
hood of a hot car. Rising pockets of hot and cool air bend light from distant
objects back and forth, so they look rippled. Berreman thought the same effect
could make air in a tube focus light like a lens. Heating the walls of the tube
would warm gas near the walls, making it expand, while the gas in the middle
stayed cool. The resulting gradient in density would cause a gradient in re-
fractive power, focusing light toward the middle of the tube like a lens. Unlike
a lens, it would have no surface to cause reﬂection losses (ﬁgure 8-1).
Berreman’s department was not working on optical communications, but
Murray Hill let its scientists play with new ideas. He built a couple of short
gas lenses, satisﬁed himself that they worked, and wrote up the results before
going on to other projects.36
At Crawford Hill, Stew Miller embraced gas lenses wholeheartedly, as a
welcome way to circumvent troublesome surface reﬂection. In fact, Miller
liked them considerably more than Berreman did after giving his idea a more
careful second look. Berreman found that slight ﬂuctuations tended to make

THE LASER STIMULATES THE EMISSION OF NEW IDEAS
99
Hot air (thin)
Cool air
Hot air (thin)
Figure 8-1: Heating the sides of a hollow tube thins the air along the sides, so its
refractive index is lower than that of the cooler gas in the middle. This refractive-
index difference makes a gas lens focus light.
the beam wander off the center of the gas lens, and once it slipped off center,
it kept on going. ‘‘The only way to recenter it was by brute force,’’ he recalls,
so he wrote off the gas lens waveguide as ‘‘a dead duck.’’37 He predicted long
chains of glass lenses would suffer similar centering problems. An interactive
computer system that sensed beam motion and moved the beam back on
target could solve the beam wander problem, but that seemed a forbidding
task at a time when a computer ﬁlled a whole room. Berreman wrote a paper
detailing the problem, but Miller would hear none of it. He sat on the negative
results until one of his own analytical wizards came up with essentially the
same answer.38
Miller put a new man on gas lenses, Peter Kaiser, who took a new ap-
proach. Kaiser blew cool gas into a hot tube about 6 inches (15 centimeters)
in diameter, so the tube heated gas near the walls to focus light. To bend
light around troublesome curves, he placed vents 30 inches (75 centimeters)
apart. Adding more vents focused light more sharply. He placed about 80 gas
lenses in a demonstration waveguide that ran 200 feet (60 meters) down a
Bell Labs corridor, and found loss was too low to measure. However, the
apparatus was elaborate, and he had to use argon rather than air.39
Those problems did not discourage Miller and Kompfner, who could see a
role for laser communications in the future that AT&T could carefully plan
as a regulated monopoly. Its Picturephone video-telephone was set to debut
in 1970, and AT&T had planned its evolving network around the new service,
even designating the # key on push-button phones to signal video calls.40 The
company expected Picturephone to spread steadily but not spectacularly,
reaching 100,000 sets in 1975 and a million in 1980. Millimeter waveguides
would provide the extra long-distance capacity to handle the early years of
that growth, but AT&T expected to need the tremendous capacity of optical
waveguides would be needed once Picturephones became commonplace,
probably after 1990.
Bell expected either gas or glass lens waveguides to be so elaborate and
expensive that they would have to carry at least a million telephone circuits
to be economical.41 That was not a showstopper for the world’s biggest and
richest telephone company. Thanks to regulations that assured the company
a return on its investment, AT&T had ample money to spend on both ap-
proaches, as well as on other research even less likely to generate near-term

100
CITY OF LIGHT
proﬁts. Nor were research managers deterred by technical difﬁculties; milli-
meter waveguides had come a long way in the past dozen years. ‘‘Today there
are probably more physicists and engineers working on the problem of adapt-
ing the laser for use in communication than in any other single project in
the ﬁeld of laser applications,’’ Miller wrote in the January 1966 Scientiﬁc
American.42
Checking Long Shots
Bell Labs also searched for long-shot alternatives to confocal or gas-lens op-
tical waveguides. One idea was making hollow waveguides from nonconduc-
tive dielectrics or reﬂective metals. The numbers looked good for 0.25-
millimeter tubes if they were perfectly straight—a third of the light would be
lost in a kilometer-long metal tube, and just a little more would be lost in a
dielectric. However, bending caused serious problems. Loss of a metal guide
doubled if it was curved over 48 meters (157 feet), comparable to a freeway
off-ramp. The dielectric guide was much worse, with loss doubling for a 6-
mile (10-kilometer) bend.43 Those numbers, and the difﬁculty of making thin,
perfect tubes, stopped that line of research.
Optical ﬁber was hard to ignore. Kapany’s Scientiﬁc American cover story
on ﬁber optics appeared as Javan closed in on the helium-neon laser. Bell had
its own resident ﬁber expert, Jeofry Courtney-Pratt; he didn’t work in com-
munications, but when he saw a 1961 paper44 that described a ﬁber as a
waveguide, he passed it along to Miller.45 Miller was intrigued by the idea of
optical analogs of solid plastic microwave waveguides.
However, the reality was daunting. Kompfner cut to the heart of the issue
by asking a simple question: How clear are the best glasses? Calls to glass
manufacturers and trips to the reference library yielded similarly discouraging
answers. The clearest glasses had attenuation of at least one decibel per meter.
That meant that 20 percent of the light entering a ﬁber was lost going the
width of a desk. That was adequate for an endoscope, which need only reach
into the stomach. It was hopeless for communications. Go 4 meters (13 feet),
the width of a typical room, and you lose 60 percent of the light. Go a hun-
dred meters—the length of a football ﬁeld—and only one ten-billionth (1010)
of the light remains. It was no wonder Kompfner said ‘‘forget it.’’46
The door at Bell Labs stayed closed for years. When Kompfner outlined
optical communications research in 1965, he shrugged off optical ﬁbers be-
cause ‘‘numerous serious problems’’ remained unsolved.47 In mid-1966, Mil-
ler and Roy Tillotson reviewed optical communications for the technical jour-
nal Applied Optics, but said nary a word about ﬁbers.48
They saw the millimeter waveguide as the next generation of communi-
cations technology. By 1966, Bell Labs had buried several miles of experi-
mental millimeter waveguide at Holmdel and was designing solid-state re-
peaters. A single two-inch waveguide was designed to transmit 50 channels

THE LASER STIMULATES THE EMISSION OF NEW IDEAS
101
each carrying 281 megabits, roughly a total of 15,000 million bits per second.
The millimeter waveguide was ‘‘at least four years from commercial service,’’
Miller declared in 1966. Yet he added, ‘‘No new inventions or fundamental
advances in techniques or materials are needed to make it a technically prac-
tical system.’’49
A Growing Fiber Industry
The fathers of ﬁber-optic imaging virtually ignored laser communications.
They had their hands full with building an industry around other ﬁber-optic
applications.
Brilliant, hardworking, and strong willed, Will Hicks built Mosaic Fabri-
cations into a thriving business making ﬁber-optic faceplates for military im-
age intensiﬁers. He was a leader, determined to steer his own course, with
the rare gift of technological charisma that dazzled those around him. De-
mand rose as the technology improved and the Vietnam war escalated. The
wily Hicks drove off potentially troublesome competitors like the Corning Glass
Works.50
By the mid-1960s, Mosaic occupied a handsome new building paid for by
hefty proﬁts from military contracts. Everything was going ﬁne until the Pen-
tagon decided Mosaic was doing too well at government expense, and took
action to recover the excess proﬁts. Hicks had put most of the proﬁts back
into the business. Lacking cash to repay the government, he sold the company
for several million dollars to Bendix, a big aerospace ﬁrm, and split the pro-
ceeds with stockholders. Bendix signed him to a ﬁve-year contract, but he
lasted less than a year, unwilling ‘‘to put up with somebody else’s nonsense’’51
after years of running his own business. Restless, Hicks bought a restaurant
and got involved in civil rights projects. His children lectured him on the evils
of the Vietnam war, and he grew angry with himself for ignoring how the
military used his faceplates. Today we’d call it his mid-life crisis.
American Cystoscope Manufacturers started selling ﬁber-optic endoscopes
in 1960 and soon had a hit on its hands. The company initially expected to
sell some 2000 instruments over the 17-year life of Hirschowitz’s patent. They
quickly sold 2000 a year, as younger doctors turned en masse to ﬂexible
ﬁberscopes. Larry Curtiss developed instruments in which ﬁbers carried light
into the body from an external bulb, giving physicians 10 times more light
and greatly easing prostate surgery.52 His one-semester leave from graduate
school at Harvard became permanent.
Fiber-optic fever spread through the medical community, and word of the
new invention eventually reached a middle-aged surgeon in Harlingen, Texas,
a small city near the southern tip of the state. Heinrich Lamm, who had
settled there in the 1930s, dug into his ﬁles for the tattered preprint of the
paper he had written 30 years earlier and translated it into English for those
who didn’t read German. ‘‘I share the fate of many who had a good idea and

102
CITY OF LIGHT
could not carry it to fruition,’’ he wrote to the author of an article in the
Texas State Journal of Medicine. ‘‘I am nearly certain there is no previous pub-
lished report of an image transmitted by a bent ﬁber bundle.’’53
Word must also have reached C. W. Hansell, who moved to RCA Labo-
ratories in Princeton after the company shut the Rocky Point Lab in 1958,
and retired in 1963 to Florida. Yet no one remembers him mentioning ﬁber
optics before he died in 1967.54 Perhaps he felt no need to boast after col-
lecting over 300 other American patents, and helping develop FM radio, color
television broadcasting, radar systems, microwave relays, and high-speed air-
craft communications.55 Perhaps he had forgotten an idea that seemed to go
nowhere nearly four decades earlier.
The ﬁber-optic illuminator became standard equipment in the card readers
that processed the punched ‘‘IBM cards’’ ubiquitous in computer centers
through the 1960s. American Optical landed the contract to make them,
generating healthy proﬁts that kept its ﬁber-optic division going. Eli Snitzer
and some of the company’s other physicists turned to lasers, starting a glass
laser group.
In California, the energetic Narinder Kapany pushed Optics Technology
into laser development as well as ﬁber optics and contract research. Polished,
charming, and articulate, Kapany has the charisma of a scholarly business-
man. With turbaned head and bearded face over a well-tailored suit, he cut
a striking ﬁgure in the board room. The company built one of the ﬁrst lasers
used in eye surgery56 and became one of the ﬁrst to mass-produce helium-
neon gas lasers.57 Full of ideas, Kapany led the company to reach sales of
$2.4 million and proﬁt of $140,000 in 1968. However, the company spread
itself too thin—although never into communications—and soon began losing
money.58
Laser research boomed although cynics called the laser ‘‘a solution looking
for a problem.’’ Communications was only one small area of laser research,
and optical communications usually meant sending laser beams through air
or space. With the space race in the headlines, Bell Labs’ work on optical
waveguides drew little attention. America led the world in developing lasers
and optical ﬁbers, but it virtually ignored the idea of ﬁber-optic communica-
tions.

103
9
‘‘The Only Thing Left
Is Optical Fibers’’
(1960–1966)
It may well be that what appears an impractical approach
today may prove to be a success tomorrow, as a result of
developments in materials and/or techniques. . . . We
point out clear advantages of some methods of [light] guid-
ing, but the ultimate choice will be made in years to come
against the background of materials technology.
—Antoni E. Karbowiak, in a 1964 paper that
concluded ‘‘of all the [optical] guides to date, the
ﬁber guide appears to hold most promise.’’1
L
acking the immense resources of AT&T, Standard Telecommunication Lab-
oratories looked at many ideas, investigated some, and seriously pursued
only the few most promising concepts. Periodically, research managers faced
the tough job of weeding out the losers. In the early 1960s, STL essentially
abandoned the millimeter waveguide.
It was a sensible commercial decision, although it must not have been a
pleasant one for men like Toni Karbowiak, who had invested a decade in the
technology. Expensive millimeter waveguides made sense only for high-
capacity, long-distance ‘‘trunk’’ communications between far-ﬂung popula-
tion centers. American needed them because it sprawled across a continent.
Britain had different telecommunication needs; its cities spanned an island,
and it had little room for systems that couldn’t turn tight corners. STL decided
it couldn’t sell enough millimeter waveguides to justify the high development

104
CITY OF LIGHT
costs, particularly since its military clients didn’t want bulky, delicate, and
costly plumbing.
The optical communication project had problems of its own, with the lack of
a good transmission medium at the top of the list. British engineers quicklyruled
out sending laser beams through the air, although Karbowiak suggested relay-
ing laser beams between tethered balloons ﬂoating high above the clouds.2
Hollow optical waveguides didn’t look much better. Reﬂective light pipes
had not lived up to Charles Eaglesﬁeld’s optimistic predictions.3 Demonstra-
tions of confocal waveguides with glass lenses worked well only brieﬂy in the
middle of the night, when thermal ﬂuctuations were at their smallest.4 No
one at STL had thought of gas lenses, but they wouldn’t have done much
good anyway. In principle, Karbowiak wrote, hollow optical waveguides
might be ‘‘capable of attenuation as low as one decibel per mile, but the
engineering difﬁculties associated with beam structures are likely to render
this scheme commercially impractical.’’5
However, laser communications was still young, and Alec Reeves, Len
Lewin, and the others were not about to give up easily. They sat down and
mulled the prospects. Both light pipes and confocal waveguides required man-
ufacturing tolerances that in the early 1960s were closer to completely im-
possible than merely damnably difﬁcult. Like the millimeter waveguide, they
offered nothing to ITT’s major military customers. ‘‘We had to conclude that
none of these were likely to ﬁnish up with something practical for high-
capacity, long-distance communications,’’ recalls Karbowiak. Their none-too-
optimistic conclusion was: ‘‘The only thing left is optical ﬁbers.’’6
The Troublesome Matter of Modes
With the millimeter waveguide gone, Karbowiak turned more to optics, al-
though the group still reported to Lewin. Karbowiak believed most problems
of millimeter waveguides and hollow optical waveguides arose from how they
guided waves. His main concern was the troublesome matter of modes. The
rectangular waveguides that worked well for microwaves transmit only a
single mode because they are less than half a wavelength across. Millimeter
waveguides are many wavelengths across, so they carry many modes. Light
pipes and confocal lens waveguides were thousands of wavelengths of light
across, so light could travel in a tremendous number of modes.
Mathematically, a single-mode waveguide is an ideal and relatively simple
system for a master of electromagnetic theory like Karbowiak. Mathematical
simplicity was important when computers were room-sized giants just moving
out of the vacuum tube era. More crucially, single-mode transmission was
physically simple as well, so the signal traveled in the same predictable way
through the entire waveguide.
Multimode transmission is messy, and the more modes, the messier the
transmission becomes. Waves in different modes can travel at slightly different
speeds, and those small differences build up over long distances. Fire an in-

‘‘THE ONLY THING LEFT IS OPTICAL FIBERS’’
105
Figure 9-1: Pulses stretch out as they travel along a waveguide or optical ﬁber
because of differences in mode and wavelength. The longer the distance, the more
the pulses stretch, until they overlap and become indistinguishable.
stantaneous pulse down a multimode waveguide, and it stretches because
some modes move faster than others. If successive pulses spread too much,
they can interfere with each other, limiting how fast signals can travel down
the waveguide (ﬁgure 9-1).
There are other problems as well. Different modes may experience different
amounts of loss, or interfere with each other, changing beam intensity inside
the waveguide. To complicate things further, bends in multimode waveguides
can shift waves from one mode into another. The results were noise and
interference, traditional enemies of electronics engineers. With all these com-
plications, engineers could not calculate exactly how multimode waveguides
would behave; they had to make approximations and hope they guessed right.
The developers of millimeter waveguides had accepted those limitations
because they considered single-mode waveguides impractical. A single-mode
guide could be only half a wavelength across, and at a frequency of 50 giga-
hertz that was only 3 millimeters (under 1⁄8 inch). Not only were small guides
hard to make, but reducing diameter increased the loss, making long lengths
impractical. Bell Labs had weighed the trade-offs in settling on a ﬁve-
centimeter (two-inch) waveguide.
Karbowiak also weighed the trade-offs and looked for fresh ideas. He asked
a young Chinese-born engineer, Charles K. Kao, to calculate the properties of
multimode millimeter waveguides using a novel theory, but Kao found little

106
CITY OF LIGHT
that was promising.7 As Karbowiak looked at the problems of confocal optical
waveguides and Eaglesﬁeld’s light pipes, he realized many of them arose from
multimode operation. He decided the solution might lay in a single-mode
waveguide for light.
The starting point for Karbowiak was the single-mode dielectric waveguide,
a thin plastic rod that guides microwaves along its surface. It had found a
few uses in microwave systems, where hollow metal waveguides usually were
more practical. But he thought the balance might shift in favor of a thin,
nonconducting waveguide at optical wavelengths. In theory, moving from
microwaves to light was as simple as dividing all the dimensions by 100,000,
the difference between microwave and optical wavelengths. It’s considerably
more complex in practice, of course, but the theoretical simplicity was alluring
for an engineer at home with equations.
An obvious problem was the tiny dimensions required for waveguides to
carry visible light, which has a wavelength under one micrometer (0.001
millimeter). A simple optical version of a single-mode dielectric waveguide
would have to be even smaller, too small to see and too ﬁne to handle. Most
people would have given up at that point; some very bright people at Bell
Labs did. But Toni Karbowiak had some ideas of how to make single-mode
waveguides, and he asked Kao and another young engineer just two years
out of school, George A. Hockham, to evaluate them. It wasn’t a big project;
STL paid for it out of internal funds set aside for such efforts, betting on
Reeves’s ability to pick winners. The theory was straightforward; the difﬁculty
was making a practical single-mode optical waveguide.
Karbowiak, Kao, and Hockham were not alone in looking at optical ana-
logs of the dielectric microwave guide. The same idea occurred to Jean-Claude
Simon and Eric Spitz at the central research laboratory of CSF,8 the French
equivalent of RCA in the Paris suburb of Corbeville. Spitz, an engineer in his
early thirties who headed the microwave lab, was intrigued by the coherence
of laser light.9 He and Simon, who directed the whole lab, thought of extend-
ing microwave concepts to light.
The British and the French both looked ﬁrst at the simplest type of dielectric
waveguide, a thin rod suspended in air, like an unclad optical ﬁber. Most
energy travels along the outside of the rod, avoiding absorption by the ma-
terial, an effect that Karbowiak had exploited in making microwave devices
for satellites. Both groups estimated the transmission loss should be attrac-
tively low.10
There was, however, a serious practical problem—those single-mode wave-
guides were only a ﬁfth of a wavelength thick. That was ﬁne for 1⁄2-inch (1.25-
centimeter) microwaves; the waveguide could be a 3/32-inch (2.5-millimeter)
polystyrene rod.11 However, at optical wavelengths it led to impossibly small
ﬁber diameters of only 0.1 to 0.2 micrometers—4 to 8 millionths of an inch.12
The developers needed something that behaved like a dielectric waveguide
but was large enough to handle.
Fortunately, microwave dielectric waveguides can take more complex
forms. The crucial requirements were that the material surrounding the cen-

‘‘THE ONLY THING LEFT IS OPTICAL FIBERS’’
107
tral dielectric could not conduct electricity, and that (for light) its refractive
index be smaller than that of the central dielectric.13 Karbowiak realized, as
Brian O’Brien had a decade earlier, that the surrounding material did not
have to be air. Any kind of cladding or coating would make a minuscule
optical waveguide easier to handle. In theory, an inﬁnitely thick cladding
should behave the same way as one just a few wavelengths thick, so the
cladding could be as thick as the designer wanted—thick enough to ease
handling but thin enough to remain ﬂexible.
More subtle, and it turned out more important, surrounding the waveguide
with another material changed the diameter needed for single-mode opera-
tion. The critical number is the difference in refractive index between the
waveguide (or ﬁber core) and the surrounding cladding. The larger the dif-
ference, the smaller the core must be to transmit only a single mode. For
glass in air, the difference is 0.5, so an unclad glass ﬁber must be no larger
than 0.1 to 0.2 micrometer to transmit light in a single mode. Anything
larger operates multimode. However, the smaller the difference between the
refractive indexes of the core and the surrounding material, the larger the
diameter for single-mode transmission. Apply a cladding with a refractive
index just one percent lower than the core, and the core or central waveguide
layer can transmit single-mode light even if it is several micrometers thick.
That’s still small, but it’s getting into the realm of feasibility, especially be-
cause the surrounding cladding can be many times thicker.
Increasing the size of the waveguide offered a crucial beneﬁt for optical
communications. Directing light into a ﬁber core is like threading a needle;
the bigger the target, the easier it is. In the 1960s, no one knew how to focus
light onto a spot much smaller than its wavelength (it’s still very difﬁcult).
You couldn’t get a useful amount of light into a bare ﬁber waveguide 0.1 to
0.2 micrometers wide. However, with great care you could aim a laser beam
into a core several micrometers across in a clad ﬁber. Thus, adding a cladding
put single-mode optical communications into the realm of possibility.
Eli Snitzer had formulated the same rules earlier at American Optical, but
he had come to single-mode ﬁbers from a different approach. Imaging ﬁbers
typically have large cores surrounded by thin cladding layers, so that they
can transmit the brightest image possible. Karbowiak had a different goal—
transmitting light in a single mode for communications—and he envisioned
a different structure, with a tiny core surrounded by a thick cladding.
While the cladding solved some problems, it added another: Light had to
travel in the transparent material, instead of in the air. (In fact, cladding
changes the properties of a single-mode waveguide such that most light trav-
els in its core, rather than along the surface.) This threatened to raise trans-
mission loss tremendously. Even the clearest solids available in the early
1960s absorbed too much light for a practical optical waveguide, Karbowiak
concluded in an internal report. Yet other possibilities looked even worse. ‘‘It
would be unwise to dismiss any of the proposed means of [optical] commu-
nications as too impractical or too costly,’’ he told a London meeting on laser
applications in September 1964. ‘‘Nonetheless . . . of all the guides known to-

108
CITY OF LIGHT
date the ﬁber guide appears to hold most promise if due to advances in ma-
terials technology it becomes possible to manufacture cladded ﬁbers having
effective loss . . . about two orders of magnitude better than at present.’’14
In France, Spitz asked the French glass manufacturer Saint Gobain to make
glass cylinders with thin inner cores, which could be drawn down into ﬁbers.
Then he assigned further research to Alain Werts, who had just started at
CSF after ﬁnishing his undergraduate degree.15 Spitz and Simon also studied
ways to suspend thin unclad ﬁbers in air.16 That would not improve light
collection, but it would make the ﬁlaments easier to handle.
A Search for New Waveguides
While Toni Karbowiak knew ultraclear glass could cure the problems of clad
ﬁber waveguides, he was not a materials specialist and had no idea how to
make it. He did know waveguide theory, and he applied that expertise to
inventing a new type that could guide light along its surface with low loss.
A crucial problem was suspending it without obstructing the surface wave.
He devised a simple and elegant alternative to hard-to-handle ﬁne ﬁlaments:
a ﬂat waveguide a fraction of a wavelength thick but many wavelengths wide.
His theoretical analysis showed the thin ﬁlm ribbon could guide light along the
middle of its surface in a single mode, although not in the same mode as a cy-
lindrical ﬁber. It could be a centimeter or more wide, large enoughtocollectlight
from a focused laser beam. Because light traveled along the middle, a frame sup-
porting the edges would not affect the surface wave. He predicted its loss should
be no more than a few decibels per kilometer—so roughly half the signal that
entered the waveguide would remain after one kilometer.
Nothing conﬁned the light in the plane of the thin ﬁlm, but twisting the
waveguide in a spiral pattern should avoid ‘‘any noticeable loss of energy,’’
Karbowiak wrote after ﬁling a patent application in April 1964.17 He hoped
to reach attenuation of a few decibels per kilometer at infrared wavelengths
of 1 to 10 micrometers.18 After ﬁnishing his theoretical work, Karbowiak
asked Kao and Hockham to make and test samples. It became their top pri-
ority. Number two on the list was ﬁnding low-loss materials to clad ﬁber
waveguides. That looked like a long shot, because Toni Karbowiak, like Rudy
Kompfner, had already ascertained that the clearest optical glass on the mar-
ket was far too lossy for the job.
An Unexpected Offer
As Kao and Hockham struggled with the tough problems of making thin-ﬁlm
optical waveguides in late 1964, opportunity knocked unexpectedly for Kar-
bowiak. With a doctorate and some three dozen articles published in scholarly
journals after a decade at STL, he was a technical heavyweight at 41. The
University of New South Wales thought he would make an ideal chair for its

‘‘THE ONLY THING LEFT IS OPTICAL FIBERS’’
109
department of electrical engineering.
Karbowiak had talked about academic posts before, but his comfortable
job at STL paid more than an ordinary professorship. He hesitated when the
Australians asked, saying he didn’t know much about the country. The vice
chancellor responded by sending ﬁrst-class tickets for Karbowiak and his fam-
ily to visit Australia. The university wined and dined him, promising him
money to continue his research in optics and other areas.19
It was an opportunity too good to resist. While STL had abandoned mil-
limeter waveguides, other leading communications labs had not—and Kar-
bowiak had invested years in that technology, becoming a recognized expert
and writing a book that was nearing publication.20 In late 1964, it was far
from obvious to him that STL was on the verge of an optical breakthrough.
Academia was a big step up the technical prestige ladder, and the university
chair paid well. It offered him more freedom to investigate new ideas than he
could have at a company with its own product agendas. Karbowiak started
packing, much to the surprise of the young men working for him.21
A Problem of Materials
Kao inherited management of the little optical waveguide program. He was
young to manage a group, but the group was tiny—only Hockham reported
to him.
Born November 4, 1933, in Shanghai, Charles Kuen Kao was the son of
a judge who tried to raise his family in traditional Chinese style. That was a
difﬁcult task in unsettled times. The Japanese army lurked ominously in
nearby Manchuria from 1932 until it attacked the French concession in
Shanghai on December 7, 1941, the same day Japanese planes bombed Pearl
Harbor. The Kao family survived the war and in 1948 ﬂed by boat to British-
ruled Hong Kong ahead of the communist takeover of the mainland.
Like other Chinese children in British schools, the young Kao Kuen took
an English name—Charles—as he learned the language.22 It was his third
language, after Chinese and French, but he learned to speak it clearly with
only a trace of accent. Chemistry was the ﬁrst science to interest him, but by
the end of elementary school he turned to electronics and communications,
building standard electronics projects like crystal radio sets. No Chinese col-
leges offered electronics when he graduated from high school, so in 1952 he
left for England, graduating from the University of London in 1957 in elec-
trical engineering.
He stayed in England to work for Standard Telephones and Cables, com-
fortable in the country’s cosmopolitan culture. He courted and married a young
STC computer engineer, born in England of Chinese parents. Ambition ran
strong in the boyish-faced Kao, and he grew frustrated by the limitations of cur-
rent telecommunications technology. In 1960 he resolved to return to school
but got a better offer from the company’s research division—a chance to earn
an ‘‘industrial’’ doctorate while working on practical problems at STL. The

110
CITY OF LIGHT
combination of work and school was demanding, but the salary beat starving
as a full-time graduate student.23 When Karbowiak left, Kao was ﬁnishing his
thesis for millimeter waveguide pioneer Harold Barlow. He also was busy at
home helping raise two small children; his wife had continued working after
they were born, a rarity in the early 1960s. While the 26-year-old Hockham
raced motorcycles, the slightly older Kao had little time for outside recreation.
Both young engineers had mastered waveguide theory; their other skills
were complementary. Kao had a good physical intuition and a knack for
assembling components into working systems. Hockham’s gift was mathe-
matical analysis of how waveguides radiate energy, an arcane art of the ut-
most importance for transmission lines and antennas. Antennas are supposed
to radiate energy; transmission lines are not. Hockham’s job was to make
sure waveguides didn’t act like antennas.24
Before Karbowiak left for Australia, Hockham tested a larger polyethylene
ﬁlm model scaled to work with eight-millimeter microwaves. Karbowiak found
the results ‘‘most encouraging, showing small attenuation, good ﬁeld con-
ﬁnement, and ability to negotiate bends and twists.’’25
Optical thin-ﬁlm waveguides proved more troublesome. Light waves are
over 10,000 times shorter than eight-millimeter microwaves, so Kao and
Hockham had to shrink the guide dramatically. To make ﬁlms thin enough,
they dissolved plastic in a solvent which evaporated readily at room temper-
ature, then dropped the solution gently onto water. The solvent evaporated,
leaving behind an extremely thin ﬁlm that they had to gently lift off the water.
After a series of experiments, they ﬁnally made ﬁlms less than half a microm-
eter thick, so thin that they were iridescent, like an oil slick, because light
waves interfered inside them.
Karbowiak’s theory said the delicate ﬁlms should carry light in just one
mode. Kao and Hockham played with the ﬁlms, aiming the red beam from a
helium-neon laser into the thin guide. When they put a ﬁlm guide on a curved
support, light spread over the walls of their laboratory, leaking prodigiously
from the bent waveguide. ‘‘It was a spectacular sight, and we took a photo
to record this event,’’ recalls Kao.26 ‘‘And that was the end of the surface
waveguide, because there was no way you could use it.’’27 He and Hockham
had done their job, testing their former superior’s idea. With Karbowiak gone,
no one remained to advocate and reﬁne the thin-ﬁlm guide. They turned to
the idea Kao considered more promising—clad optical ﬁbers (ﬁgure 9-2).
Seeking Clearer Fibers
Theory clearly showed that a cladding would keep light from leaking out at
bends in a single-mode waveguide, solving the problem that killed the thin-
ﬁlm guide. That left the question of material transparency.
Kao and Hockham began analyzing requirements for optical waveguides
months before Karbowiak left. They targeted needs of the British Post Ofﬁce
that were quite different than AT&T’s plans for high-capacity systems to cross

‘‘THE ONLY THING LEFT IS OPTICAL FIBERS’’
111
the wide open spaces of America. The Post Ofﬁce wanted better technology
to send signals between local switching centers that typically were a few miles
apart. They wanted something easy and inexpensive to install in heavily de-
veloped areas, not high-priced huge-capacity systems to span vast distances.
The goal was local arteries for communication trafﬁc, not long-distance
superhighways.
Starting from the Post Ofﬁce wish list, Kao and Hockham calculated their
targets. They knew how much power a laser transmitter could generate and
how weak a signal an optical sensor could detect. From that, they calculated
loss allowable between transmitter and receiver. Dividing that number by the
distance gave attenuation, the loss per mile or kilometer. The answer came
to 20 decibels per kilometer, so one percent of the light entering a waveguide
should remain after traveling a kilometer. (That is equivalent to 32 decibels
per mile, so under 0.1 percent of the light would remain after a mile). That
was a challenging target, because the best ﬁbers available reduced light in-
tensity by 20 decibels over a distance of just 20 meters (66 feet).
Kao and Hockham faced two crucial questions: Was any material clear
enough to meet their target of 20 decibels per kilometer loss? Would the tiny
ﬂuctuations in dimensions that are inevitable in any real waveguide make
light leak out as if the ﬁbers were miniature antennas?
The two bounced ideas back and forth and loosely divided the problems.
Hockham, the antenna expert, concentrated on waveguide irregularities that
could scatter light out of a ﬁber. The geometry of a clad optical ﬁber looked good
for a waveguide. Light spread out in the plane of a thin-ﬁlm guide, but the cy-
Figure 9-2: A clad single-mode optical ﬁber is gigantic compared to an unclad
single-mode waveguide and the thin-ﬁlm optical waveguide. This picture shows
only the comparatively small single-mode core. One wave of visible green light is
about 0.5 micrometer (µm) long.

112
CITY OF LIGHT
lindrical cladding should conﬁne light entirely within the ﬁber. However, Hock-
ham knew this simple model made some unrealistic assumptions—that the
waveguide had no discontinuities, no bends, and no changes in diameter. Ex-
perience with the millimeter waveguide warned that such assumptions could
gloss over serious difﬁculties, so Hockham took the harder course of calculating
what would happen in real ﬁbers with the inevitable minor imperfections.
He expected core diameter would be hard to control, so he calculated the
effects of ﬂuctuations along the ﬁber. He worried that such variations could
shift light into different modes and cause some light to leak out of the ﬁber.
The numbers were encouraging; it looked like the effects should be small. But
he didn’t stop with theory. To test the predictions, he built model waveguides,
scaled up to carry microwave signals. ‘‘There’s nothing magic about it,’’ says
Hockham; the larger-scale models were easier to test than ﬁbers. He still has
some of the curious-looking copper tubes, which vary in diameter along their
length and have disk-shaped metal ﬁns along their sides. The experiments
conﬁrmed his theoretical predictions, and the project became the core of
Hockham’s doctoral thesis.28
The Materials Problem
Kao concentrated on the transparency of the most common optical material,
glass. He and Hockham searched painstakingly through the scientiﬁc litera-
ture but found very little information. They visited glass specialists and found
very little more. Mostly, they learned how little people knew. Glass specialists
blamed impurities for the residual absorption in the clearest optical glasses,
but no one knew what set the fundamental limits on glass clarity. There was
good reason for that lack of knowledge. Before the invention of the ﬁber-optic
endoscope, nobody had any reason to send light through more than a few
inches of glass.
The state of the art was not encouraging. The best imaging ﬁbers had
losses of about one decibel per meter, or three decibels every 3 meters (10
feet), so half the light was lost in going the distance across a small room. Go
another three meters and half the remaining light was gone. After 20 meters
(67 feet), such ﬁbers soaked up 99 percent of the input light, as much as Kao
had allocated for one kilometer (3300 feet) in a communication system. Go
100 meters, the length of a football ﬁeld, and one ten-billionth of the light
remained. It was no wonder Rudy Kompfner gave up hope.
Charles Kao did not. Materials science is often empirical; specialists make
measurements ﬁrst, then try to explain them. Kao came from a different ﬁeld,
electromagnetic theory, where elegant formulas precisely predict what exper-
iments should measure. You can calculate the behavior of a waveguide from
fundamental laws of physics, but not the transparency of glass. Trained in a
ﬁeld where fundamental limits were known, Kao asked about the fundamental
limits on glass transmission. Three different factors enter into the equations.
One is surface reﬂection, which wasn’t a major concern because it happens

‘‘THE ONLY THING LEFT IS OPTICAL FIBERS’’
113
only on the ends of ﬁbers. A second is scattering of light by atoms in the
glass, which sends it in some direction other than down the ﬁber. A third is
absorption of light by atoms in the material.
Early on, Eaglesﬁeld asked about scattering and came back with an en-
couraging estimate that it was less than ﬁve decibels per kilometer for quartz. 29
Later Kao found a formula for light scattering derived several years earlier by
Robert D. Maurer of the Corning Glass Works.30 When he and Hockham
plugged in the numbers, they got an estimate even more to their liking—one
decibel per kilometer at a wavelength of one micrometer. That implied scat-
tering should not be a big problem for communications.
That left the issue of light absorption. Kao recalls, ‘‘I was seeking the
answer to the question, ‘What are the loss mechanisms and can these mech-
anisms be totally removed?’ It appeared that no one had really asked this
question before.’’31 Where others had asked for the best existing glass, Kao
sought the fundamental limit. The experts didn’t have a ready answer. When
he pressed them, they blamed most absorption on impurities.
The stuff we call glass is a mixture of things. The basic raw ingredient is
sand, the debris left after the weather wears down rocks until only the hardest
crystals remain—grains of quartz, which chemically is silicon dioxide, also
called silica. To melt sand at reasonable temperatures, glass makers add soda,
potash, and lime. They add other compounds to make special glasses for pur-
poses from optical instruments to ﬁne crystal ware. Add cobalt and the glass
turns a rich dark blue; other metals give other tints.
Traditional glasses are not chemically pure, but they are adequate for their
usual jobs. Small dashes of impurities don’t absorb enough light to notice in the
thickness of a sheet of window glass or a camera lens. However, the absorption
becomes noticeable if the light has to go a long distance through a ﬁber. Iron,
copper, and some other elements soak up light, darkening the glass.
How clear would glass be if you removed all the impurities? Many experts
were only guardedly optimistic. They weren’t sure because they hadn’t mea-
sured absorption in extremely pure glasses. They weren’t sure how pure glass
could be made. They simply didn’t have the answers to Kao’s questions.32 Yet
they also had no showstoppers, and Kao heard some encouraging words.
Professor Harold Rawson of the Shefﬁeld Institute of Glass Technology said
he was convinced that removing impurities could reduce absorption below
the target level of 20 decibels per kilometer.33 If all went well, that meant
ﬁber optic communications might be possible.
Putting the Pieces Together
Encouraged, Kao and Hockham drew a few ﬁbers and tested them at STL.
The ﬁbers were lossy, but those with cores smaller than four micrometers
transmitted the red light from a helium-neon laser in a single mode. They
experimented with semiconductor lasers and white light. They tested Hock-
ham’s microwave guides and analyzed the results. They convinced themselves

114
CITY OF LIGHT
that ﬁber-optic communications could work. But like Heinrich Lamm, they
knew they could not develop a whole new technology by themselves. They
needed to interest others. Convinced they had ‘‘enough evidence to commit
our ﬁndings to paper,’’34 Kao and Hockham sent an article to the Proceedings
of the Institution of Electrical Engineers in November 1965.
Their analysis was careful, but their conclusions were daring. The decibel
scale (see box, pages 115–116) understates the immense gap between the
best existing ﬁbers and their goal because it’s logarithmic. In 1965, the best
ﬁbers had attenuation of 1000 decibels per kilometer; their goal was 20 de-
cibels per kilometer. Twenty decibels is a factor of 100; lose 20 decibels and
you have one percent of the original light left. A thousand decibels is 10100;
lose a thousand decibels and you have only 1/10100 of the original light.
Actually, you have no light, because you lost it all long ago. That drop in
intensity is worse than starting with the mass of the whole universe and
ending up with one atom.
That didn’t discourage the editors, who probably had seen crazier schemes.
They asked for revisions, which Kao and Hockham completed in February.
The ﬁnal version runs eight printed pages, packed with equations and charts
and thick with electronic jargon.35 The details were central to convincing
their fellow engineers that their new communications medium could offer
huge transmission capacity at low cost.
Published papers mark milestones, but they take months to reach print.
Kao wasn’t about to wait; he launched the proposal with a January 27, 1966,
talk at the London headquarters of the Institution of Electrical Engineers,
which counts Sir Francis Bolton, the impresario of illuminated fountains, as
one of its founders. STL management thought it worthy of a press release,
which announced: ‘‘Short-distance experimental runs of these optical wave-
guides have been operated successfully. They have exhibited an information-
carrying capacity of one gigacycle, which is equivalent to about 200 television
channels or over 200,000 telephone channels.’’36 The release soberly summa-
rized the state of the art, but closed with what must have seemed a wildly opti-
mistic prediction: ‘‘When these methods are perfected, it will be possible to
transmit very large quantities of information (telephone, television, data, etc.)
between say, the Americas and Europe, along a single undersea cable.’’ That
was impossible with hollow structures like millimeter waveguide or light pipes.
The British magazine Wireless World allocated the bottom part of one page
to Kao’s talk in March.37 A small American newsletter named Laser Focus
also took note.38 Yet otherwise it sank without a trace. Scans through a
sampling of major American science and technology magazines, the New York
Times index, and the Reader’s Guide to Periodical Literature show nary a word
about Kao’s proposal.39 If the editors noticed it at all, they probably dismissed
it as just another crazy scheme, hardly likely to be practical in the twentieth
century. After all, in 1966 satellites were the future of telecommunications.
The role of light would be to travel through confocal waveguides or gas lenses
as was spelled out in the lead article of the January Scientiﬁc American40—
then the semipopular journal of record for American science—by Stew Miller

‘‘THE ONLY THING LEFT IS OPTICAL FIBERS’’
115
of the prestigious Bell Labs. Responsible journalists knew they should trust
such authoritative sources. When the Kao and Hockham paper ﬁnally ap-
peared, it also made no discernible mark even in the technical press.
No Silver Medals for Invention
The French followed the same trail after Spitz talked the French Ministry of
Defense out of a small grant, but they lagged behind STL. Werts modeled light
transmission along a ﬁber ‘‘surface’’ with 1.4-millimeter microwaves, the
shortest wavelength available. Then he calculated how light should travel
through a clad single-mode optical ﬁber. Only after Werts started did Spitz
discover Snitzer’s careful analysis of ﬁber modes. Werts had to make his own
laser for ﬁber-transmission experiments, buying mirrors from America and
ﬁlling a glass tube with helium and neon.
The Decibel Score
Decibels are very handy units for engineers evaluating signal strength but can
be quite confusing to other people. If you want to avoid complexity, you can
think of decibels as a way of keeping score. In ﬁber optics, they usually measure
how much of the signal is lost when being transmitted. Lower loss is better, so
lower decibel numbers are better. Engineers usually measure transmission loss
per kilometer of ﬁber, so the standard units are decibels per kilometer. Metric
units are standard for the research and development community, but you needn’t
worry too much about them. The relative scores for ﬁbers are the same whether
the loss is measured per kilometer, per foot, per mile, or per light year. (The
numbers, however, are quite different. Kilometers are used here because they’re
the most common scale.)
Strictly speaking decibels measure the ratio of output power to input power
on a logarithmic scale. The formula used for ﬁber optics is
power out
decibels  10 log
.


power in
For optical ﬁbers, the number is negative because power output is less than
input, but the sign is usually ignored. (The only way to have higher output is in
an optical ampliﬁer.)
Decibels greatly simplify engineering calculations because you can ﬁnd total
loss by multiplying ﬁber loss in decibels per kilometer by the length of a ﬁber.
For example, 50 kilometers of 0.5 decibel/kilometer ﬁber has a 25-decibel
loss. However, because the scale is logarithmic, it’s easy to underestimate the
impact of loss measured in decibels. Loss of 10 decibels means one-tenth of the
signal remains. Loss of 20 decibels means only one percent remains, while loss
of 100 decibels means only 1010 (0.000,000,000,1) remains. The table
below gives some examples, with physical analogies that may be helpful.

116
CITY OF LIGHT
Werts and Spitz measured some glass losses and borrowed other material
data from Kao.41 They also borrowed Hockham’s data on the effects of wave-
guide irregularities. Werts had to stretch the ﬁbers they got from Saint Gobain
to shrink the cores so they carried just one mode. ‘‘The only originality of
my work,’’ he recalls, was showing that ﬁber properties could limit light trans-
mission to a single mode.42 (Snitzer and others had observed modes in bundled
ﬁbers but had not systematically studied individual ﬁbers.)
No one considered the ﬁber project particularly important. Werts took a
while to get around to writing the paper, and when he did both Simon and
Spitz declined to be listed as co-authors. It appeared in the French-language
journal L’Onde Electronique43 just two months after the Kao and Hockham
paper was published in England. There the matter stopped. The military
money was gone, and no one at CSF was willing to bet his reputation on
ﬁber-optic communications. ‘‘I didn’t really consider at that time it was an
important paper,’’ recalls Spitz. He had ample reasons to be skeptical. French
glass specialists told him that it was impossible to remove the iron impurities
Kao considered the main cause of glass absorption. Other projects looked more
promising; his group turned to storing data in optical form, an idea that led
to today’s audio compact discs and computer CD-ROMs.44
Table 9-1 What Decibel Losses Mean in Optical Fibers and Elsewhere
Loss in
decibels
Fraction of power
remaining
Physical analog
0.2
0.954992586
Loss undetectable by the eye
0.5
0.891250938
Light lost reﬂecting from aluminum
1
0.794328235
10
0.1
Reﬂection from a dark surface
20
0.01
One percent of light remains
30
0.001
One part per thousand
40
0.0001
50
0.00001
60
0.000001
One part per million
100
1010
One part in 10 billion
200
1020
300
1030
One atom in a ton of matter
400
1040
500
1050
600
1060
Less than one atom in the sun
700
1070
800
1080
One atom in the visible universe
900
1090
1000
10100

117
10
Trying to Sell a Dream
(1965–1970)
If you really look at it, I was trying to sell a dream. . . .
There was very little I could put in concrete to tell these
people it was really real.
—Charles K. Kao1
C
harles Kao saw the future of communications and it was ﬁber optics.
Fibers would simply and elegantly avoid the problems that plagued mil-
limeter waveguides and hollow optical waveguides. All that he needed to
reach that future was glass as clear as air. Will Hicks, Toni Karbowiak, Rudy
Kompfner, and Stew Miller, men of no mean imagination and intelligence,
had turned back at the sheer challenge of making so perfectly transparent a
solid. Only Charles Kao had the vision and daring to charge full-speed ahead.
He could see no fundamental barrier blocking his goal of clear glass ﬁbers.
He had the good fortune to enlist the visionary support of Alec Reeves, who
could plead his case to top management. Kao had not invested any crucial
part of his ego in millimeter waveguides, gas lenses, or confocal lens wave-
guides. He could see that thin, ﬂexible ﬁbers not only offered high transmis-
sion capacity, but also would be simpler and far cheaper to install than del-
icate bulky pipes that required underground burial.
Fiber optic communication was a simple and elegant idea, tiny ﬂexible
‘‘pipes’’ compared to the brute-force technology of thick millimeter wave-
guides that had to be laid absolutely straight. In his twenties, Kao had seen
the transistor revolution sweep through electronics, with compact solid-state

118
CITY OF LIGHT
devices making bulky vacuum tubes obsolete. He could envision optical ﬁbers
as another technological revolution, doing the same thing to millimeter wave-
guides. It was the chance of a lifetime. Ambitious young engineers dream not
just of making something work, but of making it work so well that it brings
them fame and fortune, putting them in the league of people like Reeves, or
perhaps even Thomas Edison and Alexander Graham Bell.
The dream is not easy to achieve. Kao could not be sure in 1966 that
glass could ever be as clear as he needed. Other engineers were skeptical.
‘‘We were talking about a system concept which required a light source which
at that time was working intermittently in liquid nitrogen, and an order of
magnitude improvement in ﬁber that was so far out that people could not
believe it was an attainable goal,’’ Kao told me on the phone. He had to sell
them on the dream. ‘‘I sometimes say I must be a very good salesman.’’2 His
words sped from Hong Kong to Boston through 8000 miles of ﬁber-optic cable
so clear I could catch the faint touch of China beneath his British-English
accent.
A Customer at the Post Ofﬁce
The January 1966 talk in London opened Kao’s sales campaign. His dream
caught the imagination of a crucial member of the audience, Robert William-
son White, head of a waveguide development section at the British Post Ofﬁce
Research Station at Dollis Hill in London, the British counterpart of Bell Labs.
The Post Ofﬁce had about a hundred people working on the millimeter wave-
guide,3 but White was growing skeptical about its prospects and called it ‘‘the
pipe dream.’’4
What bothered White was the mundane matter of installation. Millimeter
waveguides had to be buried ﬁve to six feet underground and run in straight
lines. That was going to be expensive. The cost might be justiﬁable to provide
the very high transmission capacity needed for the ‘‘trunk’’ lines between
major cities, especially where they ran through open countryside. However,
the Post Ofﬁce also wanted to improve the much larger ‘‘junction network’’
linking local telephone switching centers. Like local roads feeding into an
expressway, there are many miles of junction network for each mile of trunk.
Connections typically span only a few miles, but they thread through existing
cities and towns. Millimeter waveguides were as ill-matched to winding along
the tangled streets of London as rigid metal pipes were to looking down a
patient’s throat into his stomach. Post Ofﬁce engineers wanted a cable they
could snake through utility ducts already buried underground. Thin and ﬂex-
ible, optical ﬁbers sounded worth investigating.
Technology led the way at Dollis Hill. Managers felt ‘‘if the technology can
deliver it, let’s do it and see how the customer reacts,’’5 says Jack Tillman, a
former deputy director for research. That attitude led the British lab to study
telephone access to remote computer systems as far back as 1960.6 That
interest led to a commercial service called Prestel, which ﬂoundered in the

TRYING TO SELL A DREAM
119
1980s,7 but anticipated the Internet and the World Wide Web. The Post Ofﬁce
watched Bell Labs, but steered its own course, avoiding some Bell projects
including Picturephone8 and confocal optical waveguides.
Kao’s idea struck a responsive chord at Dollis Hill. John Bray, a radio
engineer recently named to head the lab, was intrigued when IEE asked him
to review Kao and Hockham’s paper before publication.9 He and Tillman
asked Frederick Francis Roberts,10 an engineering manager under Tillman, to
investigate. It was a logical choice; Roberts had a penchant for new ideas,11
and his main project was stalled.12
Born of British parents in France in the spring of 1917, F. F. Roberts was
a career civil service engineer. Reserved by nature, he was rather stiff and
formal even for his generation of Englishmen. Tillman, who had worked with
him on radar during World War II, called him Frank, but most people knew
him by his initials, and even as the Beatles made London swing in the late
1960s, his subordinates addressed him as ‘‘Sir.’’13
Intense, curious, and dedicated to his job, Roberts had the relentless drive
of a classic ‘‘Type A’’ personality. He took a formal, rigorous approach to
problems, analyzing them systematically. That approach served him well in
1951, when he was the ﬁrst to demonstrate an important microwave effect.14
He climbed the management ladder, and by the 1960s had 50 to 80 people
working for him.15 A stickler for doing everything properly, from ﬁling trip
reports to calculating the properties of materials, he drove himself as intensely
as his staff, unable to relax on the job. Yet the crusty bureaucrat had his own
gift. ‘‘Roberts was a difﬁcult, cantankerous old sod, but he was a man of
vision,’’16 says Charles Sandbank, who became Kao’s division manager after
Len Lewin left for a professorship.
As the operator of the British telephone system, the Post Ofﬁce used tele-
communications equipment, but it didn’t manufacture any. Roberts’s goal
was to see if the new technology could meet Post Ofﬁce needs, and to en-
courage its development. He was not a glass expert, but he knew what ques-
tions had to be asked and answered. If there were problems, F. F. Roberts
would ﬁnd them.
The transparency of glass was crucial, so he set George Newns to work
purifying glass at Dollis Hill. He supported Kao’s research. Roberts also turned
to experts outside the Post Ofﬁce, asking questions and trying to stimulate
interest. He visited big British glass companies, but they showed little interest.
The hard-driving Roberts pumped every possible contact, including a roving
scientist from the Corning Glass Works who in 1966 visited Dollis Hill ﬁshing
for new uses for glass. William Shaver was a man of easy enthusiasm for new
ideas, but he didn’t have anything to offer Roberts off the top of his head.17
Back at Corning, he mentioned the idea of ﬁber communications to Bill Ar-
mistead, the corporate research director. Armistead agreed it was promising,
and they passed the idea along to Robert Maurer, who managed a small glass
research group had earlier studied light scattering in glass. Maurer sat down
to think about the possibilities.

120
CITY OF LIGHT
Military Support
Kao made another early convert in Don Williams of the Royal Signals Re-
search and Development Establishment in Christchurch. Like the Pentagon,
the British Ministry of Defense was investing heavily in new technology, seek-
ing new ideas from the likes of Alec Reeves. Military electronics were big
business for ITT in both Britain and America in the 1960s. Millimeter wav-
eguides and hollow light pipes were far too cumbersome for military use, but
small ﬂexible ﬁbers might replace the thick copper cables that weighed down
portable communications systems. Fibers also had another attraction at a time
when military planners worried about ﬁghting nuclear wars. Nuclear blasts
produce a strong burst of electromagnetic waves that can induce strong cur-
rent pulses in metal wires, and those pulses can fry delicate electronics. Fibers
are immune to that effect because they don’t conduct electricity. That made
ﬁbers promising for airplane and ship communication systems that had to
withstand nuclear effects. Because those systems don’t have to carry signals
very far, military systems could function with ﬁbers less transparent than
needed for civilian telephone networks. That was an important boost, because
it opened a market for ﬁber communications even if loss could not be reduced
to 20 decibels per kilometer.
Williams gave STL a small research grant. The military connection gave
Kao access to sophisticated equipment able to measure important quantities,
such as low levels of impurities in glass.18 Williams also funded William Alec
Gambling, an electronics professor at the University of Southampton. Gam-
bling had thought of ﬁber-optic communications as far back as 196419 but
had never done as much analysis as Kao and Hockham. His group concen-
trated on large-core ﬁbers because the short, cheap, low-bandwidth systems
wanted by the Ministry of Defense did not require single-mode transmission.
The Traveling Fiber Salesman
Support from Roberts and Williams was a step in the right direction, but only
a step. Charles Kao went on the road to sell others on the case for ﬁber optics.
He had made his ﬁrst trip to America while working on his ﬁber proposal. In
early 1966, he took a second trip to talk with American experts in ﬁber
fabrication, optical glass, and lasers. He visited Eli Snitzer at American Optical,
glass expert Norbert Kreidl at Rutgers University in New Jersey, the optics
giant Bausch & Lomb in Rochester, and Kapany’s Optics Technology in Cal-
ifornia.
His stop at Bell Labs was disappointing. Miller’s group at Crawford Hill
was less then enthusiastic. ‘‘They have requested the materials people to in-
vestigate into the possible means of obtaining the very-low-loss materials re-
quired. That was as much as they would do to inﬂuence the work of other
departments. They now just have to wait and see. If the low-loss material

TRYING TO SELL A DREAM
121
was forthcoming, then they would be very interested in looking into the ﬁber
waveguide as a possible optical wave guiding medium,’’20 Kao wrote when
he returned home. Without solid evidence of more transparent glass, Bell
would stay with gas lenses and confocal waveguides. Yet Kao felt a blessing
from Bell Labs was critical. When a younger engineer asked why he wanted
to invite a tough competitor into the ﬁeld, Kao replied, ‘‘The thing will only
take off if we get them into it.’’21
Kao and Roberts visited Spitz and Werts at CSF,22 and Kao toured German
labs. Many listened to his sales pitch, but initially few bought it.
An Invitation to Japan
In late 1966, Kao’s ﬁber-optic campaign yielded him invitations to speak at
Tohoku University and Nippon Telegraph and Telephone in Japan. Japanese
engineers had also been thinking about ﬁber communications and wanted to
hear what Kao had to say.
Engineering professor Zen-ichi Kiyasu grew interested in optical commu-
nications after leaving NTT and joining the university faculty, but he could
not see much future for hollow optical waveguides. In 1964, he told another
Tohoku professor, Jun-ichi Nishizawa, that he had not heard any proposals
for optical communications that would be reliable enough for practical use.
A couple of days later, Nishizawa suggested using optical ﬁbers, evidently
inspired by ﬁber-optic endoscopes.23
The ﬁbers used in endoscopes have large cores and thin claddings, so they
transmit many modes, like millimeter waveguides. The two professors quickly
realized that was a problem, but instead of turning to single-mode ﬁbers, they
invented a new way to guide light along a ﬁber. Imaging ﬁbers rely on total
internal reﬂection at a sharp boundary between two materials. Specialists call
them ‘‘step-index’’ ﬁbers because the refractive index changes abruptly at the
boundary between the light-guiding core and the cladding. Kiyasu and Nish-
izawa proposed grading the refractive index so that it changes gradually from
core into cladding. Instead of reﬂecting light abruptly from a sharp boundary,
a graded-index ﬁber bends it back gradually. You can visualize the light rays
as following a wavy path, rather than the zigzag path deﬁned by total internal
reﬂection in a large-core step index ﬁber. The Japanese hoped this would
reduce losses caused by imperfections in the core-cladding boundary, a prob-
lem with some early ﬁbers. Nishizawa ﬁled for a patent in November 1964
and was later surprised to learn that Stew Miller at Bell Labs had ﬁled for a
patent on a similar idea in February.24
High glass loss stalled the Tohoku group, who like most communications
engineers knew little about glass. The Japanese listened carefully to Kao and
took him to the Japanese equivalent of Bell Labs, the NTT Electrical Com-
munication Laboratory, which gave Kao a sample of its own experimental
single-mode ﬁber.25

122
CITY OF LIGHT
A Budgetary Windfall
As Charles Kao preached the gospel of ﬁber optics, Dollis Hill blundered into
a bit of budgetary good fortune. American management consultants told the
Post Ofﬁce that its telephone division wasn’t spending enough money on
research. That may seem preposterous in an era of corporate downsizing, but
the 1960s were ﬂush with technological optimism. Management allocated an
extra £12 million for research. ‘‘Goodness knows how we are going to spend
it all,’’ Tillman confessed to Richard Dyott when he started work at Dollis Hill
on March 1, 1967.26
The extra money gave Bray and Tillman the luxury of investing in wild
schemes, and the realists at Dollis Hill counted ﬁber optics among the wildest.
It would be nice to have a ﬂexible waveguide to thread through convoluted
urban underground ducts, but it was not a pressing need. Tower-to-tower
microwave transmission worked well and avoided messy construction in de-
veloped areas. Engineers saw millimeter waveguides as ‘‘the next logical step
from microwave towers for long-distance stuff.’’27 Fiber-optic communications
was a long shot, worth a small bet from the suddenly ﬂush research budget
because it might solve some annoying problems.
Roberts gathered a small team to work on ﬁbers and glass, and they col-
lected all the optical equipment they could ﬁnd. He put George Newns in
charge of developing ultrapure glasses with low loss. Dyott headed a group
devoted to making ﬁbers and studying their properties. Hugh Daglish was to
develop optical techniques to measure ﬁber properties, a critical concern for
a stickler like Roberts. Most of the team came from electronics or millimeter
waveguide development and were surprised to be assigned to the unfamiliar
world of light.28
They started with minimal resources. Dyott sealed a thin rod of tungsten
glass inside a thick Pyrex tube, which had a lower refractive index, to make
a preform that could be stretched into single-mode ﬁber. He had no ﬁber-
drawing equipment, but his lab was long and narrow, so Dyott improvised.
‘‘We heated up the preform at one end of the lab and Jacqueline Viveash,
who by chance had a pair of tennis shoes handy, raced to the other end
carrying the end of the preform in a pair of tongs to the cry of ‘Run, Jacquie,
run.’ ’’ he recalls.29 Jacquie’s dash yielded a ﬁber that carried a single mode
at the red helium-neon wavelength. Dyott was pleasantly surprised to ﬁnd
that the ﬁber collected more than half the laser light focused into it through
a microscope objective. Unfortunately, the light didn’t go very far. The loss
was 30 decibels per meter—so high that less than 0.1 percent of the light
that entered the ﬁber on one side of a desk would emerge on the other.
Dyott also borrowed time on a university computer to solve the complex
equations that Snitzer had formulated for single-mode ﬁber. It was not an
easy task because input had to be submitted to the computer center punched
on ﬁve-hole paper tape, and a single mispunched hole could stop the program,
yielding only a cryptic error message hours later. Yet the results helped ex-
plain how pulses spread along ﬁbers.

TRYING TO SELL A DREAM
123
Meanwhile, Roberts pushed ahead, forming a consortium to develop low-
loss ﬁbers, including the Post Ofﬁce, STL, the Scottish optics company Barr &
Stroud, and British Titan Products, which made titanium and ultrapure ma-
terials. Several days before the consortium’s ﬁrst meeting on July 26, 1967,
Roberts returned from a short business trip to France and started driving
toward the south of England for a short holiday. On route, he suffered a severe
heart attack in the car. Realizing what was happening, he turned around and
drove himself to the hospital.
The seizure was a shock to everyone; just under six feet tall, Roberts was
thin, active, and had appeared ﬁt. It was November before he returned to
work. He had to climb ﬁve ﬂights of stairs to reach his ofﬁce, which may have
contributed to a second heart attack in January 1968.30 A bypass operation
followed, but the diligent Roberts insisted on receiving progress reports, which
his wife delivered to his hospital bed.
Pushing Hard at STL
Charles Kao sought clearer, purer glass at STL, driving the project ‘‘every way
that he could. He believed in it, and that’s what it took,’’ recalls Martin
Chown, who worked for him.31 Management was largely skeptical with the
crucial exceptions of those in the line of command above Kao31—Sandbank,
Reeves, and Jock Marsh, STL’s managing director. Marsh didn’t come down
hard when Kao exceeded his budgets for travel and experiments.
Contracts from Roberts at the Post Ofﬁce and Williams at the Ministry of
Defense provided vital support. ITT’s contribution was modest. Sandbank pen-
ciled in $34,000 for ﬁber research in one early year. ‘‘It was very difﬁcult to
get it through,’’ he recalls.32 Reeves’s backing saved the day, because the
head of ITT laboratories had worked for him back in 1940.33
The ﬁber communications project grew slowly. Optics were incidental to
Hockham, who left to form his own antenna technology group in mid-1967.34
One early addition was Richard Epworth—a young engineer who had read
about Kao’s ideas in Wireless World. Epworth modiﬁed a laser transmitter to
send video signals through ﬁbers instead of the air. Realizing that individual
single-mode ﬁbers would not collect much light, he blew 70 segments of the
clearest ﬁber he could get into a 20-meter tube. The ﬁbers had loss of about
one decibel per meter, a total of 20 decibels along their length, but they
carried the video signal the full length of the tube.35 Students do better today
in science-fair projects, but in 1967 it was an important feasibility demon-
stration.
Kao soon realized that such demonstrations were not enough. Skeptics
focused their criticism on the key issue of glass transparency. Except for a
few small military systems, ﬁber communications would never work without
low-loss ﬁbers. He decided the best way to answer the critics was to roll up
his sleeves and measure the best glasses he could ﬁnd.

124
CITY OF LIGHT
It’s a big challenge to measure a little attenuation because it’s a small
difference between two large numbers. One percent accuracy may sound ﬁne,
but it’s useless if you want to measure the difference between 99 and 99.5
microwatts. Doing better is a challenge for the best of laboratory wizards, and
that was not Charles Kao’s specialty.
Today, engineers measure attenuation in the clearest ﬁbers by passing light
through one kilometer, or ten, or a hundred. That builds up loss until it’s
high enough to measure easily. Kao didn’t have that luxury; no one knew
how to draw good ﬁbers from the clearest glasses. The best he could do was
work with samples of bulk glass about 30 centimeters (a foot) long.
Nobody had ever tried to measure such low losses before, so he had to
develop a new technique. His ﬁrst study showed glass could be made clearer
than standard imaging ﬁbers, but could not measure loss as low as 20 decibels
per kilometer.36 That required him and Mervin W. Jones to devise an even
more sensitive instrument, which compared light passing through two glass
rods, one 20 centimeters (8 inches) longer than the other. Accurate compar-
ison is a demanding task, but it let them cancel the effects of surface reﬂection
and concentrate on loss in the bulk glass.
Kao sought the purest glass available for his measurements. Ordinary op-
tical glass would not do because the raw materials that go into it are riddled
with impurities. Instead, he studied fused silica, a synthetic glass that is es-
sentially pure silicon dioxide (SiO2), with less than one part per million of the
troublesome iron impurities.37 At ﬁrst their results looked too good to be true.
The samples seemed to be perfectly clear, with no attenuation at all. They
knew that meant that the real attenuation was somewhere within their mar-
gin of error, which allowed loss between 4 and 4 decibels per kilometer.
They spent months analyzing the experiments, to make sure they had every-
thing right, and to be sure their calculations did not yield negative loss (which
would imply their measurements were wrong because the glass would have
to generate light). In 1969 they ﬁnally reported loss of ﬁve decibels per kil-
ometer,38 with the lower limit of their error margin close to zero.39
Difﬁcult and elegant, those measurements opened the eyes of skeptics
around the world. Before them, Kao had only a handful of believers because
ultraclear glass existed only on paper. The measurements demonstrated he
was right; extremely pure glass could be clearer than anyone else had imag-
ined. ‘‘Kao gave everybody a jolt,’’ recalls Dave Pearson of Bell Labs. ‘‘That
was the ﬁrst practical measurement which said, hey, you’re not just whistling
Dixie.’’40
The Search for Clear Fibers
The measurements were a milestone far from the ﬁnish line. They showed
that pure glass could be extremely clear; they did not show how to make
ultratransparent optical ﬁbers.

TRYING TO SELL A DREAM
125
A key step was to get rid of the impurities, but how to do that was far
from obvious. Kao had measured fused silica, which most major laborato-
ries—STL, the British Post Ofﬁce, Bell Labs, and the Japanese—considered an
impractical material. Its melting point is over 1600C (2900F),41 far higher
than other glasses. Virtually no one had furnaces hot enough to soften it for
drawing into ﬁbers. More troublesome optically, its refractive index is 1.46,
the lowest of any standard glass. That was a big problem because an optical
ﬁber requires a cladding with refractive index lower than the core, but nobody
knew how to make glass with lower index than fused silica. STL engineers
groped in vain for ideas, even considering cladding pure silica with ice.42 The
difﬁculties were so large and so obvious that virtually everyone crossed pure
fused silica off their list of potential ﬁber materials.
The consensus was that the best way to make ﬁbers was to purify other
glasses, in which other oxide compounds such as phosphates, borates, soda,
and lime are added to impure silica. The glass industry had generations of
experience with multicomponent glasses. Blending other materials into silica
reduced its melting point to reasonable temperatures and gave control over
the refractive index. Purity was a problem, but progress was being made in
purifying raw materials. It seemed just a straightforward matter of slogging
slowly forward to purer and clearer glass.
Dyott’s group at the Post Ofﬁce reﬁned their methods of pulling ﬁbers from
preforms made by sealing a core-glass rod inside a tube, but they weren’t
satisﬁed. They had problems keeping rod and tube surfaces clean, and wanted
to pull ﬁbers continuously, without replacing preforms. Dyott started looking
at a process used to make other glass ﬁbers, pulling them from a hole in the
bottom of a crucible ﬁlled with thick molten glass. It yielded a continuous
ﬁber as long as fresh material was fed into the crucible, but a simple crucible
could not make the clad ﬁber needed for communications. The technical di-
rector of a glass company outside London43 suggested Dyott try a double
crucible, with core glass melted in an inner crucible which sat in the middle
of an outer crucible ﬁlled with molten cladding glass. The core glass emerged
from a central hole at the bottom of the inner crucible; cladding glass emerged
from a concentric ring around that hole.
Dyott liked the idea, a variation on a scheme invented in the 1930s to
make insulating glass ﬁbers.44 He didn’t know that Will Hicks had brieﬂy
experimented with a similar approach a decade earlier,45 but that probably
would not have mattered. Dyott thought industrial production would require
a process that could draw ﬁbers continuously. If the core and cladding glass
were both molten as they emerged from the nozzle, but cooled quickly enough
that they didn’t mix, he expected them to form a smooth core-cladding
interface.
While the double-crucible concept was simple, if was far from obvious how
to calculate exactly how the process worked. That didn’t stop Dyott, who like
Reeves devised intuitive models to test new ideas. He decided he could test
the double-crucible process with sugar. Although the choice sounded unlikely,

126
CITY OF LIGHT
it made eminent sense. Like glass, sugar melts to a thick liquid that can be
drawn into ﬁbers (cotton candy), but sugar melts at 107C (225F), so it can
be handled in brass crucibles instead of the high-temperature materials
needed for glass. Dyott dyed the inner core red and started drawing sugar
ﬁbers. By adjusting composition to control the refractive index of sugar, he
could draw single-mode sugar ﬁbers. The ﬁbers were totally unsuitable for
telecommunications, but they helped Dyott understand the physics of making
ﬁber.
Roberts knew nothing about the experiments until January 1969, when
he asked Dyott about ﬁber-drawing progress as they shared a train compart-
ment riding to Shefﬁeld. ‘‘I mentioned that we were using sugar, and he blew
his top,’’ says Dyott. The precise manager considered the experiments ridic-
ulous; to him, the only proper way to examine a process was by writing and
solving formal mathematical equations that gave exact numerical results.
Furious that Dyott could not be bothered to do the requisite calculations,
Roberts transferred ﬁber drawing to Daglish. He dutifully set to work with
pencil and paper, telling Dyott, ‘‘If Sir wants it calculated, Sir will have it
calculated.’’ However, the calculations were beyond Daglish as well, and work
stalled until an exasperated Roberts transferred Daglish completely out of ﬁber
optics. George Newns inherited the double-crucible project, and he eventually
resorted to experiments with a core of molasses and a cladding of sugar syrup.
The two liquids did not solidify, but they yielded enough information to design
a platinum double-crucible system for drawing glass ﬁbers, and Newns got
away with it.46
Newns ordered the purest available raw materials and started drawing
ﬁbers at Dollis Hill, but industrial northwest London was a poor environment
to use ultrapure materials. He was one of the ﬁrst people that the Post Ofﬁce
moved to its newly built research laboratories in Martlesham Heath, near
Ipswich, some 100 kilometers (60 miles) northeast of London. There he found
that platinum particles from the crucibles contaminated the glass, so he
switched to crucibles of fused silica, which remains hard at temperatures
much higher than the 1000 to 1200C (1800 to 2100F) melting tempera-
tures of the compound glasses he was using.47
Bell Labs Wakes Up
Kao’s careful measurements of fused silica forced Bell Labs to take ﬁbers more
seriously. At Murray Hill, the center of Bell’s materials research, Dave Pearson
put his low-level study of optical ﬁbers on the front burner, adding several
people,48 including two from Miller’s group at Crawford Hill.
Like the British Post Ofﬁce team, Pearson’s group saw little hope for fused
silica and concentrated on multicomponent glasses. They had no glass-
making facilities, so they had outside contractors make glass from the purest
available raw materials. They measured light transmission in bulk glass and
in ﬁbers. They tested ﬁbers made from rod-in-tube preforms, and assembled

TRYING TO SELL A DREAM
127
their own double-crucible apparatus.49 They conﬁrmed that impurity absorp-
tion was the big problem, and it proved as hard to reduce at Bell Labs as
elsewhere. In the spring of 1970, the lowest total loss they measured in ﬁbers
was about 0.7 decibel per meter, still far too high for communications.50
The main thrust at Bell Labs remained the millimeter waveguide. Field
trials were scheduled for 1973, Kompfner reported in March, 1970. He con-
sidered laser communications to be another technological generation in the
future, but he said some 100 Bell Labs engineers were already working on
it, mostly on underground systems using confocal waveguides or gas lenses.51
Fiber remained a tiny effort.
A New Type of Fiber in Japan
Meanwhile, the Japanese had tackled another problem: getting light into ﬁ-
bers. Squeezing a laser beam into the core of a single-mode ﬁber required
alignment accuracy of about a micrometer. In 1967, that was an extremely
difﬁcult task for a specialist in a fully equipped optics laboratory; it seemed
an inconceivable task for a technician in a manhole or on a telephone pole.
That worried Shojiro Kawakami at Tohoku University, and in the spring of
1967 he suggested the problem could be eased by switching to a new type
of graded-index ﬁber.
Standard large-core ﬁbers were not attractive for communications because
they suffered from pulse spreading. Whether you consider the light as rays
bouncing around in the core or as modes conﬁned by a waveguide, light
could follow many paths through a large-core ﬁber. Each path took a different
time to travel, so the further the light pulse traveled, the more it spread. The
more the pulses spread, the longer you had to wait between pulses to keep
them from interfering from each other. That reduced transmission capacity.
Graded-index ﬁbers work differently because the refractive index varies
with the distance from the center of the ﬁber. The original reason for the
design was to avoid losses at the core-cladding boundary. However, Kawa-
kami realized that careful choice of the refractive-index gradient also could
do something else because the speed of light in glass depends on its refractive
index. The higher the refractive index, the slower light travels. Thus, light in
the high-index center of the ﬁber lags behind light farther out, where the
refractive index is lower. The more the light travels in the outer core, the
higher its average velocity, offsetting the delay it suffers from having to travel
a greater distance. Kawakami spent a week or two grinding through the
numbers to convince himself that this change in speed could compensate for
pulse spreading. Complete compensation was impossible, but proper tailoring
of the refractive index gradient could reduce pulse spreading by a factor of
100 to 1000. He was thrilled; the effect meant that graded-index ﬁber would
have almost as much transmission capacity as single-mode ﬁber over dis-
tances of a few miles.52

128
CITY OF LIGHT
Japanese companies started working intently on graded-index ﬁbers. At-
tenuation remained a problem, but Nippon Sheet Glass claimed loss as low
as 100 decibels per kilometer by the end of 1969.53 They couldn’t do that
well consistently; their typical value was 200 decibels per kilometer. None-
theless, it was progress.
Building Real Systems
Standard Telecommunication Labs worked hard on demonstrations as well
as on improving ﬁbers. Kao asked Chown, a radio engineer, to build a dem-
onstration system. Chown decided to build a digital repeater, a device to detect
a weak optical signal, convert the light into electrical form, and amplify the
electronic signal to drive a laser transmitter. Repeaters are vital for long sys-
tems, and they demonstrate the essential components of a communication
system—a transmitter and receiver. Chown designed his to operate at 75
million bits per second.54
Light detectors and electronic ampliﬁers were easy to build. The laser
source was a much tougher problem. Everyone wanted to use semiconductor
lasers, but they had to be kept chilled in liquid nitrogen lest they burn out.
Chown had to build a miniature transmission line to deliver short but pow-
erful electrical pulses to a cooled laser chip the size of a grain of salt packaged
in a metal case about the size of a pencil eraser. To collect the light, he drilled
a hole in the window in the case through which the light normally emerged,
stuck the ﬁber through, and glued it to the laser.55
Chown proudly demonstrated the repeater at a 1969 exhibition run by
the Physical Society. Alec Reeves was not impressed; his mind had once more
drifted to the future. He thought it awkward to convert an optical signal into
electronic form, then back into light again. Reeves wanted a purely optical
ampliﬁer, which could amplify a light signal without ﬁrst converting it into
electronic form.56 However, Kao was delighted, considering the demonstration
as a sign that ﬁber communication was ‘‘ready to be moved into the devel-
opment phase.’’ At the very least, it convinced ‘‘industrial leaders, responsible
government ofﬁcials, and technocrats alike . . . to recommend further invest-
ment.’’57
Investment was on Kao’s mind because his growing ﬁber-optic program
kept running over budget. When the time came for his annual budgetary
pilgrimage to ITT headquarters in New York, Sandbank suggested a sever-
alfold increase in what had been a nominal budget for ﬁber research. Al-
though he could report progress, he hesitated to ask for too much money.
When his turn came at the meeting, he outlined his plans for trying to make
low-loss ﬁbers. Al Cookson, corporate vice president of engineering, asked
what would happen if the initial approach did not work.
Sandbank said he would try another one.
The American asked, ‘‘in series or in parallel’’—electronic jargon for one
at a time or all at once.

TRYING TO SELL A DREAM
129
‘‘In series,’’ replied Sandbank cautiously.
‘‘Why not in parallel?’’ Cookson asked.
‘‘That will cost a lot of money,’’ replied a startled Sandbank.
‘‘Yes, but it will speed up the program,’’ was the response.
That night, Sandbank revised his plan, doubling or tripling the budget, but
fully expecting the number to be cut. He was amazed the next day when
Cookson said: ‘‘That looks like a good program, Charlie.’’
Later Sandbank learned the impetus for the expansion came from the very
top. Harold Geneen, the legendary businessman who built ITT into a global
conglomerate, had read an article predicting ﬁber optics would become the
most important advance in telecommunications since the transistor. Noting
the development came from ‘‘STL in Harlow,’’ Geneen asked, ‘‘Is that our
STL in Harlow?’’ Told it was, he asked pointedly, ‘‘Well, how is this optical
ﬁber program?’’ That greased the wheels for a budget increase.58
Signs of Slow Progress
The technological boom of the 1960s, fueled most visibly by the space race
and less obviously by Cold War military programs, began to wind down after
Neil Armstrong walked on the moon in the summer of 1969. The sustaining
forces of money, mind-set, and momentum began to dissipate. The space pro-
gram lost direction. America’s love affair with technology faded as the cur-
tains were stripped away from the ugly realities of pollution and the machin-
ery of nuclear Armageddon. The economy sputtered and slowed.
Telecommunications had it easy in comparison. Slower growth left more
time for semiconductors to approach the frequencies needed to build milli-
meter waveguides linking the world’s great cities in the 1970s. AT&T had
high hopes to revive demand with its Picturephone system, a highlight of the
1964 World’s Fair in New York. Bell Labs was working on laser communi-
cations to deliver a new generation of even higher capacity systems in the
1980s and beyond. Miller and Kompfner still expected the beams to go
through gas lenses or confocal lens waveguides, but ﬁber optics had joined
the race as a dark horse.
Charles Kao had eloquently sold his dream. His success came partly from
offering the attractive prospect of a ﬂexible waveguide, and partly from his
experimental tour de force in measuring the incredible clarity of fused silica.
A small cadre of other key scientists and engineers around the world were
convinced that ﬁber loss could be reduced. While the Post Ofﬁce, STL, Pearson
at Bell Labs, and the Japanese stood in the forefront, others labored quietly,
including Bob Maurer, who had built a little team of young scientists at
Corning.
However, by the spring of 1970 others were coming to suspect ﬁber at-
tenuation was inevitably high. Theorists suggested minor irregularities in the
core-cladding interface might scatter light into modes that leaked out of the
cladding.59 Miller emphasized gas lenses and hollow waveguides when he

130
CITY OF LIGHT
reviewed optical communications for the prestigious Science magazine. With
typical managerial caution, he wrote: ‘‘Glass ﬁbers are expected to be useful
over distances of tens of meters, certainly, and over distances of kilometers if
the material puriﬁcation work proves fruitful.’’60 To most people involved, that
was a big ‘‘if.’’

131
11
Breakthrough
The Clearest Glass in the World
(1966–1972)
If you do something different from what everybody else is
doing, you’ve got two advantages. One is that you may
succeed where they fail, of course, but even if you fail you
will gather information that they don’t gather. [That] will
give you some insights into what might follow
—Robert Maurer1
We never told anyone where we were, and I had always
assumed that everybody was coming along about the
same way we were.
—Robert Maurer2
F
rom his ﬁrst-ﬂoor ofﬁce at the Corning Sullivan Park Research Center, Bob
Maurer could see the clear and compelling logic in making ﬁbers from
compound glasses. The materials were well known, and the technology for
handling them was well developed. Removing the impurities that absorbed
light seemed a straightforward matter of purifying raw materials. The ap-
proach was so logical that everyone was doing it, including companies with
resources far greater than the Corning Glass Works. It was a race Corning
seemed doomed to lose.
Never one to pick the beaten path, Maurer looked for alternatives. His
native caution warned him to be careful in picking long shots. He wanted to
take advantage of Corning’s extensive expertise in glass technology. Fused

132
CITY OF LIGHT
silica stared him in the face. Everyone else had scorned it, and that appealed
to his contrarian nature.
Others avoided fused silica because its refractive index was too low for ﬁber
cores, and its melting temperature too hot for their furnaces. Maurer worried
about these difﬁculties; he was always a worrier. But he knew that fused silica
was the purest glass in the world, and that Corning had three decades of
experience working with it. After some preliminary research, he decided the
long shot was a sensible bet.
A Company Built on Glass
Corning is a company built on glass, with its roots in the nineteenth-century
advances that made glass a cheap, widely used material, and its headquarters
in the small city of Corning in the hills of western New York state. Unlike a
host of glass makers whose names survive only on antique bottles, Corning
eagerly embraced new technology. The company built a healthy business
making glass bulbs for Thomas Edison’s electric lamps. In the late 1920s,
Corning made glass tubes for the pioneers of electronic television.3 Instead of
retreating in the face of the Depression, Corning hired scientists in the 1930s
to develop new kinds of glass. Fused silica was among the results.4
Among the new hires was a young organic chemist named Frank Hyde,
whose job was to explore ways to apply organic chemistry to glass making.
Plastics were new, and their potential competition with glass worried Corning.
The company also was casting a giant blank for the 200-inch telescope on
Mount Palomar, using Pyrex glass because its size and shape change little
with temperature. Pure silica would have been better, because it expands less,
but no one knew how to make it in quantity. Hyde came up with an idea.
He had earlier discovered that silicon tetrachloride, a colorless liquid, boiled
at 57.6C (136F), not far above room temperature. He ﬁlled a wash bottle
with the liquid and squirted it into the ﬂame of an oxy-hydrogen torch. The
hot water in the ﬂame reacted with the silicon tetrachloride, yielding a ﬁne
dust of the purest silica anyone had ever made. From that experiment, Corn-
ing developed a process called ﬂame hydrolysis that is still used today because
it yields materials of exceptional purity.5
Removing the last traces of impurities is very difﬁcult with standard chem-
istry. Precipitate something from solution, and a little bit stays dissolved in
the liquid, while little traces of the liquid remain in the solid. ‘‘Pure’’ chem-
icals may contain parts per thousand or parts per million of other materials.
Flame hydrolysis works differently because it separates materials by differ-
ences in their vapor pressure. Pick the right materials and the right temper-
atures, and vapor pressures can differ far more than solubility. You can’t
separate a dash of salt from a glass of water by mixing chemicals, but the
salt will stay behind when the water evaporates.
The ﬁrst step in making fused silica is to dissolve ordinary sand and convert
its minerals into chloride compounds. Then you separate the chlorides and

BREAKTHROUGH
133
heat them slightly. Silicon tetrachloride evaporates readily because of its low
boiling point, but the chlorides of troublesome impurities have much higher
boiling points and stay behind. For example, molecules of iron chloride are a
thousand trillion (1015) times less likely to evaporate than silicon tetrachlo-
ride.6 Inject the silicon tetrachloride into a ﬂame where hydrogen burns in
oxygen to form water, and the silicon tetrachloride splits the water molecules.
Hydrogen chloride remains in the air (but has to be removed as a pollutant).
A thick white ‘‘soot’’ settles out, silica containing just parts per billion of
impurities.
In Hyde’s time, the main attraction of fused silica was its low thermal
expansion. In 1939 another Corning scientist found that adding titania (ti-
tanium dioxide) to fused silica could reduce its thermal expansion almost to
zero near room temperature. In the early 1950s, Corning started making
large pieces of ULE (for ultra low expansion) glass and built a small but
healthy business selling it for demanding applications including telescope mir-
rors and spy satellites.7 (It also is used in Corningware ceramics.)
Research remained important at Corning, which in 1963 moved its sci-
entists into a sparkling new glass-walled complex designed by the same ar-
chitect as the sprawling Bell Labs building in Holmdel. Sitting on a hillside
outside of the town of Corning, it overlooks the Chemung River valley, where
the company began.
A Worry Catalog
Bob Maurer was a logical choice to seek the clearest of glasses. Born July 20,
1924, in St. Louis, he grew up in Arkansas and earned a doctorate in low-
temperature physics from MIT before joining Corning in 1952. By the mid-
1960s, he had thoroughly settled in rural western New York. He had spent
a decade on glass research and managed a small glass development group.
Maurer had tried to make lasers by doping glass with the rare earth europium.
In the course of that work, he had met Eli Snitzer, who had taught him to
view optical ﬁbers as waveguides.
In his systematic way, Maurer collected information. Optical ﬁbers were
not new to Corning; a plant in the valley had begun making ﬁber-optic face-
plates in 1963.8 Chuck Lucy, who was in charge of that product line, became
the corporate sponsor of Maurer’s research.9 Maurer talked with the Corning
ﬁber engineers, although he knew communication ﬁbers would require a dif-
ferent technology. He asked Stew Miller at Bell Labs about communications.10
He quizzed Shaver about his visit to Britain, and when others followed Shaver,
he talked with them.
He also began investigating on his own. He had two men in his group,
Jack Stroud and Guy Stong, study the loss in bundled ﬁbers. They concluded
it came mostly from defects formed during ﬁber fabrication. To some extent
that was good news; if imperfections caused the loss, better ﬁber fabrication
should reduce it.

134
CITY OF LIGHT
Fused silica was a logical starting point. Maurer had recognized its low
scattering back in 1956, and the lab had plenty of samples of the two types
Corning manufactured—pure fused silica and titanium-doped ULE glass. Ide-
ally, he would have preferred to use the pure material for the core, where
most light traveled, to limit impurity absorption. However, like most impuri-
ties titanium increases the refractive index of silica, so the titanium-doped
silica had to be the core, with pure fused silica as the cladding.
‘‘The choice of silica had a lot of disadvantages to it, which concerned me
considerably,’’ recalls Maurer. He had a long catalog of worries. No one knew
the lower limits of glass absorption, or what glasses would be clearest. It
wasn’t certain if anything could meet Kao’s goal of 20 decibel per kilometer
ﬁbers. ‘‘Everything absorbs light; it’s just a question of what that level of
absorption is,’’ he explains.
Another concern was the high temperature needed to draw silica ﬁbers.
Oxygen can escape from very hot glass, leaving defects called ‘‘color centers’’
because they absorb light. ‘‘Putting the dopant in the core is a lousy idea in
that it gives you great opportunity to generate these color centers,’’ says
Maurer.11
He knew it was a gamble and thought the odds were against success. How-
ever, Armistead thought the payoff was worth the risk, and Maurer agreed. It
wasn’t a big investment, or even a full-time job for anyone. They wanted to see
if anything in Corning’s considerable bag of glass tricks could beat the odds.
Maurer enlisted the help of veteran Corning glass specialist Frank Zimar,
who had some experience with glass ﬁbers. Zimar also had built a furnace
that could heat glass above 2000C (3600F), the only one at Corning—or
any other company working on optical ﬁbers—which was hot enough to
draw ﬁbers from fused silica. He started by machining samples of raw fused
silica, making thin rods of titanium-doped silica and drilling out tubes of pure
silica. Then he inserted the rods into the tubes, essentially recreating the rod-
in-tube process that Larry Curtiss had developed a decade earlier.12
Maurer also put optical ﬁbers on a list of potential projects for graduate
students working during the summer of 1967. He wanted to ﬁnd a student
who could make single-mode ﬁbers and measure their properties. The project
caught the eye of Cliff Fonstad, an MIT student interested in both electronics
and materials. Fonstad started with Snitzer’s papers on single-mode ﬁbers, but
realized his limited time would constrain his work. He took the simplest ap-
proach he could think of, threading an unclad ﬁber from Corning’s ﬁber-
bundle plant through a glass capillary tube from the laboratory stockroom,
and handing the assembly to Zimar to draw into a ﬁber.
They succeeded in making single-mode ﬁbers, but the quality wasn’t very
good. Fonstad was using ordinary glass, and he hadn’t worried about pre-
paring the glass surfaces. Flaws scattered the red light from a helium-neon
laser out of the ﬁber and the loss was high.13 Fonstad went back to MIT to
study other things, but his results encouraged Maurer to think that better
materials and better preparation would yield better results. He convinced Ar-
mistead to invest a bit more time.

BREAKTHROUGH
135
Zimar continued experiments with fused silica in his custom-built furnace.
He collapsed pure-silica tubes onto rods of titanium-doped fused silica, then
drew them into ﬁbers. It was hot and difﬁcult work, but Zimar persevered.
He was no scientiﬁc superstar, just a solid experimentalist who knew his
furnace and his materials. His fused silica ﬁbers had attenuation of about 10
decibels per meter, ten times higher than the best imaging ﬁbers. Maurer was
not discouraged; everyone at Corning had expected fused silica to be difﬁcult.
It was time to expand the project by adding a specialist in glass science and
hiring a young physicist to work on ﬁbers full-time.
The Strategist and the Young Scientists
As a research manager, much of Maurer’s job was to plot strategy. He had
already focused on fused silica to exploit Corning’s unique expertise in the
material. He weighed that strength against the risks that silica might be in-
tractable, that its loss might be irreducible, or that there might be no way to
make it into a viable light-guiding ﬁber. As a good strategist, he marshaled
human assets as well as physical ones.
Compared to Kao and Roberts, Maurer was a master of glass, but other
Corning scientists knew more. In late 1967, he asked the glass chemistry
department for help. They pointed him to Peter Schultz, hired just months
earlier after earning a doctorate in ceramic engineering from Rutgers Uni-
versity. Ironically, Schultz had earned his degree by developing a glass doped
with iron and lithium for computer memories that was absolutely black.
Tall, thin, and self-directed, Schultz was barely 25, a kid from working-
class New Jersey whose fascination with space drew him into science. He
grew interested in aerospace ceramics as a Rutgers undergraduate and stayed
there for graduate school, where he fell under the spell of Norbert Kriedl, a
world-class glass scientist who had headed research and development at
Bausch and Lomb until he turned 60.14 When Schultz graduated, Kriedl told
him Corning was the best place in the country to work on glass science.
Corning put him to work on fused silica when he joined the glass chemistry
research group in July 1967.15 Just a few months later, Maurer asked him to
make the clearest glass ever known.
With money for a full-time physicist, Maurer went recruiting and found
Donald Keck. Born in Lansing on January 2, 1941, Keck went straight
through Michigan State University, receiving a doctorate in 1967. Jobs were
plentiful for physics graduates as NASA pushed for the moon and the Pen-
tagon pushed new weapons for Vietnam; Keck had a choice of offers. A com-
pact man full of energy and enthusiasm, he had grown intrigued by the
propagation of electromagnetic waves. Maurer hooked him with the bait of
building a low-loss optical waveguide. In January 1968, just after his 27th
birthday, Keck began working full-time on the ﬁber project.16 He soon got
help from a young Canadian, Felix Kapron, who had joined Maurer’s applied
physics department the previous year after receiving his doctorate from the

136
CITY OF LIGHT
University of Waterloo. Kapron had been studying laser glass, but Maurer
asked him to calculate the ideal dimensions for core and cladding of single-
mode ﬁber.17
Keck and Schultz started working with Zimar on rods and tubes drilled
from chunks of fused silica, hoping to improve the rod-in-tube process.
However, collapsing the tube trapped bubbles, cracks, and abrasive grit re-
maining from mechanical polishing at the critical interface between core and
cladding. Those irregularities scattered light. ‘‘Polishing is simply a process of
going to ﬁner and ﬁner abrasives to make the cracks as ﬁne as possible. If
you get them small enough, you don’t see them, but the light will,’’ says
Keck.18
Next they tried ﬂame polishing. The rod was easy; they just ran it through
a hot ﬂame. Reaching inside the tube was much harder, because the central
hole was only about a quarter-inch (six millimeters) across. Keck ﬁrst tried
the infrared beam from a carbon dioxide laser, which glass absorbs strongly.
He bounced the beam off a mirror at one end of the tube and directed it at
the inside wall with a second mirror that moved along the tube. The focused
beam melted the surface, but the moving mirror made screw-thread patterns
inside the tube. He eventually turned to sliding a small torch through the
tube to ﬂame polish the inside surface smoothly.
Meanwhile, Schultz and Keck decided to try a different approach to mak-
ing single-mode ﬁbers. They didn’t need much material for the core, so it
seemed simpler to deposit a thin layer of core glass inside a thick tube. Flame
hydrolysis could deposit ﬂuffy white fused-silica soot. Heating the tube
should melt the soot to form a clear inner layer that would become the core
when drawn into a ﬁber. That, they reasoned, should make a cleaner inter-
face.
The trick was to deposit the glass soot uniformly. Schultz had set up his
burners in a fume hood for ventilation and pollution control, so they had to
custom-build a lathe to roll up to the torches. Keck mounted a stainless-steel
tube inside a giant ball bearing with a two-inch (ﬁve-centimeter) central hole,
and mounted a 1-inch (2.5-centimeter) fused silica tube inside it. He added a
belt drive to turn the tubes and hauled the whole assembly in the elevator
from his ﬁrst-ﬂoor laboratory to Schultz’s lab on the ﬁfth ﬂoor.
Schultz carefully aligned a burner to point along the hole in the tube. They
started the lathe rotating the tube slowly, then ﬁred up the burner to spray
titania-doped soot for the ﬁber core. The lathe spun perfectly, but all the soot
collected at the end of the tube. The soot couldn’t go down the 1⁄4-inch (6-
millimeter) hole because no air was ﬂowing through it.
They needed to get air ﬂowing down the tube to carry the soot and coat
the inside uniformly. The frustrated pair looked around Schultz’s lab, and
their eyes fell on an old General Electric canister vacuum sitting in a corner,
which Schultz used to clean up the mess inevitable in a glass lab. Inspiration
struck. They shut down the lathe and burner, cleaned off the tube, and re-
mounted it. This time they hooked the vacuum to the end of the tube to suck
air and soot through the little hole. When they ﬁred up the burner and re-

BREAKTHROUGH
137
moved a bafﬂe, the vacuum sucked air down the tube, spreading soot along
the inside surface.
The vacuum didn’t survive the nasty mixture of chemicals in the burner
exhaust, but it did achieve a breakthrough. The pair had learned how to
deposit glass inside a tube. Making uniform deposits required air-ﬂow equip-
ment more precise than an old vacuum cleaner, but that was ﬁne tuning.
They had developed an important new way to make a ﬁber preform, called
inside vapor deposition because it deposited the core glass on the inside of the
tube that became the cladding. The next step was to heat the preform, melt
the ﬂuffy soot to coat the inside of the tube, and draw it out into a ﬁber.
Keck hauled the preform to Zimar’s lab, where he and Zimar mounted it
vertically, with the lower end in the furnace. The heat ﬁrst melted the soot,
then softened the whole tube. Pulling on the bottom stretched the glass into
a ﬁber, closing the central hole. After Zimar drew a short length of ﬁber, Keck
snipped off a bit and hustled back to his laboratory to measure its core di-
ameter through a microscope. Then he went back to Zimar’s lab and adjusted
temperature and drawing speed to get closer to the desired diameter.
They carried out a series of experiments, making preforms and drawing
ﬁbers from them in various ways. They carefully measured ﬁber properties to
see what happened as they changed things. Between experiments, Keck and
Schultz analyzed their ﬁndings and devised the next round of trials. It was a
pattern common to every lab trying to make low-loss ﬁbers: design an exper-
iment, perform it, measure the results, deduce what happened, then design a
new experiment. They cycled through the process again and again. The re-
sults didn’t always improve, but like every experimenter they sought to learn
something each time. Maurer strategized, Zimar drew ﬁbers, and Kapron and
others contributed ideas. Bit by bit, the Corning team worked out the details
of making single-mode ﬁbers.
Working Out the Process
Corning didn’t reveal much to the outside world, although Roberts paid a
visit and Maurer spoke with some British Post Ofﬁce researchers. However,
Maurer had progress to share whenever time came to report to Armistead.
Lucy went on the road, hunting outside support for Corning’s ﬁber research
and help with other aspects of ﬁber communications. AT&T showed no in-
terest, so he went overseas. He lured money from a few makers of copper
cable—Siemens in Germany, Pirelli in Italy, and BICC in England. He worked
out agreements with French government labs and with Furukawa Cable in
Japan. It helped keep the project going.19
Through the hot, humid summer of 1969, they drew ﬁbers in Zimar’s
laboratory. ‘‘It was hotter than Hades’’ with the furnace running, Keck re-
calls.20 They wound ﬁbers of various sizes onto 2-foot (60-centimeter) diam-
eter cardboard drums used to ship raw materials to the glass lab, a step
beyond oatmeal cartons. The drums spun about once every two seconds,

138
CITY OF LIGHT
pulling about 160 feet (50 meters) of ﬁber a minute. The experiments taught
Corning important practical lessons. Heat and humidity made small ﬁber, 50
micrometers or 2 mils thick, stick to the tractor drives. Fiber 250 micrometers
or 10 mils thick grew brittle and broke in a few weeks, with loose ends
springing up on the reels. Corning settled on an intermediate diameter, 125
micrometers or 5 mils, which remains the standard size for telecommunica-
tions ﬁber.
Other challenges appeared. The transparency of titanium oxides depends
on their chemical form. When one titanium atom combines with a pair of
oxygen atoms to form titanium dioxide, TiO2, the molecule absorbs almost no
light. However, the high temperatures needed to melt silica drove off some
oxygen atoms, leaving some pairs of titanium atoms to share three instead of
four oxygen atoms. That compound absorbs light, increasing ﬁber absorption
to a decibel per meter or worse—just as bad as the compound glasses Corning
was trying to avoid. Another Corning scientist, Roy Harrington, suggested
they could replace the missing oxygen by heating the ﬁber to 800 to 1000 C
in oxygen, returning titanium to its more transparent state. Unfortunately,
the cycle of heating and cooling tended to make the randomly oriented atoms
in glass align themselves into crystals at the ﬁber surface. The crystallization
caused tiny cracks to grow at the surface, making the ﬁbers very fragile.21
The Corning team found a delicate but not perfect balance. By early 1970,
they had found a titanium doping level that seemed right and had learned
how to make good preforms. Progress was slow because it took them about
three months to make a preform, measure its properties, draw it into ﬁber,
analyze the results, and use the lessons from those experiments to make an-
other preform.
That Eureka Moment
Experiments inevitably have frustrating moments. One came in early 1970,
when a preform slipped against the furnace wall soon after ﬁber drawing
started. The accident ruined the preform, but Keck decided to test the 20
meters (65 feet) of ﬁber that had been pulled. After heat-treating, he aimed
a helium-neon laser down the ﬁber. At ﬁrst he couldn’t detect any loss, but
more careful measurements showed attenuation probably was close to the
magic ﬁgure of 20 decibels per kilometer.22
That was a big improvement. Keck had been estimating the loss of ﬁbers
only about three meters (10 feet) long by measuring changes in light trans-
mission as he broke small pieces off the end. The light intensity had changed
every time he broke a 10-centimeter (4-inch) segment off the old ﬁber, but
with the new ﬁber the change was too small to measure accurately with the
best instruments he had. With the preform ruined, he couldn’t draw any more
ﬁber from it. Nor did he have enough data to claim spectacular results.
The only thing for Schultz and Keck to do was to make another preform
using the same formula and hope the ﬁber was as good. Zimar pulled a kil-

BREAKTHROUGH
139
ometer (3280 feet) of ﬁber without incident, although it broke in two when
Keck rewound it onto a drum for heat treating. Keck concentrated on the
smaller 200-meter (660-foot) segment.
The ﬁber came out of the heat-treating furnace on a Friday afternoon. It
was early summer, and almost everyone else in the lab had gone home, but
Keck was eager to see the results and worried that the ﬁber—fragile after
heat treating—might not be in one piece when he returned on Monday. He
set up a test jig that aimed a red helium-neon laser beam into the ﬁber to
help him align it.
‘‘I remember so vividly moving the ﬁber over, and when the laser spot hit
the core, all of a sudden I got this ﬂash of light. It was different, a spot that
was different than the laser spot,’’ recalls Keck. That puzzled him; he had
never seen such a spot before, and he didn’t immediately know what it was.
Eventually he realized that the light had gone back and forth through all 200
meters of ﬁber. The distant end of the ﬁber reﬂected 4 percent of the light
that hit it back toward Keck, and that light was passing back through the
ﬁber to reach his eye. It was still bright after passing through 400 meters
(1320 feet) of ﬁber. He had before him the clearest glass ever made. Delighted
and excited, he went searching for someone to share his eureka moment. Not
a soul was left in the lab, so he went into the main hallway. He heard an
elevator door open, and out stepped Bill Armistead. Keck invited the research
director to come see ‘‘something neat,’’ showed him the new ﬁber, and then
went home to enjoy the afterglow of success all weekend.23
Careful measurements later showed the ﬁber had attenuation of 16 deci-
bels per kilometer. This time they had plenty of it. The Corning team pinned
the measurement down so tightly the error was only plus or minus one de-
cibel per kilometer. It was an impressive achievement and a dramatic im-
provement over previous ﬁbers. Don Keck, Bob Maurer, and Peter Schultz had
hit the ﬁber-optic jackpot.
A Mutually Surprising Announcement
The breakthrough presented Corning with a strategic dilemma. Corning had
built its success in the highly competitive glass industry on new technology,
which for glass usually means new processes. While processes can be pat-
ented, it is hard to make the patents so tight that competitors cannot circum-
vent them, so the glass industry had a tradition of jealously guarding its
techniques as trade secrets. This left excited Corning scientists wary about
disclosing details, even to their development partners. Maurer was particu-
larly cautious because he thought competitors were close on his heels. It
didn’t matter that the British, the Japanese, and Bell Labs were reporting
mediocre results; Maurer assumed that they, like Corning, were keeping their
successes quiet.24
In fact, everyone else in the low-loss ﬁber race were telephone companies,
who lived in a different world than Corning. In 1970, phone companies didn’t

140
CITY OF LIGHT
worry about competition; suppliers like STL had secure niches selling equip-
ment to government monopolies. They had better patent coverage and a tra-
dition of talking openly. For AT&T, it was more than a tradition; the company
had agreed to share Bell Labs technology to keep its telephone monopoly in
the United States, although it still took care to patent its inventions.
Corning managers assessed their position carefully. They thought they
were ahead of other companies and wanted to stay there. Their ﬁbers were
exceptionally transparent, but far from practical. Brittleness was the most
obvious problem, but a host of other issues remained. They wanted to an-
nounce Corning’s success while giving potential competitors as few clues as
possible about how to duplicate it. ‘‘We knew that it was going to be many
years before this thing was going to be used, and wanted to give ourselves
as much lead time as we possibly could,’’ recalls Keck.25
The ﬁrst order of business for Keck, Maurer, and Schultz was to sit down
with the patent lawyers. Glass patents were not bulletproof, but Corning be-
lieved in patenting its inventions and guarding them jealously. In July Maurer
shared the good news—but not the details of how the ﬁber was made—with
Bell Labs, because the phone company was Corning’s biggest potential cus-
tomer.26
Meanwhile, Maurer wrote a paper to announce the breakthrough—but
only very coyly. He concentrated on measurements of light scattering, not on
total attenuation, which includes absorption as well as scattering. He reported
scattering loss of about 7 decibels per kilometer in straight ﬁbers, ‘‘very close
to intrinsic material scattering loss.’’ That was not surprising; Kao had blamed
impurity absorption for most ﬁber loss. At ﬁrst glance, Maurer’s paper seemed
to conﬁrm this, because he noted that the scattering measurements were
made on two 30-meter ﬁber segments with total loss of 60 to 70 decibels per
kilometer. The paper went on to compare measured losses in bent ﬁbers with
a theory proposed by Henry Marcatili and Stew Miller of Bell Labs. The written
version gave no details of ﬁber composition or fabrication, and hid the break-
through in a single sentence:
The lowest value of total attenuation observed in all waveguides constructed
for this work was approximately 20 decibels per kilometer.27
Maurer listed Kapron and Keck as co-authors because they did the cal-
culations and measurements he described.28 Not wanting to reveal anything
about composition, he listed the glass specialists—Schultz and Zimar—only
in an acknowledgment. Maurer decided to announce the results at a confer-
ence held in London by the Institution of Electrical Engineers at the end of
September.29 In August, he sent a slightly different paper to Applied Physics
Letters, which appeared after the conference.30
The conference on ‘‘trunk telecommunications by guided waves’’ was an
ironic venue to report a ﬁber breakthrough. It had been organized by the
developers of millimeter waveguides, conﬁdent that their technology was at
last ready to provide the ‘‘trunks’’ linking the world’s great cities. The grand
old man of the millimeter waveguide, Harold Barlow, opened the meeting. It

BREAKTHROUGH
141
was an honor for a man whose vision seemed about to be realized. He rose
to the occasion, tracing progress from the discovery of radio waves and citing
major contributions by Stew Miller and Toni Karbowiak. He admitted that a
decade earlier developers had been ‘‘rather too sanguine about the prospects
of practical application.’’ Now he was convinced its time had ﬁnally arrived.
He joked about being accused of having a ‘‘pipe dream’’ and of almost being
driven ‘‘round the bend’’ by the bending losses in millimeter waveguides.
Then he looked to the future:
With most of these difﬁculties behind us, I feel quite sure that the journalists
from the other side of the Atlantic are quite realistic in describing the ap-
plication as ‘‘pipes of progress.’’ It is true that fully engineered prototypes
have still to be established, but so much work has already been done in a
practical environment that conﬁdence in the ultimate success of the project
runs high.
Dielectric surface waveguides, including optical ﬁbers, for telecommuni-
cations are perhaps a little more remote at present, but their turn will come,
and even in the near future they could ﬁnd valuable applications over the
shorter distances.31
As group manager, Maurer made the trip to London and sat through the
handful of talks on optical ﬁbers buried among the many on millimeter wav-
eguides. Dick Dyott came to describe his work at the Post Ofﬁce. Charles Kao
came as well, but having made ﬁber optics a respectable cause, he was about
to turn to a more personal mission. His children were eight and six, and he
wanted them to learn what it meant to be Chinese. He was taking leave from
STL to teach at the Chinese University of Hong Kong and turning his ﬁber-
optic group over to Murray Ramsay.
Most of the crowd was not tuned in to ﬁber optics or to Bob Maurer. He
is a modest, matter-of-fact speaker, not a master showman, and he was talk-
ing about a technology they thought was at least a generation away. He
buried the breakthrough datum—measured attenuation of 16 decibels per
kilometer—in a talk describing the details of scattering. It was an eye-opener
only to those who already had their eyes open.
‘‘A few people in that crowd were really turned on,’’ Maurer recalls.32
Among them was Stew Miller. Not completely sure of the initial measure-
ments, Maurer only claimed to have reached 20 decibels per kilometer when
he spoke to Miller in July. By the end of September, he was convinced the
actual loss was 16 decibels per kilometer. Miller didn’t realize Maurer was
talking about the same ﬁber; he thought that Corning had made further im-
provements since July.33 The misunderstanding helped light a ﬁre under Mil-
ler, who feared Bell was falling further behind.
Engineers from a British electronics ﬁrm hustled Maurer off to lunch to
ask questions. Engineers from the Post Ofﬁce and STL both asked Maurer to
bring samples for them to test in their own labs. Others seemed less excited,
not realizing the importance of the breakthrough, or knowing how easily
mistakes can be made in optical measurement.

142
CITY OF LIGHT
The few other ﬁber papers at the meeting surprised Maurer. Thinking he
was in a tight race, he hadn’t turned around to study the ﬁeld behind him.
After he crossed the ﬁnish line, he was amazed to see everyone else remained
far, far behind.
Barlow opened a general discussion at the end of the meeting by asking
what technology would come next, the metal waveguide or the optical ﬁber.
One Post Ofﬁce engineer said the millimeter waveguide was the obvious
choice because it was ready for installation. Heady with bravado after hearing
Maurer’s report, Dyott brashly retorted, ‘‘I’m quite happy for you to lay the
waveguides, and we will come along later and ﬁll them with optical ﬁbers.’’34
Guarding Snips of Fiber
The Post Ofﬁce invitation was too good an opportunity for Maurer to resist.
It came from a driving force in the ﬁeld and a major potential customer. Dollis
Hill had developed equipment to measure ﬁber properties, which in the early
days was a tricky task, and independent conﬁrmation of Corning’s results
would be an important plus.
The basic concept of measuring loss in an optical ﬁber is simple: Compare
how much light enters the ﬁber with how much emerges from the far end.
Divide to get the fraction of light emerging, take the logarithm, multiply by
ten, and you get ﬁber loss in decibels. Light output was easy to measure, but
not how much light entered the ﬁber. Especially in the early days, most light
aimed at the ﬁber would not wind up in the tiny core. Early ﬁber developers
found the best way to account for light that missed the ﬁber core was to work
backward. They ﬁrst measured how much light emerged from the end of a
long piece of ﬁber. Then they cut the ﬁber close to the light source, leaving
only a segment too short to have much loss of its own. The amount of light
exiting the short ﬁber should be essentially what entered the other end. Di-
viding the output of the long ﬁber by that of the short ﬁber gave the loss.
The cut-back method yields good results, but it consumes ﬁber. Every new
measurement requires chopping another segment from one end of the ﬁber,
so you have to have enough ﬁber to spare. You can’t repeat measurements.
More worrisome for Corning, which wanted to keep its ﬁber composition se-
cret, it breaks off little pieces of ﬁber, which someone might analyze to deter-
mine its content. It was bad enough that Corning’s ﬁbers were very brittle;
cut-back measurements could sprinkle ﬁber segments around the lab for
anyone to pick up.
Nonetheless, the Post Ofﬁce measurements were crucial to establish Corn-
ing’s credibility. Corning carefully wound a long length of precious brittle
glass thread on a paint can, then packed it in a custom-built container that
looked like a hat box and bought a seat for it on the plane. Maurer sat beside
the box, and he or Chuck Lucy, who went with him to discuss business
prospects for ﬁber, kept a hand on it at all times.35 It was an odd-looking

BREAKTHROUGH
143
piece of luggage, and London was going through a bomb scare when they
arrived. A bobby inspecting incoming luggage looked long and hard at the
strange package. Worried about ruining the fragile ﬁber, Maurer took off the
lid and showed the bobby the optical ﬁber wound on the can.
The bobby looked and replied, ‘‘Oh yes, they use them in medicine.’’
Amazed that a policeman would recognize such novel technology, Maurer
explained he was going to the British Post Ofﬁce to measure it. That satisﬁed
the bobby, who sighed and said, ‘‘You Yanks will probably be selling them
to us one of these days,’’ before moving on to other luggage.36
Maurer and Lucy arrived at Dollis Hill late in the morning of Monday,
November 9, 1970. After the Post Ofﬁce team installed the ﬁber in their
apparatus, Dyott suggested they break for lunch and do the measurements
after returning. Maurer insisted he had to stay with the ﬁber. Dyott displayed
a large key for the 1920s vintage lock and offered to lock the lab, but Maurer
refused to budge, even when Dyott said he could hold the key. Not about to
be denied their lunch, the British left Maurer behind, returning with a cup of
coffee and a cheese sandwich for him.
They spent the afternoon making measurements with a helium-neon laser.
Several tests conﬁrmed that attenuation was ‘‘an astonishing 15 decibels per
kilometer,’’37 as Maurer had claimed. Each time he carefully cleaved a piece
of ﬁber off the reel, Maurer retrieved it and taped the piece onto the side of
his drum. Then a short piece broke with an audible ping and fell to the ﬂoor.
The horriﬁed Maurer searched for it on a ﬂoor sprinkled with pieces of British
ﬁber left from earlier tests. Corning’s ﬁber was larger, and heat treating gave
it a distinctive curve. Nonetheless, he couldn’t ﬁnd the missing piece and had
to leave without it after the day’s measurements were done.
As soon as Maurer was gone, Dyott stopped everything to sweep up the
ﬁber fragments on the ﬂoor. The Post Ofﬁce crew sifted carefully through the
debris and, Dyott recalls, ‘‘in no time we found the piece of larger-diameter
slightly curved ﬁber, about 11⁄2 to 2 inches long. I handed it to George Newns
to see what he could make of it.’’38
Dyott and Newns knew the secret of Corning’s ﬁber lay in its composition,
so Newns immediately took the little piece to British Titan Products, which
had a neutron activation system that could sensitively analyze composition
of even tiny samples. Within hours, British Titan reported back that it was
the purest form of silica they had ever encountered. Dyott knew the ﬁber had
to contain something else, either to dope the core to increase its refractive
index, or to reduce the index of the cladding. He asked what else was in the
glass, but the neutron activation specialists said they had found only pure
silica. Dyott insisted there had to be something else. Reluctantly, British Titan
admitted there was one possibility. The company specialized in titanium prod-
ucts, so traces of the metal were everywhere, and that background contam-
ination could conceal small quantities of titanium from their instruments.
That hinted at the identify of the magic ingredient, but a deﬁnitive answer
was out of reach. The test had consumed the tiny piece of ﬁber.39

144
CITY OF LIGHT
Maurer also lost a ﬁber fragment at STL, where engineers used a different
trick to deduce composition of the Corning ﬁber. To make sure the measure-
ments were accurate, light captured in the cladding had to be removed from
the ﬁber. This can be done easily by immersing the ﬁber in a liquid with
higher refractive index than the cladding, so light in the cladding escapes into
the liquid. STL kept changing liquids during the measurements, each time
giving Maurer one with lower refractive index. They ﬁgured that when they
got to a liquid with an index lower than the cladding glass, the light would
not escape into the liquid, and the measurement wouldn’t work. However,
all the liquids worked, indicating the cladding had to be the lowest-index
glass, fused silica. Murray Ramsay recounts the trick with pride, but admits
‘‘it didn’t help us, because we still didn’t know how to dope the bloody core.’’40
A Crucial Turning Point
The low-loss Corning ﬁber was a breakthrough that marked a turning point
for ﬁber-optic communications, although even the technical press almost
completely ignored it at the time.41 It made Charles Kao a visionary; no one
else had been willing to bet his future on the clarity of glass ﬁbers. It thrust
Corning into the telecommunications business. It made Roberts a prophet as
well, and gave ﬁber a big boost around the world.
Yet in reaching that crucial milestone, Corning did not demonstrate a
practical technology. The heat treatment that made titanium-doped ﬁbers
clear also made them brittle. If the lab got too hot or cold over the weekend,
Monday morning found little brittle ends of broken ﬁbers sticking up on the
reel. Light sources remained a problem (detailed in chapter 12). Much work
remained to make viable communication systems.
Keck and Schultz found heat-induced crystallization caused the brittleness.
Other Corning scientists tried etching ﬁbers with hydroﬂuoric acid to remove
surface contamination, but the process was awkward and cumbersome.42 Hy-
droﬂuoric acid is nasty stuff, and thin ﬁbers could easily be etched away to
nothing. However, their results persuaded Corning management to move ﬁ-
bers from research into a larger-scale ‘‘development’’ program.
Competitors stepped up their efforts as well. The British Post Ofﬁce and
STL steadily improved double-crucible ﬁbers. Other labs around the world
started looking seriously at ﬁbers for the ﬁrst time. The biggest change came
at Bell Labs, where Dave Pearson’s little group at Murray Hill had been the
only ones working on ﬁbers. Top management was not happy to see another
company stealing the thunder of what was supposed to be America’s biggest
and best corporate research operation. ‘‘We could feel the pressure all the
way from the vice president,’’ recalls Pearson, who was surprised by Corning’s
announcement. Management asked, ‘‘If Corning can do it, why can’t you?’’43
Pearson stepped up his efforts on multicomponent glasses and added to his
team at Murray Hill.

BREAKTHROUGH
145
Seeking a Better Magic Ingredient
As others tried to identify the mystery ingredient in Corning’s ﬁrst low-loss
ﬁber, Schultz sought better dopants. Corning reduced loss of titania-doped
ﬁbers to about 10 decibels per kilometer, but they remained extremely fragile.
Schultz wanted something that increased the refractive index of fused silica,
without absorbing light or requiring the troublesome heat treatment. He also
wanted a material that made a better glass.
The chemistry of glass is tricky, in an entirely different league from things
that ﬁzzle in high-school test tubes. Glasses are unusual solids that form only
when certain liquids are cooled in the proper way. As most liquids freeze,
atoms link up in ordered crystalline lattices. In a glass, the atoms retain the
random arrangement of a liquid, but are frozen in place.44 Only a few ma-
terials form glasses; silica is among the best. Titanium dioxide, a compound
called ‘‘titania,’’ is not a glass-former. Silica can form a glass if it contains a
dash of titania, but mix in too much titania, cool the liquid too slowly, or do
any of a thousand other little things wrong, and the solid crystallizes instead.
Germanium was a logical alternative. Just a row below silicon on the
periodic table, it has similar chemistry and is also a glass-former. It absorbed
little light and did not require the troublesome heat treatment. Schultz also
found problems: Germanium oxide (or ‘‘germania’’) evaporated more easily
than silica, which complicated glass formation. Nonetheless, in early 1972
Schultz adjusted the ﬂame-hydrolysis process and started doping preform
cores with germanium instead of titanium.
By then, Corning was scaling up ﬁber development, adding people and
investing money, but still cautious because the future was far from assured.
The changes meant Keck, Schultz, Maurer, and Zimar no longer had to do
everything themselves. Technicians and other scientists helped them mount
the germanium-doped preforms in the furnace and draw ﬁber from them.
Keck took samples to his lab and measured them. Even the ﬁrst of the
germanium-doped ﬁbers looked encouraging.
It wasn’t long before Keck had results good enough to invite Maurer’s boss
to take a look one Monday morning. However, when he set up the test, not
a speck of light went through the ﬁber. Keck sputtered an apology and set to
work ﬁnding the problem. He discovered the problem arose from Corning’s
habit of shutting down air conditioning over the weekend. Humidity built up
and the cardboard reel holding the ﬁber expanded, stressing the ﬁber such
that it wrinkled, forming tiny ‘‘microbends’’ where light leaked out. Micro-
bend loss had shut down light transmission totally. Keck rewound the ﬁber
and called the man back down to show that he’d solved the problem.45 With
a little experimentation, he and Schultz reduced loss to a mere four decibels
per kilometer. It was June, 1972, not quite two years after they had broken
the 20 decibel per kilometer barrier.
‘‘This was to my mind the breakthrough for ﬁber optics, because it was
now a practical ﬁber,’’ says Schultz. ‘‘It didn’t break, you didn’t have to go
through all this other stuff. You could make ﬁbers right off the draw with

146
CITY OF LIGHT
these nice low losses.’’46 Bob Maurer’s strategy had paid off. Half a dozen
years earlier, ﬁber optic communications had been merely the dream of a
Chinese immigrant to England. Charles Kao had spread his dream around the
world. Now scientists working in a western New York town with a population
of only 13,000 people had made it a reality.
At the moment of triumph, the deluge struck. Hurricane Agnes swept
across Pennsylvania and dumped heavy rains on western New York, causing
disastrous ﬂoods. The hillside research lab was safe, but Corning and other
towns in the Chemung River valley were not. Corning scientists and man-
agers dropped everything to spend weeks helping the community clean up.
Yet even in the midst of the disaster word of the new ﬁbers percolated upward.
Bill Armistead spotted Schultz while the two were helping ﬂood victims in
Corning and congratulated him. ‘‘Pete, that’s fantastic. You really did it!’’47
When the mud and the water were gone, the Corning ﬁber team went
back to their lab. They carefully measured ﬁber loss from the edge of the
ultraviolet into the infrared. It was near four decibels per kilometer in two
critical parts of the infrared where lasers emit light: 800 to 850 nanometers,
and near 1050 nanometers. They identiﬁed traces of water as responsible for
most of the remaining absorption. In December 1972, Keck, Maurer, and
Schultz wrote a paper reporting prospects for low-loss ﬁbers, in which they
predicted, ‘‘Total attenuation of about 2 decibels per kilometer in the region
beyond 800 nanometers thus appears possible.’’48 That meant ﬁbers made of
doped silica could carry light ten times farther than Charles Kao had thought
would be necessary.
Optical ﬁbers had crossed the threshold for communications. Much work
remained to be done. Fibers had to be ﬁne tuned to meet system requirements.
Telephone companies worried how they could transfer light into ﬁber cores.
Light sources remained an issue, although progress was being made on semi-
conductor lasers. Fiber strength had to be improved. Coatings were needed to
prevent damage during handling. Cable structures and manufacturing tech-
nology had to be developed.
Nonetheless, ﬁbers were looking better as ﬁeld trials made the millimeter
waveguide look worse. With the right supporting technology, it looked like
Dick Dyott might get his chance to thread ﬁber-optic cables through buried
millimeter waveguides.

147
12
Recipes for Grains of Salt
The Semiconductor Laser
(1962–1977)
Jack Tillman said ‘‘Did you know the semiconductor laser
has just been invented? . . . I think we should get some and
see if they’re any use at all for communications.’’ So I went
over [in 1963 to the Joint Services Electronics Research Lab-
oratory in Baldock, north of London] for a month, and
brought some of these things back with me. They only op-
erated at liquid nitrogen temperature, only operated in
pulses of about 10 microseconds, and it took 100 am-
peres in each pulse to drive the bloody things. We con-
cluded that they weren’t very promising.
—David Newman, British Post Ofﬁce
Research Laboratories1
A
s Corning all too keenly recognized, clear optical ﬁbers were not the only
building block vital for ﬁber-optic communications. A second crucial
ingredient was a matching light source. From Bell Labs to the British
Post Ofﬁce, developers of optical communication systems thought the ideal
light source would be a semiconductor laser. By a curious coincidence, the
spring and summer of 1970 also marked symbolic breakthroughs on the
semiconductor laser frontier, although as with ﬁbers, practical devices took
longer.
The allures of semiconductor lasers were considerable. One was the sheer
magic of solid-state devices. Semiconductor technology was hot in the 1960s;

148
CITY OF LIGHT
transistor electronics were pushing vacuum tubes into the grave of obsoles-
cence. Semiconductor lasers generated light easily, with the intensity con-
trolled by the electrical currents passing through them. Tiny as grains of salt,
they matched the size of optical ﬁbers, but the potential for compact, solid-
state laser transmitters attracted even the developers of hollow optical wave-
guides.
Unfortunately, early semiconductor lasers were as useless for practical
communications as the optical ﬁbers of the early 1960s. The lasers operated
only at the cryogenic temperature of liquid nitrogen, 321F or 196C.
They burned out quickly and unpredictably. Worse yet, the warmer the laser
got, the more current you needed to make it emit light, and the higher the
current, the faster the laser burned out. It didn’t look good, and after an early
burst of energy, progress stalled in the mid-1960s. Developers needed better
recipes for their grains of salt.
A Curious Class of Materials
Both the allure and the problems of semiconductor lasers came from the
nature of semiconductors. From an electrical standpoint, materials fall into
three classes—conductors, semiconductors, and insulators. The essential dif-
ference among them is the amount of energy needed to free an electron from
the bonds that link atoms in the material. In conductors, notably metals, very
little energy is needed, so electrons ﬂow freely through copper wires. In glass
and other insulators, the electrons are bound so tightly between atoms that
essentially none of them have enough energy to escape.
Semiconductors fall between the two extremes, because a few electrons do
escape from atomic bonds to conduct electricity in the crystal. The bonded
electrons occupy a ‘‘valence band,’’ where they form bonds between atoms
in the crystal. Electrons that get enough energy to escape those atomic bonds
fall into another energy state called the ‘‘conduction band.’’ No energy states
exist between the valence and conduction bands, so electrons have to get
enough energy to jump this ‘‘band gap’’ before they can carry a current.
In a pure semiconductor, only a few electrons have enough energy to
reach the conduction band. Those that escape the valence band leave behind
vacancies called ‘‘holes,’’ which effectively have a positive charge equal to
the negative charge of the electron. Other valence-band electrons can move
to ﬁll the hole, leaving another hole behind, so essentially the holes move as
well as the electrons in the conduction band. For practical purposes, you can
think of holes as positive charge carriers and electrons as negative charge
carriers, although it really isn’t that simple.
One way that engineers can adjust the number of electrons and holes in
a semiconductor is to add impurities to replace some atoms in the crystal
lattice. If the impurity has one more outer electron than the atom it replaces,
that extra electron is free to roam through the crystal, forming an n-type (for

RECIPES FOR GRAINS OF SALT
149
negative carrier) semiconductor. An impurity with one less outer electron
creates a hole, forming a semiconductor of the p-type (for positive carrier,
because the absence of an electron leaves a positive charge on the atomic
nucleus). Adding such dopants releases more carriers in the crystal, making
better electronic devices. Put layers of n-and p-type semiconductor together,
and you have a simple two-terminal device called a diode.2
Things get interesting when you apply a voltage across a diode. A positive
electrical voltage attracts the negative electrons, while a negative voltage
attracts the positive holes. Apply a positive voltage to the n-type material
and a negative voltage to the p-type material, and the electrons and holes
move to the terminals and stay there, so no current ﬂows through the junc-
tion between the two materials. However, a current will ﬂow if you switch
the voltages, because electrons in the n material move toward the positive
terminal on the p material, and holes move in the opposite direction. Thus,
a semiconductor diode conducts electricity in only one direction3 (ﬁgure
12-1).
The real action happens at the junction between n and p material, where
electrons from the n material combine with holes from the p material. As
the electron drops into the hole, it releases its extra energy by a process called
recombination. In silicon, the energy typically is released as heat. However,
in gallium arsenide, indium phosphide, and certain other semiconductor
crystals, some energy is released as light. This is the basis of a light-emitting
diode or LED. Initially, the process was quite inefﬁcient. The ﬁrst LEDs turned
only about 0.01 percent of the input electrical energy into visible or infrared
light.4
Birth of the Semiconductor Laser
When the laser hit the headlines, a few physicists thought of making lasers
from light-emitting semiconductors. However, nobody took the idea too
seriously until 1962, when Robert Rediker, Tom Quist, and Robert Keyes
changed the way they were processing gallium arsenide at the MIT Lincoln
Laboratory. LEDs made from the new material generated light surprisingly
efﬁciently. When Keyes announced their results at a July 1962 meeting in
New Hampshire, an astounded member of the audience stood up to say that
Keyes’s statement violated the second law of thermodynamics—a cardinal
principle of modern physics which holds that the degree of disorder or ‘‘en-
tropy’’ always increases. Keyes returned to the microphone and deadpanned,
‘‘I’m sorry.’’5
Bob Hall, a semiconductor expert from the General Electric Research Lab-
oratory, immediately ﬁgured out what the MIT group had done. After every-
one stopped laughing, he stood up and explained why the results were pos-
sible. He also realized that high efﬁciency opened the door to making a
semiconductor laser. He worked through the numbers on the train ride home,

150
CITY OF LIGHT
Figure 12-1: The ﬁrst semiconductor laser was a simple cube of gallium arsenide
(GaAs), half p-type and half n-type.
and back in Schenectady he rounded up a crew of other scientists to try some
experiments.6 In short order, they made gallium arsenide chips with edges
polished to act as the mirrors needed to generate a laser beam. When they
ﬁred powerful electrical pulses through the chips, they emitted light at a nar-
row range of wavelengths, a sign of laser action. The whole process took just
two and a half months.7 It was a scientiﬁc tour de force.
Hall was good, but three other labs were hot on his heels. A team from
IBM came in a close second with a slightly different variation, although no
one from the lab had attended the New Hampshire meeting.8 Nick Holonyak,
Jr., returned from the New Hampshire meeting to try making lasers from
gallium arsenide phosphide at GE’s Syracuse lab but didn’t succeed until he
tried Hall’s approach of polishing the crystals.9 The Lincoln Lab group, dis-
tracted by other projects, wound up a close but frustrating fourth.10
That remarkably close ﬁnish—achieved in the shadow of the Cuban missile
crisis—seemed to herald good things for semiconductor lasers, but there the
technology stalled. The developers of communication systems wanted lasers
that generated steady beams and operated for long periods at room temper-
ature. The lasers made by Hall and the others only ﬁred intermittent pulses
and didn’t last long even when cooled to liquid nitrogen temperature, 321F
or 196C. Progress from there was painfully slow. By the end of 1964, the
best semiconductor laser could ﬁre a single pulse at room temperature when
25 amperes—more current than a standard household refrigerator draws—
ﬂowed through an area of 0.02 square millimeter for 50 billionths of a second.
Then it had to cool before ﬁring again.11

RECIPES FOR GRAINS OF SALT
151
A Tough Array of Problems
Endless problems frustrated semiconductor laser developers. The devices didn’t
last long. Some died suddenly; others degraded gradually, emitting less and
less light. The beams were messy, not pencil thin like those of gas lasers but
spreading rapidly and unevenly, a fuzzy blur instead of the pinpoint of light
wanted for communications. No one was sure what caused the problems.
Was the design inadequate? Were requirements for crystal quality impossibly
high? Or was the whole problem simply insoluble, dooming semiconductor
lasers to the oblivion of interesting but impractical devices?
Many researchers interested in civilian communications bailed out, but not
the military. Compact semiconductor diode lasers looked promising for use in
portable systems with purposes ranging from battleﬁeld communications to
measuring the distance of an air-to-air missile from its target. Pulsed lasers
could do many of those jobs, although room-temperature operation was vital.
Besides, the Pentagon was ﬂush with money.
As often happens, ideas that would help solve those problems had already
been suggested but had not been tested. The ﬁrst diode lasers were made
entirely of one material, gallium arsenide, with different dopants. In 1963,
Herbert Kroemer, an engineer at the Varian Central Research Laboratory in
Palo Alto, suggested adding layers of different composition.12 So did one of
the Soviet Union’s top semiconductor researchers,13 Zhores Alferov of the Ioffe
Physico-Technical Institute in Leningrad (now St. Petersburg), but the Soviet
government classiﬁed his patent disclosure.14 Their basic idea was the same,
to trap electrons at the junction so they could recombine more efﬁciently with
holes. They hoped this would make a more efﬁcient laser, able to operate at
warmer temperatures. They realized they could do this by adjusting the semi-
conductor composition, which affects the band-gap energy electrons need to
be in the conduction band. Substituting aluminum for some gallium atoms
in gallium arsenide increases the energy requirement, so electrons in gallium
arsenide lack enough energy to move into gallium aluminum arsenide. Place
a layer of gallium aluminum arsenide next to a p-n junction in gallium ar-
senide, forming what specialists call a ‘‘heterojunction,’’ and you’ve trapped
electrons on the gallium arsenide side of the junction, increasing the odds
they will recombine with holes and emit light.
Unfortunately, no one knew how to make heterojunctions in 1963. Chang-
ing semiconductor composition also affects the spacing between atoms in the
crystalline lattice, and mismatches cause fatal ﬂaws in devices. The trick was
to ﬁnd a combination of materials where the lattice difference was small.
Gallium arsenide was the logical place to start. The question was what to
add.
Alferov’s group considered two possibilities: replacing some gallium with
aluminum, or replacing some arsenic with phosphorus. Adding aluminum
hardly changes the lattice constant, but aluminum arsenide decomposes in
moist air, so the Russians doubted gallium aluminum arsenide would be sta-
ble. Instead, they added phosphorus, but that changed the lattice constant so

152
CITY OF LIGHT
much that the lasers worked only at liquid-nitrogen temperature.15 The Rus-
sians were getting discouraged when they looked at some gallium aluminum
arsenide crystals one of them had stashed in a desk drawer a couple of years
earlier. They were delighted to ﬁnd nothing had happened to the crystals,
showing gallium aluminum arsenide was stable.
Once they realized that, the Russians soon grew heterojunctions using a
technique called liquid-phase epitaxy that Herb Nelson developed in 1963 at
RCA Laboratories.16 It crystallizes gallium arsenide compounds from a mix-
ture of molten gallium placed on a semiconductor substrate. This avoids
growth problems arising from differences in melting points of the elements.
Although the Russians made the ﬁrst heterojunctions,17 the Iron Curtain and
the need to translate their work into English kept word from reaching Amer-
ica until a team at IBM had reported the same thing.18
Heterojunctions revived diode laser development. They were hard to grow,
but they reduced the threshold current needed to drive the laser—and its
rapid increase with temperature. RCA became a hotbed of activity, funded by
military contracts. Henry Kressel and Nelson began making lasers with a
single heterojunction. They gradually perfected the process, reducing thresh-
old currents so their lasers could ﬁre repeated short, high-power pulses at
room temperature,19 meeting Army requirements. In April 1969, RCA an-
nounced plans to manufacture single-heterojunction lasers; two months later,
a spin-off—Laser Diode Laboratories Inc.—announced they would, too.20 The
Pentagon was happy.
The communications industry was not. They wanted semiconductor lasers
that generated a steady beam they could modulate with a signal. The best
hope for that seemed to be a double-heterojunction laser, where a pair of
heterojunctions sandwiched the active layer. Developers hoped that by trap-
ping electrons better this would improve efﬁciency and reduce threshold cur-
rent. Kressel and Nelson were working on the idea, but military contracts
had taken top priority.
Bell Labs Places Its Bet
Military contracts were not a distraction at Bell Labs, where John K. Galt,
director of solid-state electronics research at Murray Hill, was convinced that
optical communications needed room-temperature diode lasers. In July 1966,
he asked two Bell Labs researchers to ﬁgure out why diode lasers had such
high thresholds at room temperature. Chemist Mort Panish, 37, and Japanese
physicist Izuo Hayashi, 45, who had joined the Bell Labs group a month
before, accepted the challenge. Galt didn’t expect them to solve the problem,
but he wanted Bell Labs to learn enough to compete.21
The two men had complementary skills, although Hayashi’s awkward En-
glish sometimes slowed communication.22 Panish had studied the chemistry,
physics, and luminescence of gallium arsenide. Hayashi wanted to move into

RECIPES FOR GRAINS OF SALT
153
semiconductors from high-energy physics. In the careful, cautious way of Bell
Labs, they spent months studying compound semiconductors and their lu-
minescence. Not until the summer of 1967 did they start growing lasers, at
ﬁrst entirely of gallium arsenide. Their early heterojunction experiments in
November surprised Hayashi by producing strong luminescence, suggesting
the possibility of lower laser threshold currents.23 At the end of the month,
the two went to a semiconductor laser conference in Las Vegas, where in-
spiration struck Panish as he listened to an IBM talk and realized the impor-
tance of lattice matching. He walked out of the lecture room and sketched
plans for a series of laser structures.24
Back at Bell Labs, they started growing single-heterojunction lasers and
quickly saw a drop in threshold current. It was a step in the right direction,
but they spent most of 1968 slowly improving their techniques and devices.
They found that threshold current in single-heterojunction lasers increased
by a factor of 11 between liquid nitrogen temperature and room tempera-
ture.25 That was a big improvement over the thousandfold increase in lasers
without heterojunctions. They duly reported their results,26 but only after
Kressel and Nelson.27
Double-heterojunction lasers were the next logical step, but they were dif-
ﬁcult and required more complex processing. Panish and Hayashi tested their
ﬁrst double-heterostructure laser on January 29, 1969. Its threshold current
was much higher than their best single-heterostructure lasers. But they were
encouraged to ﬁnd the threshold increased less with temperature than for a
single-heterojunction laser. They felt they were on the right trail.
The Race to Room Temperature
They didn’t know Alferov was pursuing the same goal. Little word of his work
seeped through the Iron Curtain until his ﬁrst visit to America in August
1969. Alferov told a research conference that he had made double-
heterojunction lasers that had a low threshold current at room temperature
but could not operate continuously.28 The report ‘‘was like an unexpected
bomb explosion for my American colleagues,’’ Alferov recalls.29 Afterward, he
visited Bell Labs, where Hayashi and Panish grilled him for more details. His
answers were sobering. ‘‘We had not realized that the competition was so
close and redoubled our efforts,’’ Hayashi wrote.30
In December, Panish began testing a new type of liquid-phase epitaxy,
which deposited layers from a ‘‘boat’’ with three liquid-ﬁlled slots that slid
over the wafer. It took time to perfect layer deposition. Hayashi tested ways
to remove the excess heat that raised threshold current and could destroy the
lasers. As Panish made new wafers, Hayashi tested their laser properties. By
January, they had lasers with room-temperature threshold currents only half
what Alferov had claimed in the summer. As the wafers got better, they got
the lasers to operate at higher and higher temperatures. Panish kept pushing

154
CITY OF LIGHT
Figure 12-2: The ﬁrst room-temperature laser made by Alferov’s group included
several thin layers and a narrow stripe, to better control the ﬂow of current and
light. (Courtesy of Zhores I. Alferov.)
after they passed the freezing point of water, making a better-looking wafer.
In May, Hayashi got a few diodes from that wafer to emit steadily near room
temperature.
Typical of hard-working Japanese scientists, Hayashi was not about to be
interrupted by the Memorial Day weekend. On Monday morning, June 1, he
tried another diode—and it emitted a steady or ‘‘continuous-wave’’ (CW)
beam at 24C, just above the nominal ‘‘room temperature’’ of 23C (73F).
The excited Hayashi scribbled a note which Panish found on his door the
next morning: ‘‘C.W. deﬁnite!!! at 24C 10:30 A.M. June 1, 1970.’’31 Word
spread quickly through Bell Labs, and a top manager arrived at Hayashi’s
lab. ‘‘In violation of all AT&T rules, he brought a couple of bottles of cham-
pagne. I never saw it before or since,’’ says Panish.32 After growing more
than a thousand wafers and testing countless diodes, Bell Labs thought they
had scored an important ﬁrst. Management geared up its public relations
machinery to announce the news at an opportune moment.
A Narrow Stripe in Leningrad
Nobody at Bell knew the Russians had broken out the vodka a bit earlier.
Alferov’s large group made rapid progress after he returned to Leningrad.
They couldn’t match the equipment at the sprawling Murray Hill complex,
but they were one conceptual step ahead. Their design concentrated laser
action in a narrow stripe running the length of the semiconductor crystal
(ﬁgure 12-2).
The double heterojunction laser worked well because it concentrated elec-
trons in the junction layer, making them more likely to release their energy

RECIPES FOR GRAINS OF SALT
155
as light which increased laser efﬁciency and reduced threshold current. In
the Bell Labs lasers, this region was the plane of the junction across the entire
chip, 0.37 millimeter long and 0.08 millimeter wide.33 Alferov concentrated
current ﬂow further by covering parts of the laser chip with silica, an insu-
lator, so electrons had to ﬂow through a 0.03-millimeter stripe in the 0.20
millimeter wide chip.34 This extra conﬁnement increased the likelihood the
electrons would recombine with holes—improving laser operation. Later di-
ode laser developers have followed the same philosophy, reﬁning structures
to better conﬁne current. Performance also improves when the layers conﬁne
light by total internal reﬂection, trapping it in the active stripe like a cladding
traps light in an optical ﬁber.
Ironically, the narrow-stripe laser originated at Bell Labs in 1966. Jack
Dyment hoped that limiting current ﬂow to a narrow stripe would reduce the
current needed to drive the laser. He didn’t make much progress toward that
goal; the real problem was the homojunction structure of his laser. But the
stripe geometry eased another problem of early semiconductor lasers—poor
beam quality. While gas lasers generated steady pencil-thin beams, the un-
even pulsed light from diode lasers spread out so fast that calling it a beam
was barely justiﬁed. When he added the stripe, Dyment says, ‘‘We could start
to see repeatable mode patterns coming out of these devices, the ﬁrst time
anyone could see anything repeatable happening in diode lasers.’’35 Mode
control was an important advance, and stripe-geometry lasers helped focus
light into single-mode ﬁbers.36
Panish and Hayashi knew about stripe-geometry lasers, but they didn’t
bother with the extra step of adding a stripe to their laser. Alferov’s group
did, covering their wafer with a thin insulating layer of silicon dioxide, in
which they etched a 30-micrometer stripe for current to ﬂow through. That
extra concentration of current ﬂow did the job, and the Russians had the ﬁrst
semiconductor laser to emit steadily at room temperature.37
It probably didn’t last very long. The informal rules of the laser-making
game specify only that a laser has to emit a steady beam long enough to
measure its properties. It might last for only seconds or minutes. Hayashi was
a stickler and insisted that his operate repeatedly; it emitted for a couple of
hours altogether. The Russians left the precise lifetime discretely unmen-
tioned.
The Russians also were vague on other details and announced their suc-
cess only in a Russian-language journal. By the time word trickled through
the Iron Curtain, Bell Labs had already claimed a ﬁrst. The lack of details and
the penchant of Soviet ofﬁcials for claiming their scientists had invented al-
most everything left many Americans skeptical. You have to go back and
compare submission dates to discover that Alferov submitted his report on
May 6, a month before Hayashi submitted his. Neutral observers consider the
Russian claim credible.38
Both groups realized they had something to learn from each other. In
October, Hayashi and Panish visited Alferov in Leningrad. In November, Al-
ferov came to America39 to spend six months at the University of Illinois with

156
CITY OF LIGHT
Nick Holonyak, Jr., a diode laser pioneer who had learned Russian from his
coal-miner father.40 It was a rare window of scientiﬁc cooperation during the
Cold War. Alferov stopped in Philadelphia in April 1971 to receive an award
from the Franklin Institute for his laser work. When he returned home, Soviet
ofﬁcials restricted his travel to the West for the next three years.41 With lim-
ited resources, the Russians had gone about as far as they could.
‘‘A Pocket Laser’’
Bell Labs had more ambitious plans when heralding its new laser at an Au-
gust 31 press conference. Bell management probably didn’t know about the
Russian claims, but they must have heard about Corning’s low-loss ﬁber.
Maurer already had told Stew Miller, and Bell executives understood public
relations. Announcing the laser breakthrough would turn the press spotlight
to Bell achievements and away from its ﬁber-optic shortfall. The New York
Times duly reported ‘‘a low-cost, pocket-size, reliable and versatile infrared
laser—the ﬁrst such device that may be practical for use in communications
systems.’’ Rudy Kompfner told the Times: ‘‘This is the laser we’ve been waiting
for, although it will be a few more years before we can actually use it in a
communications system.’’ An unidentiﬁed Bell Labs spokesman predicted la-
sers would play a major role in communications, ‘‘when picture phones be-
come common, when high-speed computer conversations are more wide-
spread, and when communication needs in general expand beyond current
carrying capacity.’’42
Interestingly, Kompfner was more cautious with the technical press. He
told Laser Focus that he did not expect the new diode lasers to be used in
practical communications for many years, probably well into the 1980s. Some
system specialists at Holmdel were less enthusiastic in private, saying diode
lasers might be interesting in 20 years.43 In fact, as Kompfner well knew, the
room-temperature diode laser was a symbolic breakthrough, not a practical
device. Panish and Hayashi did well to make one laser that lasted a couple
of hours; AT&T wanted light sources that lasted for many years routinely,
and those clearly were far away.
Competitors were close behind. Kressel soon had room-temperature lasers
at RCA. So did Standard Telecommunication Labs.44 In Japan, the Nippon
Electric Co. duplicated the Bell Labs feat in October, making lasers with
slightly lower threshold currents.45 NEC gained another key player a year
later, when Hayashi returned to Japan, lured by a tempting job offer and
worried his daughters were becoming too American.46
The Reliability Problem
The key issue with lasers was reliability. Developers measured lifetimes in
seconds, minutes or—at best—hours. Shifting to a stripe geometry did not

RECIPES FOR GRAINS OF SALT
157
solve the problem. Having done their job of showing the feasibility of room-
temperature lasers, Panish and Hayashi were happy to give device specialists
the responsibility for developing practical lasers.47 The greatest strength of a
place like Bell Labs is not individual superstars, but its tremendous depth of
talent to apply the perspiration vital to practical inventions. Management
handed the job to Barney DeLoach, a hero for inventing a vital high-frequency
semiconductor device that helped restart the millimeter waveguide program.
At ﬁrst, DeLoach’s group measured laser lifetimes in one-minute intervals.
‘‘It was a rare device that lasted that long,’’ recalls Robert Hartman. ‘‘It would
emit light constantly for a couple of seconds, then boom, it’s off. The better
ones would last 30 to 40 seconds, and die in a second or two.’’48 He spotted
two distinct failure modes: sudden burnout and slower dimming to darkness.49
They soon pinned down the cause of sudden failures. The laser beam emerged
from a spot only about half a micrometer high and 20 micrometers wide on
the edge of the chip. The total power wasn’t high, but concentrating it on
such a tiny spot damaged the edge or ‘‘facet’’ where the beam emerged.
Applying special coatings and reﬁning the laser structure reduced the dam-
age.
Gradual degradation was a more stubborn problem until Hartman noticed
it resembled changes in mechanical springs and wondered if it might arise
from strain in the crystalline lattice. Studies with polarized light showed that
the more strain in the crystal, the faster the laser died. Then he set up a
microscope to watch laser emission through holes in its electrical contacts.
The laser stripe started as a bright zone, then dark lines grew across the bright
region, choking out laser emission. Growth of these dark lines was an un-
canny sight for a solid-state physicist trained to think of atoms as locked
immobile in a crystalline lattice. ‘‘Matter was moving around at room tem-
perature, as you watched. Nobody ever heard of diffusion rates like that in a
solid,’’ recalls DeLoach.50
Detailed studies showed that the problem was ﬂaws, usually in the gallium
arsenide substrate on which the whole laser structure was deposited. The
intense laser light triggered their formation and spread. Solving it required
years of meticulous development of better technology to grow laser crystals.51
The British Post Ofﬁce, STL, RCA, and Nippon Telegraph and Telephone had
their own programs. Life testing became an art, with racks of lasers, each
mounted with its own drive electronics and a heat sink to keep its temperature
constant. Sensors monitored drive current and output power, with feedback
circuits keeping one or the other constant. When output power dipped too
low or drive current rose too high, the testers declared the laser dead and
plugged another one into the socket.
Thousands and thousands of lasers lived brightly and brieﬂy in labs around
the world. By the end of 1972, DeLoach had 25 to 30 people ‘‘going like
gangbusters’’ on reliability. Lifetimes crept up from minutes to hours and then
days. Then top management slammed on the brakes. DeLoach summarizes
their attitude: ‘‘We’ve already got air, we’ve already got copper. Who needs
a new medium?’’52

158
CITY OF LIGHT
Downs and Ups at Bell Labs
The early 1970s brought tough times to AT&T. Long-distance trafﬁc slumped
with the economy, and the ﬁrst signs of competition appeared. It was time to
cut back on unpromising research, so one grim day in January 1973, man-
agement told DeLoach to shut down diode laser development. They shifted
his whole group to work on silicon integrated electronic circuits. The next
morning DeLoach returned, pleading to stay with the laser project if anything
was to be kept alive.53 He got his wish, although he was one of three people
left.54
The cutbacks were not irrational. Other gallium arsenide devices had
earned a reputation for poor reliability, and diode lasers were doing nothing
to change that.55 Ironically, progress was close at hand. By mid-1973, Bell
Labs had operated a double-heterojunction laser continuously for more than
a thousand hours at 30C, the temperature of a warm room. Its output power
dropped a mere 10 percent over that 42-day period, although threshold cur-
rent increased and mode structure changed. No fundamental limits were in
sight.56
Longer lifetimes posed new problems in testing. At the British Post Ofﬁce,
says Alan Steventon, ‘‘We got to the stage where the predicted life of lasers
was increasing at the same rate as time was passing.’’57 The longer the lasers
lasted, the longer experiments took to yield results. One thousand hours is 42
days; 10,000 hours is over a year. System developers wanted lasers to last
up to a million hours (100 years), but nobody could wait that long. Test
specialists turned up the heat, ﬁguring that higher temperatures would ac-
celerate aging.
As the research engineers debated the merits of accelerated aging, a little
New Jersey company decided the time was ripe to start selling double-
heterojunction lasers. Commercial solid-state and gas lasers had reached the
market within a couple of years after the ﬁrst laboratory successes. In June
1975—ﬁve years after Hayashi taped his note to Panish’s door—Laser Diode
Laboratories sent out its ﬁrst new product announcements. The RCA spin-off
was too small to wait for long-term life tests; it had to cash in on its invest-
ment early. The press release conceded that life tests had only reached 1000
hours, but boldly predicted that the lasers would last 10,000 hours. Nobody
else was brash enough to offer room-temperature diodes, but Laser Diode bet
that system developers would pay $250 to $350 for diode lasers emitting
steady powers of 5 to 10 milliwatts.58
System designers wanted to verify much longer lifetimes, so laser devel-
opers turned up the heat. They put fresh new lasers into ovens at 50 to 90C
(122 to 194F) and watched how long they lasted. Then they multiplied that
number by a suitable factor to extrapolate room-temperature life. It was a
simple way to test laser reliability without waiting forever for the results.
Researchers debated the proper scaling factors for a few years, but it was
never a crucial issue.

RECIPES FOR GRAINS OF SALT
159
Bell Labs kept making better lasers, and the group grew once again. By
the spring of 1976, they estimated average room-temperature lifetimes of 5
to 10 years for a batch of 90 diode lasers—after screening out 14 lasers that
died within the ﬁrst 10 hours.59 By mid-1977, they had lasers expected to
last a million hours at nominal room temperature.60 Bell Labs put out a press
release,61 and the technical press took it as a good sign.62
The race was not quite over. Other labs doubted the Bell Labs calculations,
but in the end they proved reasonably accurate. The technology still had to
be transferred to manufacturing, and transmitters still required temperature
stabilization, but developers could say they had tamed the gallium aluminum
arsenide laser. They had little time to sigh in relief, because the ﬁber-optic
technology was racing ahead at breakneck speed and developers were starting
to talk about other kinds of semiconductor lasers.
Like many breakthroughs, it took time for the world to appreciate the
importance of the work that led to the room-temperature semiconductor laser.
When recognition came, it arrived in a big way. In 2000, the Nobel Com-
mittee awarded the physics prize to three men ‘‘for basic work on information
and communication technology.’’ It was a rare tribute to the pioneers of
technologies that have revolutionized our lives. One Laureate was Jack Kilby,
the surviving co-inventor of the integrated circuit. The other two were Kroe-
mer and Alferov, cited ‘‘for developing semiconductor heterostructures used
in high-speed- and optoelectronics.’’

160
13
A Demonstration for the Queen
(1970–1975)
The glass-ﬁbre guide . . . will be very cheap, small, and
ﬂexible. With the increasing conﬁdence that the attenuation
can be reduced to an acceptable ﬁgure it is certainly the
most promising form of light guide for long-distance optical
communication links.
—Martin Chown, Standard Telecommunication Labs,
July 19701
The low loss which is attractive for long-range applications
can only be achieved if the light propagates partly or com-
pletely in vacuum or gas.
—Detlef Gloge, Bell Labs,
October 19702
We have seen that low-loss glass ﬁbers can be made; we
must make them in usable form. We must have semicon-
ductor lasers as inexpensive commercial devices rather
than as laboratory miracles.
—John R. Pierce, Bell Labs, address at Centenary of
Institution of Electrical Engineers, May 17, 19713
T
he low-loss optical ﬁber and the room-temperature semiconductor laser
made 1970 a very good year for ﬁber-optic communications. Although
both developments would prove crucial, at the time it was painfully obvious

A DEMONSTRATION FOR THE QUEEN
161
that neither was ready for practical use. The ﬁbers were far too brittle; the
lasers were too shortlived.
To the American communications industry, ﬁber optics was at best a vague
hope for some distant future. It had no obvious connection with the near-
term trends that Electronics magazine predicted at the start of the year:
Face-to-face communication will be ushered in with the introduction of
Picturephone service in 1970, while information exchange will be greatly
expanded through the use of pulse-code modulation, millimeter waves, and
satellites.4
The magazine forecast echoed the plans of AT&T, secure as the country’s
virtual telephone monopoly. Bell Labs saw optical ﬁbers only as a long shot,
a possible niche technology to run several miles between some local telephone
switching ofﬁces, or more remotely a long-term alternative to gas-lens optical
waveguides after Picturephone circuits clogged millimeter waveguides. If top
AT&T management knew ﬁber optics existed, they considered it just another
far-out Bell Labs program.
The British were the wild-eyed optimists. Having just heard about the Bell
Labs room-temperature laser, Martin Chown waxed optimistic in a July 16,
1970, supplement to the British weekly New Scientist:
By combining recently announced improvements in technology, it should
be possible to build a system to carry over 3000 [voice] channels per ﬁber,
with repeater spacing of two kilometers and no cooling of the lasers. With
future improvements in components, the channel capacity is expected to be
around 10,000.5
In 1971, the Institution of Electrical Engineers celebrated its one hundredth
anniversary6 by inviting British companies to show their latest and greatest
technologies to the assembled dignitaries. Jock Marsh, managing director of
Standard Telecommunication Labs, picked ﬁber optics. Murray Ramsay, who
had taken Charles Kao’s place, was in charge, and on May 19 he demon-
strated ﬁber-optic video communications to Queen Elizabeth II.7 The ﬁber
worked ﬂawlessly.
The IEE Centenary
Looking back, Ramsay calls demonstrating ﬁber-optic transmission at the IEE
Centenary ‘‘a hell of a gamble.’’8 Marsh was willing to bet on it after hearing
of the room-temperature laser and the low-loss ﬁber, but Ramsay worked with
it every day and knew its practical limits.
Ramsay had inherited some problems along with the hot new technology.
Kao was as enthusiastic in managing his ﬁve-man group as he was evangel-
ical to outsiders, so he hadn’t stopped spending when he went beyond the
budget. When Ramsay asked about one project that had consumed £8000,
Kao shrugged and said, ‘‘We’ll have to sort that out later.’’9 Fortunately,

162
CITY OF LIGHT
Marsh saw the promise in ﬁber optics and put promising ideas before rigid
rules. The word went up to Harold Geneen at the very top, who asked STL
to demonstrate ﬁber optics for top ITT managers in Brussels. The technology
was on a roll.
A successful television experiment helped convince Marsh to push ahead
with the IEE demonstration. BBC engineers were testing digital transmission
of color television signals. They started with a length of millimeter waveguide,
supposedly the digital transmission medium of the future, which the Post
Ofﬁce had installed at its new research lab at Martlesham Heath. They needed
three weeks to get their television signals through the waveguide,10 and even
then it never worked for more than a few minutes at a time because the
signal hopped between modes. Then the BBC engineers asked Chown about
trying ﬁber optics.
They set aside another three weeks to test a ﬁber system that Chown and
another STL engineer brought to their lab. The two arrived at 9 A.M. but had
to go out and buy a vacuum ﬂask to hold liquid nitrogen to cool their laser
before they could set up their system. By 10:45, a small reel of ﬁber was
carrying the digitized video signal and Chown was marveling at the crystal-
clear color version of ‘‘Playschool,’’ a program his children watched in muddy
black and white at home.11 Beating the millimeter waveguide hands down
was a big morale boost. Ramsay says, ‘‘That convinced us that ﬁber was a
transmission medium that had a future.’’12
Chown carefully took apart the BBC demonstration system and carefully
put the pieces back together in exactly the same way at the exhibit hall. Once
again it worked. As the royal party approached, security pushed Chown off
among the unauthorized. Ramsay wondered where he had disappeared but
soldiered on and proudly showed his new marvel to Queen Elizabeth.
The BBC had lost its color signal, so STL had hastily borrowed a color
signal from the rival Independent Television (ITV). Otherwise, the display
worked perfectly. The Queen dutifully watched for ﬁve minutes before going
on to the next exhibit. As the crowds milled about, Chown found himself
alone to demonstrate the system to her husband Prince Philip. The prince
stayed for nearly half an hour, prompted by Lord Louis Mountbatten to ask
probing questions which amazed Chown with their acuity.13 Trained as an
engineer, Mountbatten already knew about ﬁber optics. Two years earlier, he
had told a laser meeting in Southampton about prospects for ‘‘ﬁber optics
connecting every British home with huge information centers.’’14 STL was
showing he was right.
The audience with the Queen was a symbolic milestone, but Lord Mount-
batten’s interest had far more practical import. He was a patron of engineer-
ing, a top-level advisor with serious clout behind the scenes in the British
government.15 Nobody could pretend that all the problems were solved when
the laser sat in a ﬂask of liquid nitrogen, but the demonstration alerted the
British establishment to the potential of ﬁber-optic communications.

A DEMONSTRATION FOR THE QUEEN
163
The Importance of Being Digital
The spread of digital pulse-code modulation in the telephone industry brought
honors to Alec Reeves from his fellow engineers, recognizing the technology
he invented a generation earlier.16 Invited to give the 1969 John Logie Baird
Memorial Lecture at the University of Strathclyde, the aging visionary talked
of future ﬁber-optic communication.16 In the fall of 1969, he told South Af-
rican engineers that within a half century, ‘‘The main overland and subma-
rine information highways will consist of wide-band optical quadratic-law
[graded-index] ﬁbers with laser-type repeaters spaced just over two kilometers
apart.’’17
ITT gave Reeves an award and a $5000 honorarium when he retired at
68 at the end of 1970. Intending to remain active in engineering as well as
dabble in the paranormal, he formed Reeves Telecommunication Laboratories
Ltd. in London with Charles Eaglesﬁeld and another engineer. They landed a
Post Ofﬁce research contract, but years of heavy smoking caught up with
Reeves. He fell ill with lung cancer and died October 13, 1971, in London,
having done his part to launch the new technology.18
By then, F. F. Roberts had become the central ﬁgure in British ﬁber-optic
research. Dedicated, energetic, and efﬁcient, the crusty career technocrat fo-
cused British ﬁber-optic development on meeting the practical needs of the
Post Ofﬁce’s telephone division. He concentrated on testing the technology,
looking for potential fatal ﬂaws as well as pushing the state of the art.19 Top
management had already committed to digital transmission, made practical
by the advent of transistors and the integrated circuit,20 so he concentrated
on digital systems.
Other system trials also yielded encouraging results. The University of
Southampton sent live BBC color-television signals through 1.25 kilometers
of experimental ﬁber and later repeated the experiments with French and
German television.21 By late 1972, Chown could switch a narrow-stripe
double-heterojunction on and off up to a billion times per second. That meant
the laser could transmit a billion bits per second.22
The experiments showed ﬁber-optic systems handled digital signals well.
In fact, semiconductor lasers worked much better for digital signal than for
analog ones. The light output of early semiconductor lasers did not increase
evenly with their drive current, so they could distort analog signals, like a
bad audio ampliﬁer or speaker jumbles sound. Digital signals are immune to
such distortion, because systems need not detect the precise signal level, but
only if the signal is on or off. That doesn’t require high-ﬁdelity reproduction—
a doorbell buzzer, a damaged speaker, or a semiconductor laser will sufﬁce.
A Well-Planned Future Begins to Go Awry
On the other side of the Atlantic, AT&T had begun going digital in 1962.
The ﬁrst step was the ‘‘T1 carrier,’’ running between urban switching centers.

164
CITY OF LIGHT
A pair of wires carried 24 digitized voice channels, combined into a single
stream of 1.544 million bits per second, with a repeater every 6000 feet (1.8
kilometers) to boost signal strength. By 1970, a whole hierarchy of faster
digital systems were on the drawing boards. Each step up involved combining
or multiplexing slower signals, to be separated at the other end. The digital
pipes interfaced with digital switches, special-purpose digital computers hard-
wired to route telephone signals to their proper destinations. The second step
in the hierarchy, called T2, merged four T1 lines on wires, a total of 6.3
million bits per second. Combining seven T2s gave a T3 carrier at 45 million
bits per second, a speed Bell had not decided how to transmit. Six T3s com-
bined to make a T4 signal, 270 million bits per second or 4032 voice circuits,
routed over coaxial cables or microwaves.23 Millimeter waveguides were to
be the next step, with each pipeline carrying sixty T4 signals, 240,000 voice
circuits or about 17 billion bits per second.24
Those plans assumed that video communications would follow speech as
surely as television had followed radio. Bell Labs had sought that goal since
the 1920s, when it competed with C. Francis Jenkins to devise mechanical
television transmitters.25 Top AT&T management had planned the Picture-
phone revolution to start in 1970, with service in Manhattan and Pittsburgh.
The whole Bell System was designed to handle the new technology once you
pushed the # button on your Touch-Tone phone to signal a video call.26 Each
Picturephone circuit needed the equivalent of a hundred voice lines, so the
network would need plenty of new capacity, assuring a place for millimeter
waveguides.
That well-planned future started to unravel before regular Picturephone
service began. New York state regulators blocked the new service in Man-
hattan until the phone company improved its regular service. AT&T inau-
gurated Picturephone service June 30, 1970, with only 38 sets at eight com-
panies in Pittsburgh, but that did not deter the optimists. The front page of
the New York Times proclaimed, ‘‘A major stride in the development of com-
munications was taken today.’’27 AT&T predicted 100,000 Picturephones
would be in use by 1975.
Potential customers didn’t agree. A year later, only 33 Picturephones were
operating in Pittsburgh, and only 12 could call beyond their buildings. ‘‘The
thing hasn’t really grown the way we thought it would,’’ admitted a phone-
company marketer, although higher ofﬁcials maintained that its time would
come. The Times—perhaps a bit embarrassed itself—buried its follow-up story
on page 26.28
Still sure that the time would come for the millimeter waveguide, Bell
planned a full-scale ﬁeld trial in 1974, the ﬁrst outside the lab.29 To avoid
troublesome mode problems, the waveguides were buried in trenches as
straight as arrows. The tubes were ﬁlled with pure dry nitrogen, because
oxygen in the air absorbs millimeter waves. Nobody pretended it was going
to be cheap or easy, but with government regulations assuring a return on
its investment, AT&T was ready to spend untold billions.

A DEMONSTRATION FOR THE QUEEN
165
The telephone monopoly was a giant battleship, steering full steam ahead
into its carefully planned future. From the captain’s tower of top manage-
ment, Picturephone seemed merely a little behind schedule. Other unpleasant
realities were easy to mistake for patches of choppy water. Long-distance
trafﬁc slumped along with the economy. Angry consumer advocates and up-
start MCI challenged Bell’s telephone practices and long-distance monopoly.
Looking back, we can see the well-planned future starting to unravel, but
those on board the great ship didn’t spot the icebergs on the horizon.
Nor did Bell Labs worry, at least initially. AT&T’s well-oiled invention ma-
chine had earned a Nobel Prize for the transistor and scored a technical
triumph by demonstrating the ﬁrst communications satellite. After years of
development, the labs had turned Picturephone over to manufacturing and
the millimeter waveguide to ﬁnal ﬁeld trials. Millions of dollars invested in
gas lenses and hollow optical waveguides had yielded only modest success,
but no one expected overnight miracles. Management was convinced they
had the best and brightest scientists on the job, and no one could do it better.
In short, Bell Labs was not merely fat and happy, but growing complacent
and overconﬁdent. The ‘‘not invented here’’ syndrome was rampant; many
managers didn’t want to hear ideas that came from outside what they con-
sidered the world’s premier industrial laboratory. That made ﬁber optics a
hard sell for Charles Kao and F. F. Roberts. They succeeded by convincing
Bell that ﬁber might ﬁll the vital but unglamorous role of linking telephone
switching centers a few miles apart. Small and ﬂexible, optical ﬁbers could
thread easily through the underground ducts that carry phone lines in urban
and suburban areas, an impossible task for bend-sensitive millimeter wave-
guides and hollow optical waveguides.
Yet Bell still saw ﬁber playing a secondary role to the more glamorous
high-capacity systems running between cities. Bell was sure glass could never
be as transparent as air. Detlef Gloge calculated hollow optical waveguides
would have loss below one decibel per kilometer, so they could carry light
over 20 times farther than ﬁbers with loss of 20 decibels per kilometer.30
Fibers might go a mile or two, but waveguides would run from city to city,
carrying signals at rates far higher than optical ﬁbers. ‘‘The scale on which
an optical intercity system will become useful is in the range above 500,000
two-way voice channels, or equivalently over 5,000 two-way video telephone
channels,’’ Miller wrote in 1970. That meant carrying 60 billion bits a sec-
ond, although eventual capacities might be a hundred times larger.31 He ex-
pected individual ﬁber links to merely carry ‘‘a single video telephone signal,
or a hundred or so voice channels’’ within urban or suburban areas.
A Low-Proﬁle Program
Bell stepped up the pace of its ﬁber-optics program after learning of the Corn-
ing breakthrough, but it did not change its direction. As Kao had originally

166
CITY OF LIGHT
proposed, Bell concentrated on interofﬁce transmission. Initially it was a quiet
program, virtually invisible to the outside world. The general press ignored
it, and even the technical press took time to catch on.32 In early 1971, John
Kessler at Electronics magazine picked up rumblings of the ﬁber-optic revo-
lution, but only after a few months did he realize its importance and write a
cover article.33 Even advocates were cautious. ‘‘Corning has several ﬁbers
about 200 meters long which exhibit losses of 20 dB’’ per kilometer, said
Chuck Lucy, ‘‘but this is a long way from a system.’’34 Technology trends
were unclear; Corning and others were working with the small-core single-
mode ﬁbers that Kao had proposed, but some developers were considering
larger-core ﬁbers that could collect light more easily. Bell had not changed
its plans for millimeter waveguides, which Kompfner still predicted would ﬁll
the communication needs of major population centers through the 1980s.
Behind the scenes, the pressure was on at Bell Labs,35 which still had not
matched Corning’s low-loss ﬁbers. The stress highlighted tensions between
ﬁefdoms in the AT&T research bureaucracy. Miller wanted to draw ﬁbers at
Crawford Hill, reasoning that as waveguides they fell into his communications
research domain. Murray Hill disagreed, believing that glass fell into its do-
main of materials research. Eventually, upper management assigned glass
chemistry and ﬁber-making physics to Murray Hill but let Crawford Hill keep
experiments with novel ﬁber structures.36
Groping for something they could demonstrate, Crawford Hill turned to
‘‘liquid-core’’ ﬁbers, ﬁne silica tubes ﬁlled with a dry-cleaning solvent, per-
chloroethylene, C2Cl4. The liquid core guides light because its refractive index
is higher than pure silica, and the solvent was clearer than anything else Bell
could make. Crawford Hill measured loss of 13 decibels per kilometer, letting
them brieﬂy claim the record for lowest reported ﬁber loss.37 An Australian
group came up with the same idea independently and soon measured loss of
6.5 decibels per kilometer.38 The University of Southampton later did slightly
better.39 Nobody today admits seriously considering using liquid-core ﬁbers in
communication systems; their problems were legion. However, they were use-
ful for laboratory tests of ﬁber transmission.40
Miller also seized on an idea of Peter Kaiser’s, placing a ﬂat planar wave-
guide of pure silica inside a hollow silica tube and stretching it out into a
hollow ﬁber-like structure. Kaiser made samples,41 but as with Karbowiak’s
thin-ﬁlm waveguide, they worked much better in theory than in reality.
Murray Hill assigned more people to ﬁber development, but they lost time
shuttling back and forth to measure their ﬁbers in Kaiser’s lab in Crawford
Hill.42,43 This fast became a nuisance, so management asked a Murray Hill
optics specialist to design a new ﬁber measurement lab and funded it with
amazing speed.44
At Crawford Hill, Miller shifted more people from hollow optical wavegui-
des to ﬁbers. Their ﬁrst task was to take a long, careful look at ﬁber technol-
ogy. No one knew if ﬁbers would hold up over time.45 Experimenting with
plastic coatings, Kaiser found they protected pure silica ﬁbers from the envi-
ronment, and they remain standard on modern communication ﬁbers.46

A DEMONSTRATION FOR THE QUEEN
167
A Change of Mode
As Miller’s group looked closely at ﬁber-optic systems, they began worrying
about getting light into the ﬁbers. Kao’s proposal for transmitting light in a
single mode was theoretically elegant, but the light-carrying core of a single-
mode ﬁber was microscopic. Corning’s ﬁbers had cores only three micrometers
across—0.003 millimeter. If they were much larger, they would carry light
in more than one mode. That was far larger than unclad single-mode ﬁbers
would have been, but it was uncomfortably small for telecommunications
engineers. There was no obvious way to increase core size much; the upper
limit for single-mode transmission depends on the light wavelength and the
difference in refractive index between core and cladding. Moving to the 850-
nanometer wavelength of gallium arsenide diode lasers would only increase
core diameter to four micrometers; the index difference had already been cut
to one percent.
Bell Labs took a hard look at the trade-offs and decided single-mode trans-
mission had to go.
A crucial issue was aligning the tiny ﬁber cores with each other or with
light sources, and in 1970 that seemed impossible. Their positions has to be
adjusted to within a micrometer—a task extremely difﬁcult in a well-equipped
optical laboratory, and totally inconceivable for a technician in a manhole or
on a telephone pole. The light-emitting zones of semiconductor lasers were
several times wider than single-mode cores, and Miller wasn’t optimistic about
their prospects.47 Bell considered light-emitting diodes (LEDs) to be much bet-
ter light sources. Their output was feebler than semiconductor lasers, and
they emitted from an area much larger, but they could operate for years. In
fact, Crawford Hill had already made a special LED with a hole etched into
its top so that a ﬁber could be inserted to collect light efﬁciently.48 The things
had to be made by hand, but they survived almost indeﬁnitely and delivered
a usable amount of light to a ﬁber.
Another concern was that single-mode ﬁber seemed hard to make. Corning
was keeping mum while its patent was pending, and obvious alternative tech-
niques—the rod-in-tube and double-crucible processes—were poorly suited
for drawing single-mode ﬁbers.
What made large-core ﬁbers appear more practical was the invention of
the graded-index ﬁber at Tohoku University. By nearly equalizing the speeds
of the many modes in the ﬁber, the refractive index gradient avoided the
biggest problem of large-core ﬁbers—large pulse spreading that severely lim-
ited signal speed. Alec Reeves spotted the idea and called graded-index ﬁber
‘‘the most promising practical wide band optical waveguide that can be fore-
seen now.’’49 The Japanese were making graded-index ﬁbers, although they
weren’t as clear as Corning’s, and Miller had also thought about graded-index
waveguides, which may have made him more receptive.
Graded-index ﬁbers could not completely eliminate pulse spreading, but
Miller wasn’t worried. He still expected millimeter waveguides or hollow op-
tical waveguides to carry long-haul, high-speed trafﬁc. He wanted ﬁbers to

168
CITY OF LIGHT
link switching centers in urban and suburban areas. That meant they had to
carry a hundred to a thousand voice lines, 10 to 100 million bits per second,
over 2 to 20 kilometers (1.2 to 12 miles). LEDs could handle the lower end
of that range, but faster semiconductor lasers would be needed for the high
end. On the technological horizon, Miller envisioned multimode graded-index
ﬁbers carrying 300 million bits per second between repeaters six to eight
kilometers (four to ﬁve miles) apart—four to ﬁve times farther than coaxial
cables.50 The ever-optimistic Reeves thought the ultimate speed limit might
be 10 billion bits per second over a few kilometers.51
Bell turned its attention to improving graded-index ﬁbers. Two top theo-
rists, Gloge and Henry Marcatili, reﬁned the design by calculating a new
refractive-index gradient that in theory increased transmission capacity a
thousand times above large-core ﬁbers with a sharp ‘‘step’’ boundary between
core and cladding. In practice, the improvement was much less, ranging from
20 (in production) to 75 (in the laboratory).52 However, that seemed good
enough because the theorists expected other pulse-spreading effects to limit
transmission capacity, even for single-mode ﬁbers.
The most important of these is the same phenomenon that makes a prism
spread white light into a spectrum—material dispersion. The refractive index
of glass varies slightly with wavelength, so some colors travel faster than
others. Semiconductor lasers are not purely monochromatic, and although
the effect is small, it builds up with distance. Material dispersion limited the
transmission capacity of single-mode ﬁbers at the 800 to 850 nanometer
wavelength of gallium arsenide semiconductor lasers to only two to three
times that of graded-index ﬁbers. That wasn’t enough of an advantage to
offset the other problems of single-mode ﬁbers.53 Indeed, for short links be-
tween switching ofﬁces, even LED sources looked viable, although their
broader range of wavelengths made material dispersion 10 to 50 times worse
than for semiconductor lasers.
Most of the rest of the world came to the same conclusion. Some staunch
single-mode advocates remained at the Post Ofﬁce, but to others light-
coupling problems made single-mode seem ‘‘an unattainable dream.’’54 STL
also was slow to move away from single-mode ﬁbers, wary of multimode
transmission problems in millimeter waveguides and seeking the highest pos-
sible capacity for its parent company’s submarine cable business.55
The Corning Connection
Corning knew glass and it had a healthy head start on making low-loss ﬁbers,
but it didn’t know much about communications. Chuck Lucy could see en-
ticing possibilities. ‘‘It really seemed like it had the possibility for inﬁnite band-
width and zero loss,’’ he recalls. ‘‘If you had that, there had to be a market
somewhere.’’56 However, merely supplanting millimeter waveguides in high-
end, long-distance systems would amount to what another glass company

A DEMONSTRATION FOR THE QUEEN
169
derisively called ‘‘just a few buckets of sand.’’57 Corning wanted to crack the
much bigger market for shorter cables running between telephone switching
centers. Filling the need for shorter, moderate-speed cables was AT&T’s goal
in shifting to larger-core graded-index ﬁbers, so Corning followed, trying to
reduce ﬁber costs to expand the market. The ﬁber developers didn’t mind the
change; Bob Maurer found large-core ﬁbers were simpler to make than single-
mode ones.58
The partnership between Corning and AT&T was an uneasy blend of com-
petition and cooperation. About the time Corning developed its 20 decibel per
kilometer ﬁber, the company cross-licensed patents on semiconductors and
optoelectronics with AT&T. The deal was a ﬂat-out trade—both companies
could use the other’s patents without paying royalties. Corning licensed the
electronics patents for Signetics, a subsidiary that manufactured integrated
circuits. The managers who arranged the deal thought they came out ahead,
because Bell insisted ﬁber communications was decades away, but it proved
to be a ﬁasco when Signetics ﬂoundered and AT&T decided to make its own
ﬁbers instead of buying them from Corning.59
The two cooperated in developing ﬁber measurement techniques, crucial
to establishing the new technology. Measurement specialists Paul Lazay from
Murray Hill and Marshall Hudson of Corning drove the back roads between
western New York and northern New Jersey with reels of ﬁber in their back
seats, comparing results from their labs. Sometimes the results were unset-
tling, as when Hudson started to see different results on Bell ﬁber from one
day to the next. An uneasy Lazay worried that the ﬁbers were degrading, but
several round trips showed the changes were in the measurements. They
puzzled over the discrepancy until one day they compared ﬁber spools in
Hudson’s lab. When Lazay asked about the thermal expansion of Corning’s
Styrofoam spools, they were surprised to ﬁnd it was much larger than Bell’s
aluminum spools. There lay the key to the mystery. Hudson’s lab wasn’t air-
conditioned, and the minicomputer he used to automate his measurements
slowly warmed the room during the day, heating the reels and the ﬁbers. The
measurement results had changed along with the temperatures.60
On the other hand, the competition in ﬁber development was intense.
Corning couldn’t block Bell from using its patented technology, and Bell didn’t
have to pay royalties. Yet Corning didn’t have to share information beyond
what the patents contained, and that only when the patents were published.
When Corning reduced loss to four decibels per kilometer in mid-1972, they
shared the attenuation measurements and revealed the ﬁber core was a large
91 micrometers, inside a cladding with an outer diameter of 125 microme-
ters.61 But Corning kept its fabrication process and composition the deepest
and darkest of secrets, trying to keep its technical lead in a market it expected
to take years to develop.
Materials were the most sensitive topic. Corning didn’t say a word about
titanium until after it changed its core dopant to germanium.62 Peter Schultz
playfully called the new magic ingredient ‘‘fairy dust’’ at a few technical

170
CITY OF LIGHT
meetings—until George Sigel of the Naval Research Laboratory deduced it
was germanium and spilled the beans at a meeting of the American Ceramic
Society.63
Corning also developed a new process for the new ﬁber, depositing glass
soot on the outside of a ceramic or graphite rod, instead of on the inside of a
pure silica tube. They could change the glass composition gradually as they
deposited soot, so the process was easy to adapt for graded-index ﬁbers. Heat-
ing melted the soot, which solidiﬁed to form a glass tube covering the rod.
Cooling shrunk the rod more than the tube, so it slipped out easily, and could
be reused. Then heating collapsed the tube so it could be drawn into a ﬁber.
The process promised better quality at lower cost, and Corning still uses it.
With strong support from top management, Corning added more people
to the ﬁber program. Looking for a theoretician, Maurer hired Robert Ol-
shansky,64 who wanted to get into industry after two discouraging research
fellowships in particle physics. He says, ‘‘It was just a fantastic time to arrive
on the scene.’’65 He started with no ﬁber-optic background but soon eased
the troublesome problem of losses from small bends in the ﬁber. He found 85-
micrometer cores were too close to the ﬁber diameter of 125 micrometers but
that shrinking core diameter to 50 or 60 micrometers would cut the losses
by a factor of 10. Then Olshansky reﬁned the recipe for the ideal gradation
of refractive index in a multimode ﬁber.66
The Conversion of Bell Labs
No single event made Bell Labs collectively stand and shout ‘‘Hallelujah, I
believe in ﬁber optics.’’ Kao’s measurements of fused silica transparency had
opened eyes; Corning’s 20-decibel ﬁber opened more. The four-decibel ﬁber
was a shock. After being stalled at 60 decibels per kilometer in late 1971,67
Bell had brieﬂy claimed a low-loss record with liquid-core ﬁbers. Bell had some
other good results but nothing consistent that came close to Corning’s new
ﬁber,68 and little insight into what Corning was doing. AT&T management
was not happy.
From 1970 through 1972, Stew Miller shifted the balance of his guided-
wave group increasingly toward ﬁber optics. The people didn’t change, but
their research did. His three department managers, Jack Cook, Tingye Li, and
Henry Marcatili, moved into ﬁber system development.69 They organized an
interlaboratory committee on ﬁber systems with department heads from the
parent AT&T, device groups at Murray Hill, the engineering research center
at Princeton, ﬁber and cable manufacturing in Georgia, and the digital trans-
mission lab in Holmdel.70
Yet as late as the summer of 1972, Rudy Kompfner had not abandoned
hope for hollow optical waveguides that used pairs of mirrors to relay a laser
beam. He admitted their mechanical stability ‘‘has been a subject of concern
for some time’’ but held out hope for corrections that would allow use of their

A DEMONSTRATION FOR THE QUEEN
171
potentially vast transmission capacity. However, optical ﬁbers were looking
better, and he conceded that they ‘‘may satisfy a demand for much smaller
capacities much sooner.’’71 By the time Kompfner retired at 64 the following
summer, hollow optical waveguides were essentially dead.72 Research man-
agement changed as John Pierce also retired to join the faculty at Caltech.
A New Process Explodes at Bell Labs
Bell ﬁnally started to make progress on ﬁber fabrication in the winter of 1972,
after France published Corning’s application for a ﬁber patent.73 Bill French,
who had worked with Dave Pearson at Murray Hill, saw a translation and
wondered if a similar process, chemical vapor deposition, would work for
ﬁbers. He suggested the idea to another Murray Hill scientist, John Mac-
Chesney, who had used chemical vapor deposition to make other types of
silica.
To see if it would work, they ﬂowed silicon tetrachloride, titanium tetra-
chloride, and oxygen through a hot glass tube. The gases reacted, depositing
glassy soot inside the tube, which they then melted and drew into a ﬁber.
‘‘The experiment worked the ﬁrst time, largely for the wrong reasons, but
that didn’t matter,’’ MacChesney recalls.74 Further experiments reduced ﬁber
loss.75
Another Bell glass specialist, Ray Jaeger, realized that a dash of boron
would reduce silica’s refractive index. That boron-doped glass could serve as
a low-index cladding on a core of nearly pure silica, avoiding the need to add
dopants to the light-carrying core. MacChesney used that trick to make ﬁbers
with loss of only 5.5 decibels per kilometer, a breakthrough for Bell.76,77 By
1974 they reduced loss to four decibels per kilometer at 900 nanometers,
and to just over two decibels at 1060 nanometers.78
Reﬁning the process took time and countless experiments. MacChesney
veritably mass-produced preforms, which he sent to another lab that drew a
few hundred meters of ﬁber for measurements. Sometimes he let deposition
run unattended overnight; it speeded research but was risky with volatile
chemicals. One Saturday night an oxygen line broke, fueling a ﬁre so hot it
melted window glass and sealed the lab door shut. Firemen needed much
time and even more water to quench the inferno, which devastated Mac-
Chesney’s lab and ﬂooded one Paul Lazay ran downstairs.79
It was the second lab MacChesney melted, but the ﬁre didn’t diminish his
stature at Bell. It was the sort of occupational hazard that comes with high-
temperature chemistry; Southampton also burned down a lab.80 The occa-
sional ﬁre was a small price to pay for a process that worked, and Mac-
Chesney’s did. It became AT&T’s standard way to make ﬁber.
Others developed their own vapor deposition processes. In England, South-
ampton doped ﬁber cores with phosphorus to make ﬁbers with minimum loss
of 2.7 decibels per kilometer at 830 nanometers.81 There was room for some

172
CITY OF LIGHT
variation, although Corning soon received fundamental patents that would
become gatekeepers for entry into the American optical ﬁber industry. The
British Post Ofﬁce plugged along with double-crucible ﬁbers but never quite
caught up.82
Seeking Supporting Technologies
With ﬁbers improving and LEDs available for short-distance transmission, de-
velopers started looking at the imposing host of supporting technologies
needed to make practical communication systems. Their work could be a book
in itself. Fresh glass ﬁbers were surprisingly strong, but they needed plastic
coatings to protect their vulnerable surfaces. The ﬁbers, in turn, had to be
encased in a cable that could be hung from poles, threaded through buried
ducts, buried directly in the dirt, or run through walls. AT&T knew how to
cable wires, coating them with insulating plastic and wrapping the coated
wires with strong plastics or metallic armor. Corning didn’t have any cabling
expertise, and the few cables it tried making weren’t very good. Chuck Lucy
trotted the globe hunting cable manufacturers to form partnerships, and made
deals with BICC in England, Siemens in West Germany, Pirelli in Italy, and
government labs in France and Japan. Mostly, Corning supplied ﬁber and let
others do the cabling.83
Connecting ﬁbers end to end was another major worry. Nature smiled on
one approach—melting the ends together to form a permanent splice. Surface
tension of the glass tended to align the tips. Typical of much ﬁber develop-
ment, different groups each took small steps. Bell Labs did it ﬁrst for multi-
component glasses,84 then the Post Ofﬁce added the delicate alignment for
single-mode ﬁber,85 and Corning adapted the process for silica by zapping the
ﬁber tips with an electric arc.86 It worked well as long as ﬁber cores were
precisely centered, and there, too, nature smiled on careful manufacturers.
Temporary junctions were a tougher problem. Electrical connectors, like
the jack on your telephone, need only touch each other. Fibers have to be
aligned such that the light goes straight from one core into the other, and
without special tools that’s as hard as lining up a couple of hairs. Bell Labs
put a small army to work at the task; the Naval Research Laboratory and
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency set defense contractors to
work on military connectors. Some results were awful, but a few ideas
worked. Engineers devised special tools and alignment techniques, and their
performance steadily improved.
Field Trials for Fiber and Waveguide
By the fall of 1973, Bell Labs was sold on ﬁber-optic communications and
Stew Miller had put light pipes on the shelf. Jack Cook laid out plans for

A DEMONSTRATION FOR THE QUEEN
173
digital ﬁber links carrying 24 telephone conversations in Scientiﬁc American.87
Developers demonstrated digital repeaters operating at 6.3, 45, and 274 mil-
lion bits per second. The two slower ones used LEDs; the fastest one a room-
temperature diode laser.88 The next step was to take the technology out of
the lab for a ﬁeld trial like the one of the millimeter waveguide nearing its
start in New Jersey.
AT&T, being a giant corporation, had a committee set the parameters.
Some choices were easy. The main goal was to test digital transmission in an
urban environment. Fiber-optic cables packed a lot of capacity in a small
diameter, so they could alleviate crowding in underground ducts—saving the
phone company the untold millions needed to dig up the streets and lay new
ducts. Fibers also could stretch much farther between repeaters than the 6000
feet (1.8 kilometers) possible with wires.
Committees need something to debate, and this one concentrated on trans-
mission speed. Some people wanted ﬁbers to replace the 1.5 million bit per
second T1 lines that AT&T had been installing since 1962; that way they
could interface directly with existing systems. Another suggestion was to op-
erate at the 6 million bit per second T2 speed, where electronics were readily
available. However, executive director Warren Danielson pushed for the 45
million bit per second T3 rate, which had never been used for lack of a cable
to carry it. He argued the slower speeds didn’t improve on wires and that the
higher speed would share the high cost of the laser and ﬁber over more
channels. The others agreed.89
Ira Jacobs’s group at Holmdel spent 1975 assembling equipment for tests
at a suburban Atlanta AT&T plant. They packed Corning and AT&T ﬁbers
into plastic-coated ribbons of 12 ﬁbers, and stacked a dozen ribbons together
to make a pencil-thin 144-ﬁber core for the cable.90 They threaded 650 meters
(2100 feet) of that cable through ducts buried under a parking lot, then
spliced ﬁber ends together to test transmission over distances up to 10.9 kil-
ometers (6.8 miles).91 They put a separate ﬁber cable through environmental
torture tests in a duct where they could adjust the temperature and humidity.
On January 13, 1976, they turned on the Atlanta ﬁber system and spent the
next several months waiting for something bad to happen.
The communications world watched. The British Post Ofﬁce and others
had their own tests in the works, but no one had the resources to match Bell
Labs. Bell might not lead in inspiration, but it excelled in perspiration. Its
careful and cautious engineers would poke and probe the new technology
and spot any problems.
They did ﬁnd one problem. A distressingly large fraction of the lasers died
during the test. That was not unexpected, nor was it fatal. Laser lifetimes
were improving steadily, and Bell was hedging its bets by developing LED-
based transmitters. Otherwise, ‘‘things went quite smoothly,’’ Jacobs recalls.
Fiber loss was smaller than expected, as was the variability among compo-
nents.92 Bell had hoped to get 100 good ﬁbers, but 138 of the 144 were good.
Average loss was six decibels per kilometer, below the planned eight deci-

174
CITY OF LIGHT
bels.93 All systems were go for the next step, installing a ﬁber-optic link to
carry live telephone trafﬁc in the AT&T network.
The End of the Millimeter Waveguide
The wheels of progress ground more slowly for the millimeter waveguide. It
took years to prepare the test in Netcong, New Jersey, along a route planned
for a waveguide between New York and Philadelphia. Bell buried 8.7 miles
(14 kilometers) of waveguide four feet underground inside a 6-inch (15-
centimeter) pipe covered with yellow plastic to protect against corrosion. Then
they ﬁlled it with nitrogen gas. Completed behind original schedule in Feb-
ruary 1975, the installation cost $100,000 a mile.94
Careful tests followed. Ofﬁcially, Bell insisted the waveguide worked as ad-
vertised. ‘‘The verdict was that the TE01 [waveguide] system was a success,’’
says a corporate history. ‘‘It had the predicted low losses, only 5 percent
above’’ theoretical predictions.95 However, achieving that low loss was hor-
rendously difﬁcult because minute deviations shifted energy to undesired
modes. Settling of the soil around the buried pipeline caused transmission
problems. The desired mode faded away, and new modes interfered with the
signal.
AT&T had wanted the new technology to provide tremendous capacity
over long distances. That would have justiﬁed the tremendous cost for a reg-
ulated monopoly. By the time the test was done, the need for that extra
capacity had evaporated with the economic slump and the failure of Picture-
phone. New technology packed more signals onto microwave links.96 The
‘‘success’’ of the millimeter waveguide became academic; AT&T donated its
surplus waveguide to construction of the Very Large Array radio telescope in
Socorro, New Mexico.97
The story was the same around the world. The British Post Ofﬁce buried
14.2 kilometers (8.8 miles) of millimeter waveguide ﬁve feet under a main
road near Martlesham Heath, disrupting trafﬁc for three months. To keep the
waveguide straight even when temperature changed, they set up equipment
to pull constantly on both ends.98 Like Bell, the Post Ofﬁce considered the
tests starting in October 1975 to be successful.99 However, at the last minute
the Post Ofﬁce canceled plans to run a millimeter waveguide from London to
Reading. Long-term monitoring of the Martlesham system showed the loss
was increasing as the soil settled.100 The end was abrupt; research director
John Bray called the 60 or 70 people working on millimeter waveguides
together one Friday and said that on Monday they would start working on
ﬁber optics.101
The millimeter waveguide was a dead duck, although the organizations
that had poured vast sums into the technology took care not to publish an
obituary. Like vanquished generals, they declared victory and retreated. Dick
Dyott never got to carry out his brash promise to run optical ﬁbers through

A DEMONSTRATION FOR THE QUEEN
175
millimeter waveguides because none were ever installed in the global tele-
phone network.102 The technology sputtered to a stop barely a half-dozen
years after Harold Barlow had proclaimed that ‘‘conﬁdence in the ultimate
success . . . runs high.’’103 What Dyott had intended as a bold statement
turned out to be too cautious. Fiber optics blew the millimeter waveguide
away before it could carry a single phone call.

176
14
Three Generations in Five Years
(1975–1983)
Optical communications, for all its glamour, has already
passed most of the hard tests of practical application. We
know how to draw ﬁbers of the unprecedented degree of
transparency required. We know how to combine those
ﬁbers into cable. We know how to splice the cable. We
have designed and built devices to generate and modulate
optical signals. And we have designed and built repeaters
to regenerate these signals. In short, we have designed
and built a completely integrated optical transmission sys-
tem.
—John D. deButts, chairman, AT&T, October 17, 19751
It is now clear that optical ﬁber systems will win in the
competition for performance and economy. . . . The future
will always be constrained by the physical properties of
materials and by the technological skills developed to over-
come or make use of them. A step-wise move toward wave-
lengths of about 1.2 micrometers can be foreseen, limited
largely by the development of efﬁcient and reliable enough
optical sending and receiving elements. The splicing prob-
lem may remain a signiﬁcant barrier to the wide use of
monomode ﬁber systems, but other barriers may be set by
the terminal costs and overall network reliability costs as-

THREE GENERATIONS IN FIVE YEARS
177
sociated with any systems of very high transmission capac-
ity. But none of these barriers will be insuperable.
—F. F. Roberts, 19772
A
s Bell Labs carefully prepared its Atlanta ﬁeld trial in the summer of 1975,
lightning struck a two-way radio antenna used by the Dorset police in
southern England. The current surge destroyed the communication system at
the department’s eastern division control room in Bournemouth.3 To keep in
touch with roaming ofﬁcers, the police had to park a patrol car atop a nearby
hill to relay signals to other cars.
That was no way to run a police force, and the chief constable did not
want it to happen again. He sought help from Geoffrey Philips at the Home
Ofﬁce Police Scientiﬁc Development Branch in London. Philips had been Don
Williams’s boss at the Ministry of Defense, so he knew about ﬁber optics.4 The
military was interested in ﬁbers because they did not carry electric currents,
and Philips knew that meant they would not carry power spikes from light-
ning strikes, so he suggested the chief constable contact Standard Telephones
and Cables.
Standard Telephones and Cables had sold ﬁber equipment for experiments,
but no one had asked them for a commercial system before. The chief con-
stable didn’t care that the technology was new. What he wanted was a cable
that would keep another lightning strike from frying the replacement elec-
tronics.5 He didn’t haggle with STC about speciﬁcations; he trusted their as-
surances it would work. STC didn’t disappoint him; in mid-September, within
just a few weeks of the order, the ﬁber cable was on line and the Dorset police
resumed normal operations.6
The timing gave Charlie Sandbank a perfect opportunity to report a tri-
umph at the First European Conference on Optical Fiber Communications,
September 16–18, 1975, in London. The ﬁrst ﬁber-optic system put to work
in the real world was up and running.7
A Premature Consensus
The Dorset system was good news, but it wasn’t good enough to convince
the traditionally conservative telephone industry of the mid-1970s. Phone
companies wanted standardized equipment, tested for reliability and compat-
ibility with existing systems. AT&T set the standards for North America; the
International Telecommunications Union set them for most of the rest of the
world. To Bell Labs, the Atlanta trials were the ﬁrst step toward a new stan-
dard, ﬁber-optic transmission at the previously unused 45 million bit per sec-
ond T3 rate. Bell had taken risks and made trade-offs to reach the consensus
design. Graded-index ﬁber seemed far more practical than single-mode, which
had essentially the same loss at 800 to 900 nanometers and offered only a

178
CITY OF LIGHT
modest increase in transmission speed at those wavelengths. The toughest
choice was between gallium arsenide lasers and LEDs; lasers were brighter,
but in 1975 they didn’t last long. Bell hedged its bets and worked on both.
The consensus reﬂected a widespread belief that the technology was near
a plateau. The best laboratory ﬁbers were approaching the fundamental
limit on transparency at 850 nanometers, two decibels per kilometer.8 De-
velopers added in other losses expected in production ﬁbers, connectors, and
splices and ﬁgured signals couldn’t go much beyond 10 kilometers (6 miles)
without a repeater. Graded-index ﬁbers could easily carry tens of millions of
bits per second over that distance, and perhaps a few hundred million. After
15 years of development, gallium arsenide lasers were approaching desirable
lifetimes.
A few labs pushed a bit further. The Post Ofﬁce tested gallium arsenide
lasers and graded-index ﬁbers to transmit similar distances at the European
standard speed of 140 million bits per second.9 A team at Fujitsu sent 400
million bits per second through 4 kilometers (2.5 miles) of graded-index ﬁber
and held out hope for even faster transmission.10 However, the industry gen-
erally followed the Bell Labs consensus.
The little village of ﬁber-optic developers had become a fast-growing town.
When Charles Kao returned from Hong Kong in 1974, he found himself an
elder statesman in his early forties. He was honored for recognizing ﬁber’s
potential, although he had underestimated the transparency of silica and the
industry had turned away from his suggestion of single-mode ﬁber. ITT gave
him a high proﬁle, sending him to Roanoke, Virginia, to launch a new Amer-
ican ﬁber-optics group.
A few others held to the original vision of single-mode ﬁbers. Dick Dyott
felt alone, ‘‘bleating in the wilderness’’ about their virtues before he left
the Post Ofﬁce in 1975.11 Developers of submarine cables were interested
because they had to stretch transmission speeds and distances as far as
possible, but they were not ready to invest much. F. F. Roberts and Stew Miller
thought single-mode ﬁbers were long-term possibilities but gave them low
priority for use on land. The biggest single-mode project was a Navy effort
to develop acoustic sensors to track the movement of Soviet nuclear sub-
marines.
A Fiber-Optic Gold Rush
At the end of May 1976, Bell Labs reported that the Atlanta trial had worked
better than expected. Deep collective sighs of relief were breathed. Much more
detailed analysis remained,12 but the basic message was loud and clear: Fiber
works. That was more than sufﬁcient to launch a ﬁber-optic gold rush.
Hot new technologies lure would-be entrepreneurs like rumors of a gold
strike draw miners. Corning fueled the ﬁres when it attacked corporate ﬁnan-
cial problems by companywide layoffs that hit the ﬁber group. Corning’s ﬁber

THREE GENERATIONS IN FIVE YEARS
179
sales had been stubbornly low, but two victims of the layoff still saw a bright
future for ﬁber optics. Rich Cerny had been marketing ﬁbers after earning an
MBA in the ample spare time afforded an Air Force captain tending missile
silos in North Dakota. Eric Randall had worked in ﬁber development after
earning a doctorate in glass science.
Boyishly bright and friendly, Cerny was a born salesman. Randall had the
technology down cold. Young and energetic, they went looking for cash to
get into the ﬁber business. American Optical turned them down ﬂat, writing,
‘‘There’s no market for communications ﬁber optics.’’13 They got a better
reception from Jim Godbey, an ambitious former Air Force ofﬁcer and presi-
dent of the Valtec Corp., a small company with stock traded over the counter.
Several years earlier, Godbey and two other veterans of Mosaic Fabrications
had started a company called Electro-Fiberoptics in an old pickle factory in
Worcester, Massachusetts, to make ﬁber-optic bundles for lamps and signs.
They changed the name to Valtec after a 1972 merger with Valpey, an optics
company headed by Ted Valpey, who contributed some family money and
became chairman while Godbey ran day-to-day operations.14
Cerny and Randall did not have to start cold. Paul Dobson, a Valtec en-
gineer, had already talked Godbey into buying a high-temperature furnace to
draw silica ﬁbers. Unable to make complex preforms, Dobson pulled ﬁbers
from pure silica rods and clad them with a plastic with lower refractive index.
It was a simple way to make ﬁbers, and other companies also were experi-
menting with it, but Dobson had a knack for making things work that out-
weighed his limited formal training and tiny budget. When Cerny and Randall
arrived, Dobson was producing the best plastic-clad silica ﬁbers available,15
with loss of only 3.5 decibels per kilometer at 850 nanometers.16 However,
the process could not make graded-index or single-mode ﬁbers, so its potential
was limited.
Godbey saw that Cerny’s salesmanship and Randall’s expertise in glass
science complemented Dobson’s practical skills. He hired them and set the
three up in a separate subsidiary called Valtec Communication Fiber Optics.
They built a glass lathe and started making graded-index ﬁbers using the Bell
Labs vapor deposition process. After a local cable manufacturer failed disas-
trously in its efforts to make ﬁber cable, they decided to build their own cable
plant.17
You couldn’t buy ready-made equipment to cable ﬁbers, so Dobson built
his own on a low budget. Lacking much machinery, he had to assemble the
cable in stages. First he packaged the ﬁbers into loose tubes. Then he assem-
bled several tubes into a complete cable. Winding the ﬁber-containing tubes
around a central steel strength member required keeping the spools holding
the tubes aligned horizontally while winding them around the strength mem-
ber. Big companies custom-built elaborate heavy-duty machines with all sorts
of wheels and gears. Dobson built Valtec’s from plywood and 2  4s.18 It did
the job, and the design had an added bonus. Separating the tubes at the ends
turned out to make cable installation easier.

180
CITY OF LIGHT
The Rise of Irving Kahn
Fiber optics also caught the eye of Irving B. Kahn, a colorful promoter and
nephew of composer Irving Berlin. Kahn had made a fortune from the Tele-
PrompTer Corporation, which he launched in 1950 to sell TelePrompTers to
cue forgetful actors with their lines. He later made TelePrompTer an early
giant in cable television but courted local ofﬁcials a bit too hard. At the height
of his success in 1971, he was convicted of perjury and bribing ofﬁcials of
Johnstown, Pennsylvania. He resigned from TelePrompTer and spent 20
months in jail.19 Forced to sell his stock, he emerged from prison with cash
and new ideas, including using ﬁber optics to carry signals for cable television.
Short, stocky, and physically powerful, Kahn had a blend of charm, clout,
and arrogance that meant power in the entertainment industry. He found a
couple of former Bell Labs scientists and helped them set up a small ﬁber-
making company called Fiber Communications Inc. His contacts helped the
little company land a contract to supply TelePrompTer with one of the ﬁrst
ﬁber systems used in cable television. He prophesied that ﬁber would soon
replace coaxial cables for cable television. Many cable companies already were
working on ﬁber. Most of the rest scoffed at him, but Kahn found open ears
at Insilco, a large Connecticut company that owned Times Wire & Cable Co.
Kahn persuaded Insilco to merge its subsidiary with Fiber Communications.
Insilco contributed a complete coaxial cable plant that supported an ongoing
business. Fiber Communications contributed little more than a draw tower
and Kahn’s virtuoso salesmanship.20 Veterans of the ﬁber industry still marvel
at the results. When the deal was done in December 1976, Kahn’s group
owned 49 percent of the new Times Fiber Communications Inc.21,22
From Atlanta to Chicago
The behemoth AT&T paid little heed to would-be competitors; the telephone
monopoly had long made most of the equipment it used. The next step in the
Bell System plan was to run ﬁber cables through urban underground ducts
and test them with live telephone trafﬁc. Telephone engineers worried that a
cable full of glass threads would shatter like a plate-glass window or degrade
rapidly when exposed to the harsh conditions in manholes, sometimes ﬁlled
with water and inhabited by wildlife from rats to alligators. AT&T ran 1.6
miles (2.6 kilometers) of ﬁber cable through buried ducts linking three build-
ings in the downtown loop district of Chicago. It was typical of the sites where
AT&T planned to use ﬁbers ﬁrst: urban centers where underground ducts
were crammed with copper cables. A single ﬁber cable no larger than a gar-
den hose could hold 144 ﬁbers, and four ﬁber cables could ﬁt into a duct built
to house one ﬁre-hose sized copper cable. Yet each ﬁber cable had many times
more capacity than the bulkier copper cable. Replacing the old copper cables

THREE GENERATIONS IN FIVE YEARS
181
with new ﬁber cables promised to multiply duct capacity, without digging up
a single downtown street.
AT&T reﬁned its Atlanta system hardware, using ﬁbers that were a little
clearer, lasers that were a little better, and connectors considerably im-
proved.23 Engineers set up test equipment at both ends and carefully measured
each of the 24 ﬁbers after technicians threaded the thin cable through the
twists and turns of the buried ducts. Not a single ﬁber broke. On April 1,
1977, the system carried its ﬁrst test signals, as Bell prepared to send regular
digitized phone service—including Picturephone and video signals—through
the cable starting on May 11.24 Proud of getting the testbed up and running
less than six months after approval, AT&T ofﬁcials geared up for a major
press announcement of the feat. Then they opened their papers to discover
that the nation’s second-largest phone company, General Telephone and Elec-
tronics, had beat them to it.
GTE Steals a March in Long Beach
While AT&T coordinated its Chicago demonstration within its corporate bu-
reaucracy, the much smaller GTE Laboratories quietly laid its own plans just
off Route 128 west of Boston. They picked a 10-kilometer (6-mile) route
served by General Telephone of California between Long Beach and Artesia
and bought six-ﬁber cable from the General Cable Corp.
John Fulenwider, a top GTE research engineer, went along to test ﬁber
splicing in manholes and get the system running. The California phone com-
pany sent a couple of Hollywood cameramen to ﬁlm him. After water was
pumped from the manhole, the soft-spoken Fulenwider descended with his
splicing tools and microscope, dressed in a white lab coat. The cameramen
followed with their klieg lights and cameras, joking uneasily about their fate
if an earthquake hit while they were underground. They had never been
down a manhole before, and in the tight quarters one of them leaned a lamp
housing on a four-inch cable. He didn’t know that telephone companies pump
air through cables to keep water from seeping in and damaging the wires.
Nor did he know that his lamp housing grew hot enough to melt the plastic
jacket on the cable. The ﬁrst thing he noticed was a loud ‘‘whoosh’’ as the
pressurized air escaped from the cable. Convinced the ‘‘big one’’ had struck,
the two dropped everything and scrambled out of the manhole.25
That didn’t stop GTE from getting its system up and running on April 22.26
It was not as ambitious as Bell’s; it used LED transmitters and carried only
6.3 million bits per second. But it was a ﬁrst.
AT&T was not amused; Chicago was supposed to be the ﬁrst. Press ofﬁcers
scrambled to inform reporters that the Chicago system had carried its ﬁrst
signals on April 1, but they had to admit that regular telephone trafﬁc did
not start until six weeks later. GTE had won a race that Bell didn’t realize it
was running.

182
CITY OF LIGHT
British Field Trials
F. F. Roberts turned 60 in the spring of 1977, and Post Ofﬁce rules forced
him to retire. As he turned management of the ﬁber-optics group over to his
quick-witted and scholarly lieutenant John Midwinter, he could take pride in
a job well done. Fiber optics were on a roll.
In January 1977, the Post Ofﬁce pulled a graded-index ﬁber cable through
old, crowded ducts near Martlesham Heath, picked to highlight the contrast
with the millimeter waveguide.27 By April, test signals at the European stan-
dard level of 8.4 million bits per second were going through 13 kilometers
(8 miles) of ﬁber.28 When that worked well, Post Ofﬁce engineers tried the
next level, 140 million bits per second, and were amazed how easily that
worked over eight kilometers (ﬁve miles).29 Bell hadn’t tried such high speeds
in the ﬁeld; pulse spreading was a problem in graded-index ﬁbers at the next
level in the North American transmission hierarchy, 274 million bits per
second. On June 16, the Post Ofﬁce started routing live telephone trafﬁc
through the system.30
Standard Telecommunication Labs ran its own ﬁeld trial between Hitchin
and Stevenage, splicing the cable in the ﬁeld and mounting two repeaters in
standard Post Ofﬁce roadside housings along the 9-kilometer (5.6-mile) route.
The system worked so well at 140 million bits per second that they pulled
out one repeater and sent the signals through 6 kilometers (3.7 miles) of
ﬁber.31 Others followed, the French National Center for Telecommunications
Research,32 Siemens in West Berlin, and Pirelli in Turin.33 Everything worked
better than expected. Problems were trivial compared to millimeter wavegui-
des, which ofﬁcially had been merely delayed until demand justiﬁed them.
The results assured that millimeter waveguides would not rise from the dead,
and forced top management to decide what to do with ﬁber.34
Organizers of the third European Conference on Optical Communications
invited Roberts to open the September 1977 meeting with a talk on the pres-
ent and future of optical communications. It was an honor for the godfather
of European ﬁber optics. He prepared his talk in the weeks after he retired,
noting that ﬁber was successful in cost and performance. Looking at new
research, he predicted that a new generation of systems would operate at
wavelengths around 1.2 micrometers, and doubted that barriers to practical
single-mode systems would prove insurmountable.
He did not have a chance to see how prophetic his predictions would prove,
or even to hear his compatriots’ reactions. In early summer Roberts suffered
a fatal heart attack while in the shower.35
A Second Window Opens
The ﬁrst decade of ﬁber optic communications built up a critical mass of
researchers pushing the limits of the technology. As they approached the

THREE GENERATIONS IN FIVE YEARS
183
limits of what was possible at 850 nanometers, they began looking for alter-
natives.
Two effects restrict light transmission through glass—absorption and scat-
tering. Absorption depends on glass composition, but scattering is a funda-
mental limit that depends on wavelength. It decreases quite rapidly as the
wavelength increases.36 The best ﬁbers were approaching the scattering limit
at 850 nanometers, but longer wavelengths promised much lower scattering.
Double the wavelength and the scattering limit should drop by a factor of 16.
Early measurements at longer wavelengths were discouraging; higher ab-
sorption offset lower scattering loss. Total attenuation—loss plus scattering—
hit a low point near 850 nanometers, increased at longer wavelengths, then
dipped brieﬂy around 1000 nanometers (1 micrometer) before rising again.
Another dip loomed beyond 1400 nanometers (1.4 micrometers), but it didn’t
look promising.37 In 1974, Bill French and John MacChesney pushed loss
down to 1.1 decibels per kilometer at 1020 nanometers,38 close to the theo-
retical minimum, but beyond the range of practical diode lasers.
Researchers traced the residual absorption to bonds between hydrogen and
oxygen atoms from the traces of water remaining in the fused silica. The
University of Southampton reduced water levels to 0.5 part per million,39 but
the formidable effort of removing the rest hardly seemed worthwhile without
good diode lasers beyond one micrometer. By 1975, few researchers bothered
measuring transmission beyond 1.1 micrometers.40
Masaharu Horiguchi, who had been working on ﬁber communications
since 1971 at Nippon Telegraph and Telephone’s Ibaraki Electrical Commu-
nication Lab, was not ready to stop. What lured him further were suggestions
that pulse spreading caused by material dispersion should drop nearly to
zero—allowing much higher transmission speed—between 1.2 and 1.3 mi-
crometers. As far back as 1970, Dick Dyott’s computer calculations had
shown material dispersion should drop to zero at 1.23 micrometers.41 Shortly
afterward, Felix Kapron at Corning did a more detailed analysis predicting a
minimum near 1.3 micrometers, with the exact zero point depending on the
ﬁber structure.42 Nobody paid much attention at the time because they lacked
suitable lasers, but in 1975 Dave Payne and Alec Gambling at Southampton
took another look and found material dispersion should be zero at 1.27 mi-
crometers.43 Horiguchi saw their report and decided to look at longer wave-
lengths.
In the fall of 1975, Horiguchi developed an automated system to measure
ﬁber loss between 0.4 and 2.5 micrometers, a much wider range of wave-
lengths than anyone else. Knowing that water caused most absorption be-
tween 1.1 and 1.8 micrometers, he realized that ﬁbers containing less than
100 parts per billion of water should be very clear. He teamed with Hiroshi
Osanai of the Fujikura Cable Works, who in early February 1976 succeeded
in making low-water ﬁbers. ‘‘On rare occasions, a beautiful loss spectrum was
observed in the 0.6 to 1.1 micrometer spectral range,’’ recalls Horiguchi.44
An annoying water absorption peak at 0.945 micrometers was gone.

184
CITY OF LIGHT
On March 27 Horiguchi measured a low-water ﬁber at longer wavelengths
and found it had loss of 0.47 decibel per kilometer at 1.2 micrometers, with
all but 0.1 decibel due to scattering. That was their best ﬁber so far, and it
was no ﬂuke. Total attenuation was below 1 decibel from 0.95 to 1.37 mi-
crometers. They looked very very closely at loss over a range of wavelengths
and concluded that their clearest ﬁber contained only 80 parts per billion of
water, one-sixth as much as the previous record low.45 They had hit the
jackpot, a new window for ﬁber optic communications.
Crucially, their new window offered both low loss and low material dis-
persion. Not only could signals go farther at the longer wavelength, but also
they could carry much more information because shorter pulses could be
packed more closely together. Opening the new window was encouraging
news, and even while Bell Labs was designing its Chicago system, researchers
on the cutting edge began considering the new window at 1.3 micrometers.
A New Laser Family
The most obvious problem in moving to a new wavelength was the need for
a new laser source. That seemed a formidable obstacle because after a dozen
years of development, gallium arsenide lasers still didn’t meet telephone in-
dustry reliability requirements. However, as Horiguchi and Osanai opened the
second window in ﬁbers, a Chinese-born scientist at the MIT Lincoln Labo-
ratory invented a new family of long-wavelength lasers.
J. Jim Hsieh was in grade school when his father, an air force ofﬁcer, ﬂed
the communist revolution and took his family to Taiwan. After a year in the
Taiwanese Navy, the tall young Hsieh came to America, where he earned a
doctorate studying the then-exotic semiconductor gallium nitride.46 He started
working on gallium arsenide when he arrived at Lincoln Lab in 1971, but
his interest soon wandered. The Air Force wanted 1.06 micrometer diode
lasers for space communications, and Hsieh thought such wavelengths might
be useful in ﬁber optics. After standard materials showed little promise, about
1973 he turned to an unconventional approach, making semiconductor la-
sers from a mixture of four elements, gallium, indium, arsenic, and phospho-
rus.
The conventional wisdom held that as a bad idea. Two-element semicon-
ductors such as gallium arsenide must be mixed in the right proportions to
make working devices. Adding a third element to the blend caused more
problems because they had to be grown on substrates of simpler compounds
with almost identical atomic spacing. That worked for gallium aluminum
arsenide on gallium arsenide, but not for other semiconductor mixtures. Most
specialists thought there was no hope of balancing four elements in what
they called a ‘‘quaternary’’ compound.
Hsieh saw an opportunity instead of a problem. A two-element compound
has a ﬁxed lattice spacing and gap between valence and conduction bands—
which determines the laser wavelength. Adding a third element generally

THREE GENERATIONS IN FIVE YEARS
185
changes both wavelength and lattice spacing, but leaves only one degree of
freedom to adjust both parameters—like one knob both tuning a radio fre-
quency and changing its volume. Mix four elements together in the right
proportions and you get two degrees of freedom, so you can adjust both
wavelength and lattice spacing. Hsieh realized that mixing gallium, indium,
arsenic, and phosphorus would let him both select the laser wavelength and
match the lattice spacing of the thin quaternary layer to that of a substrate
of indium phosphide.47
Like Panish and Hayashi, Hsieh had to expend considerable perspiration
to take advantage of his inspiration. Few others had worked on indium phos-
phide, so he had to painstakingly test mixtures and growth techniques. He
and a technician set up four furnaces and grew samples, collecting one data
point per day per furnace, compiling the data he needed to make recipes for
his lasers.48
With data in hand, Hsieh grew simple double-heterojunction lasers with
a blend of indium gallium arsenide phosphide (InGaAsP) mixed to emit at 1.1
micrometers. The ﬁrst ones emitted only pulses at room temperature, but as
Horiguchi and Osanai measured their record low loss, Hsieh saw a steady
1.1-micrometer beam from a InGaAsP laser at room temperature.49 When
Hsieh tried making longer-wavelength lasers to match the new window, he
found they were easier to produce. By the end of 1976, he had made room-
temperature InGaAsP lasers emitting steadily at 1.21 and 1.25 micrometers
and generating pulses at 1.28 micrometers.50
Other developers expected lifetime problems like those that continued to
plague gallium arsenide. But Hsieh was delighted to ﬁnd that his quaternary
lasers ‘‘looked great’’ in early life tests. From the very start, they were much
more durable than gallium arsenide, although initially no one knew why.
Long wavelengths began looking good.
A Big Push in Japan
Osanai and Horiguchi were on a roll in the summer of 1976. Hydrogen-
oxygen bonds absorbed very strongly at 1.39 micrometers, even in dry ﬁbers.
But removing boron from the core glass opened a third window beyond 1.5
micrometers. The window opened further when they used cores of fused silica
doped with germanium. Their best ﬁber had loss of only 0.46 decibel per
kilometer at 1.51 micrometers.51 They also dried the glass further, reducing
water to 30 parts per billion, although their clearest ﬁber at the time con-
tained 150 parts per billion.
Opening the new window changed the ground rules for ﬁber optics. Sys-
tems operating at 1.3 micrometers had a whole different set of operating
characteristics than 850-nanometer systems. Japanese engineers were quick
to see that lower loss and pulse spreading could be the basis of a second
generation of ﬁber technology. A team at Nippon Telegraph and Telephone
calculated that 1.3-micrometer LED transmitters could send several tens of

186
CITY OF LIGHT
millions of bits per second through 20 kilometers (12 miles) of graded-index
ﬁber. Brighter laser signals could carry hundreds of millions of bits per second
through 30 to 50 kilometers (19 to 31 miles) of graded-index ﬁbers. They
even looked farther into the future and envisioned a third generation of sys-
tems that would use single-mode ﬁbers to carry up to two billion bits per
second over similar distances.
The NTT engineers saw more than just record-setting numbers. They
looked beyond the short interofﬁce systems that were the center of American
efforts to systems carrying high-speed signals long distances between major
urban centers. Millimeter waveguides had been assigned that role, but they
were dead. Fiber optics could do the job with repeaters at regular intervals,
but repeaters were expensive and potentially troublesome. Short-wavelength
systems would require a repeater about every ten kilometers, and many would
have to go into the unfriendly environments of manholes. Stretch repeater
spacing to 30 kilometers and they could go inside buildings, offering impor-
tant practical advantages.52
The Japanese also spotted Hsieh’s long-wavelength lasers much faster than
American developers. They invited Hsieh to Japan, and when he arrived they
grilled him about his process. Within a year, they had copied it.53 It was part
of a sea change in the attitudes of Japanese engineers, who for decades after
World War II had suffered a cultural inferiority complex, automatically fol-
lowing the lead of overseas groups. By the mid-1970s, they were growing
more conﬁdent in their own technology and willing to compete head on with
Americans. Having captured much of the consumer electronics market, they
decided to go after communications and placed the ﬁrst bets on a second
generation of ﬁber-optic systems.
Mixed News from Field Trials
AT&T steered a more cautious course, even as its engineers returned from
Chicago to report a boring litany of successes. Automatic protection switches
rerouted signals only four times in the ﬁrst six months—once because a laser
died—but no one using the system noticed because the signals were switched
in milliseconds.54 After a year, Ira Jacobs told an eager audience of ﬁber spe-
cialists: ‘‘The system has performed excellently—to date there have been no
service outages owing to the lightwave components, and the error-
performance surpasses the most stringent Bell System objectives.’’55 The big-
gest problem remaining was gallium-arsenide laser lifetimes. While Bell Labs
reached the million-hour target during the Chicago ﬁeld trial, it was only for
lasers carefully made in the laboratory. Mass-produced chips did not last as
long, and even the best lasers needed thermoelectric coolers to keep them
from heating to the point of self-destruction. Nonetheless, Jacobs announced
AT&T would start installing systems operating at 45 million bits per second
as regular parts of its network starting in 1980.

THREE GENERATIONS IN FIVE YEARS
187
Looking farther into the future, Bell Labs set new ﬁber goals. One target
was submarine cables using single-mode ﬁbers and gallium arsenide lasers;
another was long-distance systems operating in the 1.1 to 1.3 micrometer
window.
In Britain, the ﬁeld trials at Martlesham Heath and Hitchin-Stevenage were
similarly encouraging. The Post Ofﬁce decided to lay eight-ﬁber cables along
routes totaling about 500 kilometers (300 miles), including the London-
Reading route where the millimeter waveguide had almost gone.56 Like Bell
Labs, they began looking to future single-mode and long-wavelength systems.
Some annoying glitches did nag at engineers evaluating the ﬁeld trials. It
proved impossible to predict reliably how much light would be transferred
from one ﬁber to another at Hitchin-Stevenage, even when their speciﬁcations
seemed identical. Something was inducing noise at the junctions. Initially
bafﬂed, Richard Epworth sat down to analyze the problem at Standard Tele-
communication Labs. Common sense said that ‘‘bad’’ lasers were the most
likely cause, and switching lasers usually cured the problem. However, the
lasers that seemed best in laboratory measurements fared the worst in the
system.
Epworth ﬁnally realized that the problem lay in the coherence of laser light.
Coherent light waves can interfere with each other if they travel slightly
different paths, producing light and dark zones. Illuminate a small area with
coherent light and you see shifting grainy patterns called ‘‘speckle.’’ It’s an
effect well known to laser specialists, which makes laser-illuminated holo-
grams look grainy. Epworth realized the same effect could occur when many
modes interfered with each other at the end of a multimode ﬁber. The more
coherent the light, the more pronounced the speckle pattern and the more
intense the ‘‘modal noise’’ caused by minute shifts in laser wavelength or
ﬁber position. From a theoretical standpoint, it resembled the modal problems
that plagued the millimeter waveguide.57
Modal noise hit the STL test hard because it used more coherent lasers
and ﬁbers with 30-micrometer cores instead of the 50 or 62.5 micrometer
cores used in American trials. The coherence increased speckle intensity, and
the small cores meant that loss of only a few speckles could cause noise.
When Epworth ﬁrst described the problem in 1978, he recommended shifting
to less coherent light sources,58 or using ﬁbers that carried more modes. How-
ever, it soon became clear that only single-mode ﬁbers could eliminate modal
noise.59 It was a message many people did not want to hear.
Back to Single-Mode
Single-mode ﬁbers had a bad reputation because light coupling was difﬁcult.
They also didn’t offer much advantage over graded-index ﬁbers at 850 nan-
ometers, where high material dispersion largely offset any attractions of
single-mode transmission.

188
CITY OF LIGHT
Opening the 1.3-micrometer window made single-mode ﬁbers look much
better. The lower loss—about 0.5 decibel per kilometer—meant that signals
could travel tens of kilometers. The low material dispersion promised capacity
many times higher than at 850 nanometers. Moreover, core size increases
with wavelength, to nine micrometers at the longer wavelength, compared
to a mere four micrometers at 850 nanometers. That eased alignment toler-
ances, which had been improving with splice and connector technology.
The single-mode revival spread rapidly. Having ﬁnished its trials of graded-
index ﬁber, the British Post Ofﬁce turned to single-mode.60 Corning, committed
to a strategy of staying at the forefront of the new technology, shifted Bob
Olshansky to single-mode, and he discovered it was easier to design and make
than graded-index ﬁber.61
The Japanese stepped up single-mode research after they opened the 1.3-
micrometer window. By late 1977, NTT was making low-loss single-mode
ﬁbers.62 The Ibaraki lab pushed to remove the last traces of water, paying off
at the end of 1978 with single-mode ﬁber showing a dip at 1.55 micrometers
where loss was lower than anything anyone had ever seen before. They had
made the clearest glass in the world, with attenuation only 0.2 decibels per
kilometer, just a little higher than the theoretical lower limit on scattering.
NTT knew they couldn’t do much better, and called it ‘‘ultimate low-loss’’
ﬁber.63
The lower the loss, the more enticing single-mode ﬁbers became. Pulse
spreading increases with distance; it’s a hundred times larger over 100 kilo-
meters of ﬁber than over one kilometer. Good graded-index ﬁbers could carry
a hundred million bits per second for 10 kilometers, but only 20 million bits
over 50 kilometers—and at 1.3 micrometers, 50 kilometers (30 miles) became
a reasonable transmission distance. Single-mode ﬁbers could easily carry a
billion bits 50 kilometers, leaving graded-index ﬁbers in the dust.
In America, single-mode ﬁbers caught the eye of Will Hicks, recovering
from a descent into alcoholism that followed his sale of Mosaic Fabrications.
Never satisﬁed with other people’s explanations, he calculated the properties
of single-mode ﬁber for himself and found its transmission capacity went far
beyond the billion bits a second that impressed others. He stubbornly ignored
people who insisted single-mode wouldn’t work and started evolving his own
vision of future ﬁber-optic systems.
Hicks knew from his early experiments with ﬁber bundles that light could
leak between ﬁber cores. Electromagnetic theory explained the process, and
Hicks realized it could be applied to switching light into and out of ﬁbers,
something important for practical communications. He also realized that one
ﬁber could simultaneously carry signals at many wavelengths, an idea called
wavelength-division multiplexing. Others could see the possibility in theory.
Glass transmits the whole visible spectrum as well as some infrared light,
while the air simultaneously carries radio and television signals at many dif-
ferent frequencies. A single ﬁber could carry many different wavelengths, but
getting many separate signals into the same ﬁber and separating them at the
other end were extremely challenging problems. At best, most specialists

THREE GENERATIONS IN FIVE YEARS
189
thought, each ﬁber could carry only a few signals. Only Hicks seriously
thought it might be possible for one ﬁber to carry tens, hundreds, or even
more separate wavelengths. Taking the idea a step farther, he envisioned that
a single optical ampliﬁer, using the laser principle, might simultaneously boost
the strengths of the whole range of wavelengths passing through the ﬁber,
amplifying all the signals at once.
In his mind, Hicks put it all together, looking into the future and seeing
an all-optical network, carrying light signals all the way to homes without
bothering to change them back to electric currents. Fibers and optics would
go beyond being mere pipes to become part of the switches that routed calls
through the network. He talked some about his ideas, earning a reputation
as a wild-eyed visionary, but all that he wrote was patent applications. Then
in his early ﬁfties, he was broke, but he talked Chuck Lucy out of a quarter-
million dollars from Corning. It wasn’t much to build a new technology, but
Hicks had cut his entrepreneurial teeth on a shoestring budget. He set up
shop in the loft of an old building in central Massachusetts, and with a couple
of helpers settled down to inventing a new ﬁber-optic network technology.
He whimsically called his company 1984 Inc., because it would have so much
transmission capacity that it could keep track of everybody all the time.64
Fiber development accelerated with the opening of the new windows. Each
issue of Electronics Letters—the British journal that published the hottest de-
velopments—announced new wonders. Corning and Bell Labs pushed loss in
their best laboratory ﬁbers below 0.2 decibel per kilometer at 1.55 microm-
eters, to about 0.16 decibel.
Semiconductor lasers advanced apace with ﬁbers. Much to the surprise of
the establishment, long-wavelength lasers proved much more reliable than
gallium arsenide. As the trend became obvious, Martlesham Heath shifted all
its research from gallium arsenide to InGaAsP in a week. Initially frustrated
because they had been making progress in gallium arsenide, developers
changed their mind when they saw that the longer wavelengths did not trig-
ger the growth of fatal ﬂaws. ‘‘The wind was behind us,’’ says Alan Steven-
ton.65
Valtec Rides a Dangerous Growth Wave
The revolution in telephone operations was more modest. Industry was trying
to do the logical, cautious thing, grow by making systems based on technol-
ogy that already worked, not the latest idea from the labs. That meant staying
with gallium-arsenide lasers and graded-index ﬁbers.
There was no denying ﬁber optics after its successes in Chicago, Long
Beach, and Martlesham Heath. Valtec landed a contract to install a 4.2-
kilometer (2.6-mile) system for Central Telephone in Las Vegas, which wanted
to show its ﬁber prowess when a big trade show came to town in December
1977.66 Marshall Hudson, freshly hired away from Corning, taught the work-
men how to splice ﬁbers and promised everyone who beat his target a six-

190
CITY OF LIGHT
pack of beer. The whole crew won. To show the system was built for the real
world, Cerny handed out photos of a Centel workman guiding the cable into
underground ducts—sitting in a grimy manhole, his hands covered with
greasy black cable lubricant.67 The brash little company became the ﬁrst in-
dependent contractor to deliver a working ﬁber-optic system to a telephone
company.
The young ﬁber industry was growing explosively. Big cable and telecom-
munications companies in America, Europe, and Japan jumped into the ﬁeld,
worried that they might miss a revolutionary new technology. For a while,
the ﬂood of companies threatened to splinter the market so much that no one
made any money. In one year, sales of ﬁber-optic connectors rose an impres-
sive 50 percent, but the number of manufacturers tripled, meaning that av-
erage sales per company dropped.68
Valtec stood at the peak of the wave, struggling to keep its feet. The com-
pany was in an enviable yet dangerous position—the purest stock-market
play in ﬁber-optic communications. Fiber was only a small part of the billion-
dollar Corning Glass Works; it was a minuscule fraction of corporate giants
like AT&T or GTE. Moreover, Godbey shrewdly kept the company growing by
such moves as buying Laser Diode Labs. Sales doubled to about $30 million
in 1977, and Valtec made a $1.3 million proﬁt.69 However, neither stock
market hype nor Valtec’s manic energy could generate the tons of money it
needed to invest in ﬁber development. The company needed a partner with
deep pockets, and the logical place to look was in the metal-cable business.
The ﬁrst candidate was Canada Wire and Cable, which agreed to buy a
small interest in Valtec. However, a close look at Valtec’s business and ﬁ-
nances from the inside convinced Canada Wire it could do better itself, so it
founded its own ﬁber division called Canstar.70
Next, Godbey talked to Comm/Scope, a North Carolina company that made
coaxial cable for cable television. The company was proﬁtable, privately held,
and about the same size as Valtec. In size and scope, it looked like a merger
of equals. Valtec brought ﬁbers to the deal; Comm/Scope brought cabling. By
spring 1977, they were jointly developing ﬁber-optic cables. Later in the year,
they hammered out terms of a merger, in which the publicly held Valtec
technically acquired Comm/Scope in exchange for 38 percent of the stock in
the merged company.71 Yet when the dust settled in mid-1978, Frank Dren-
del, the head of Comm/Scope, was in control as vice chairman and chief
executive ofﬁcer, with Ted Valpey as chairman. After spending a decade build-
ing the company, Jim Godbey had lost control. The stress hit him hard, and
while attending a cable-television trade show in California he suddenly fell ill.
The next day he was dead of a heart attack at 43, the victim of an unrecog-
nized heart defect.72
The merger and a supplementary stock offering gave the ﬁber program
badly needed money. Valtec hired more people to help Cerny, Dobson, Hud-
son, and Randall with the Las Vegas telephone system. However, morale
started slipping after Godbey’s death. Randall left for another company in
1979, after Godbey died.73 At the start of 1980, Ted Valpey swapped some

THREE GENERATIONS IN FIVE YEARS
191
$3 million in cash and stock for divisions that made quartz crystals and
decorative ﬁber-optic lamps and resigned as chairman.74
Firmly in control as the new chairman, Drendel focused Valtec on com-
munications and tried to sell the company’s other operations. Entranced by
the promise of ﬁber optics, the stock market ran Valtec shares up from $16
at the end of March to $26.25 in mid-June. However, the company looked
better from outside than in; it was again running out of cash. In mid-June,
Valtec announced plans to merge with M/A Com Inc., a communications
company with about twice its sales. That pushed both company’s stocks up
further, and when the deal was closed in September 1980, Valtec owners
received a staggering $224 million in M/A Com stock.75
Despite its tremendous stock market valuation, the merged company re-
mained short of cash. Valtec had become a money pit; a massive investment
was needed to realize the bright promise of ﬁber, and M/A Com didn’t have
the resources to do it alone. In February 1981, M/A Com found a well-heeled
partner in the Dutch giant Philips N. V., which sent money and experts to
help the beleaguered Americans.
A Bet on Long-Wavelength Lasers
The entrepreneurial bug bit Jim Hsieh in the midst of the ﬁber boom. Lincoln
Lab’s role was to develop new technologies until they were ready for industry;
the time came to transfer long-wavelength lasers in 1978. Hsieh didn’t want
to abandon them. After seven years at the lab, he was growing restless. After
agonizing for months, he called Ken Nill, who had left Lincoln a few years
earlier to start a laser instrument company. The call was a pleasant surprise
for Nill, who had sold his interest in the instrument company and was getting
restless himself. Nill knew about Hsieh’s work on long-wavelength lasers and
thought it might be a good starting point for a new company. Other com-
panies would have to grow their own expertise in long-wavelength lasers;
Hsieh would have a running start at his own company,
Their ﬁrst task was raising money to start manufacturing lasers at the
company they called Lasertron. Hsieh already had talked with one interested
but unusual party. The Ministry of Post and Telecommunications of the Peo-
ple’s Republic of China wanted the new technology to modernize its anti-
quated phone system. China had changed after the death of Chairman Mao,
but the communist government was an unlikely investor in an American
start-up.
Venture capitalists were more logical funding sources. Fiber-optic tech-
nology was hot, Hsieh had a good technology, and Nill had an entrepreneurial
track record. But when the two sat down and weighed the offers, the Chinese
came out ahead. Nill had picked up a sharp business sense at his ﬁrst com-
pany; he didn’t want to give up too much equity. The venture capitalists
wanted a business plan with nice-looking numbers and a large chunk of the
company for themselves. The Chinese wanted good people.

192
CITY OF LIGHT
The Chinese also offered more than money. Their engineers knew how to
set up factories, package lasers, and design transmitters. Those skills nicely
complemented Hsieh’s expertise in making lasers and Nill’s background in
making and selling scientiﬁc instruments. They formed the company in 1980
and signed up with the Chinese, who promised to send engineers when Las-
ertron was ready to get its production lines running.76
Counting Installations
Through about 1980, you could easily count the number of major ﬁber sys-
tems installed by telephone and cable television companies. The cable-TV
industry took a while to decide what they wanted, but the telephone industry
quickly settled on systems like Chicago. AT&T’s standard design, mirrored
through the American telephone industry, was for graded-index ﬁbers and
gallium arsenide lasers to carry 45 million bits per second distances of several
miles between switching ofﬁces. The application was exactly what Charles
Kao had proposed, although the technology had changed considerably.
Initially, every new installation was an adventure. Engineers worried if
their brand-new technology could survive in the outside world. GTE installed
its ﬁrst permanent ﬁber system in Indiana after ﬁnding it could save $1.5
million in construction costs by squeezing two ﬁber cables through a single
duct in downtown Fort Wayne.77 Outside of town, a bulldozer plowed a 4-
foot (1.2-meter) trench and laid ﬁber cable directly into the fresh cut. Allen
Kasiewicz, General Cable’s technical rep, watched uneasily but was relieved
when the ﬁrst segment tested okay. On the next leg, the bulldozer bogged
down in a muddy stream. The installers summoned help and chained what
Kasiewicz still calls ‘‘the biggest ’dozer I’ve ever seen’’ to the one stuck in the
mud. The behemoth rumbled onward, pulling the smaller one which still
plowed the cable into the ground. Much to Kasiewicz’s amazement, the sys-
tem worked.78 The cable engineers had done their job well.
Fibers were still a novelty at the time of the 1980 Winter Olympics in Lake
Placid, New York. Bell Labs talked about sending digital video over ﬁbers
months in advance, but New York Telephone stalled and loaded its poles with
temporary coaxial cables. At the last minute ABC Television decided that
wasn’t enough. With the world watching—and millions of dollars of adver-
tising revenue at stake—the network wanted backup video feeds from the
Olympic arena to its local control center. The poles couldn’t hold any more
heavy metal cables, but they could hold a light ﬁber cable. It was too late to
install digital electronics, so Ira Jacobs’s group at Bell Labs hastily hooked up
standard video. The backup ﬁber system worked much better than the metal
cables and quickly became the primary video feed. For the ﬁrst time, the world
saw ﬁber optics working—transmitting signals so clearly there was no sign
the glass was there.
The public took little notice, but engineers saw and believed. Lake Placid
was a torture test for coaxial cables. The sun baked them in the day and

THREE GENERATIONS IN FIVE YEARS
193
bitter cold froze them at night. Normally, engineers had to adjust the elec-
tronics to compensate for effects of the huge temperature swings on coax.
They didn’t need those adjustments with ﬁber.79 It was the sort of thing en-
gineers noticed. Fiber was ready.
So too, at last, was the ponderous machinery of industrial production.
AT&T and independent suppliers had supplied one-off systems; now they were
making standard hardware using gallium arsenide lasers and graded-index
ﬁbers. They knew better technology was in the works in the labs, but they
thought years would be needed to make it as reliable and economical.
Second-Generation Technology
Even as production lines were starting to roll for ﬁrst-generation systems, a
second generation was sprouting vigorously from ‘‘hero experiments’’ that
sought to show how far and fast ﬁber signals could go. In August 1978, NTT
sent 32 million bits per second through a record 53 kilometers of graded-
index ﬁber at 1.3 micrometers.80 In a matter of months, they raised the data
rate to 100 million bits per second.81 You couldn’t do that at gallium arsenide
wavelengths—Fibers absorbed too much light and pulse spreading limited
transmission speeds.
Steady improvements followed in laboratory system tests. Commercial
companies began to take notice. Corning, determined to ﬁght for the market
by pushing the technology, jumped on the long-wavelength bandwagon with
a dual-window ﬁber usable at either wavelength.82 Others offered long-
wavelength ﬁbers, and long-wavelength lasers were on the market before Jim
Hsieh had production up and running at Lasertron. Even AT&T worked on
long-wavelength systems, although Bell Labs, wary of laser lifetime problems,
concentrated on 1.3-micrometer LEDs. The LEDs weren’t as powerful as la-
sers, but they did not require cooling, and with the lower loss at 1.3 microm-
eters, their signals could span ten kilometers (six miles) of graded-index ﬁber
at the same 45 million bit per second rate as short-wavelength lasers.83
System developers grew bolder with second-generation systems, partly be-
cause the changes were relatively minor. Long-wavelength graded-index ﬁ-
bers ﬁt into the same cables and used the same connectors and splices as
ﬁrst-generation systems. Many transmitters and receivers could be converted
to the long wavelengths simply by plugging in new light sources and detec-
tors; the new components cost more but paid handsome beneﬁts in longer
repeater spacing.
Rural phone companies were the ﬁrst to take a serious interest, because
they have to span longer distances than the few miles between urban or
suburban switching ofﬁces. Valtec charged boldly into the ﬁeld, installing a
pair of long-wavelength systems in rural Virginia that ran 18.7 and 23.5
kilometers without repeaters, using its own special graded-index ﬁber opti-
mized for 1.3 micrometers. Those were record repeater spacings for any work-
ing system at the start of 1982. Rich Cerny had left to start his own company,

194
CITY OF LIGHT
but the infusion of cash from Philips was reviving Valtec, helping it build a
solid technical reputation.84
Phone companies began shifting their interest to the longer wavelength to
run long distances. The change came as Saskatchewan Telecommunications
was building a 3400-kilometer (2100-mile) loop to carry a dozen digital video
signals to the largest towns in the prairie province. Project manager Graham
Bradley bet boldly on ﬁber and contracted for the best available ﬁber systems.
Construction started in 1980 with a ﬁrst-generation system but soon shifted
to 1.3 micrometers over longer distances.85
The longer wavelength roughly doubled transmission speed and distance
through graded-index ﬁbers. Second-generation systems spread fastest where
those capabilities were critical, as in rural Canada. First-generation systems
remained in the pipeline, with many potential customers wary about shifting
to new systems that used costly new lasers with little track record. The con-
sensus of telephone companies remained solidly in favor of graded-index ﬁbers
for the same reasons Stew Miller had advocated them years before—their
large cores collected light easily.
A Fateful Trial at British Telecom
Doubts about graded-index systems were growing in the labs. They ‘‘are ex-
ceedingly complex,’’ John Midwinter complained as he reviewed the state of
the art circa 1980.86 The Post Ofﬁce was splitting off its telephone division as
British Telecom, and Midwinter was tired of battling mode monsters. He won-
dered how far 140 million bits per second could go through single-mode ﬁber
at 1.3 micrometers, so his group set up a laboratory test to ﬁnd out.
The answer was 49 kilometers (30 miles). ‘‘That sent shock waves through
British Telecom,’’ recalls Midwinter. There were buildings about every 30
kilometers (19 miles) along the company’s long-haul phone lines, originally
built to provide electrical power to repeaters on coaxial cables. With single-
mode ﬁbers, repeaters could be put in those buildings and kept out of dingy
manholes, making the system simpler and more reliable. The demonstration
‘‘suddenly made people realize that graded index was a dead duck,’’ recalls
Midwinter.87 That was not what people scaling up production of graded-index
ﬁber wanted to hear.
Midwinter’s boss, Sidney O’Hara, wanted to go single-mode immediately
in 1981. Despite his frustration with graded-index ﬁbers, Midwinter urged
caution because a few problems remained with single-mode ﬁbers.88 His tal-
ented team tackled the problems head on and made rapid progress. They
collaborated with Standard Telecommunications Labs on a single-mode trial
between Martlesham and Ipswich in 1982. The results were impressive.
Single-mode ﬁber carried 565 million bits per second—then the highest speed
used in European telecommunications—62 kilometers without repeaters at
1.3 micrometers. Their signal went even farther, 91 kilometers at 1.55 mi-

THREE GENERATIONS IN FIVE YEARS
195
crometers, although it was limited to 140 million bits per second because
pulse spreading was higher than at 1.3 micrometers.89 The tests convinced
British Telecom to shift entirely to single-mode, and it began installing single-
mode systems in 1983.
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone and its Japanese suppliers, who opened
the long-wavelength window, also moved quickly to single-mode. However,
Bell Labs still saw submarine cables as the only place for single-mode. Bell’s
position was that single-mode was at least a decade away on land. Those who
disagreed were frowned upon. After telling a group of AT&T manufacturing
engineers about the virtues of single-mode ﬁbers, Paul Lazay was taken aside
by a manager who informed him that his ‘‘comments on the superiority of
single-mode technology were probably a career-limiting presentation.’’90
Midwinter briefed Crawford Hill on British single-mode programs and left
‘‘with the overwhelming impression that they were very interested but frankly
they were very convinced that this was all very blue-sky stuff, and the real
world was graded-index and that’s what they were going to engineer the hell
out of.’’91 AT&T’s top priority was building a massive high-capacity digital
system to run along the nation’s busiest communications route, the Northeast
Corridor from Boston to Washington. The phone company was committed to
using graded-index ﬁbers.
The Northeast Corridor
The Boston-to-Washington route was no ordinary link in the phone network.
Its heavy trafﬁc came from heads of government, industry, and ﬁnance. It
was big, it was visible, and the existing system was antiquated and over-
loaded.
Microwave relays still carried most long-distance trafﬁc in 1980, but AT&T
wanted to replace the old analog technology. Digital microwaves could do the
job in the wide open spaces but not along the Northeast Corridor. Trafﬁc was
heavy, cities were close together, and the microwave spectrum was crowded.
Once the route had been planned for millimeter waveguides, which could
have provided the tremendous capacity needed. Now AT&T chose it as the
launching pad for optical ﬁbers in the long-distance telephone network.
AT&T already had a cable right of way along the route, which had been
used for an old coaxial cable system. Huts had been built for coax repeaters
every seven kilometers (four miles), closely matching the repeater spacing
needed for graded-index ﬁber carrying 850-nanometer signals. Each ﬁber
could carry only 45 million bits per second—672 phone calls—but Bell had
designed its cable to hold up to a dozen 12-ﬁber ribbons. By ﬁlling the cable
with ﬁbers and using the technology already tested in Atlanta and Chicago,
AT&T thought it could achieve both high capacity and robust reliability. The
company did not want captains of industry, senators, and congressmen wait-
ing for phone lines.

196
CITY OF LIGHT
In January 1980, AT&T asked the Federal Communications Commission
to approve construction of the $79 million system.92 The designers played it
safe. In its ﬁrst stage, the system would send one 45 million bit channel per
ﬁber at 825 nanometers. Later, they proposed to add two more channels per
ﬁber at different wavelengths, 875 nanometers and 1.3 micrometers. (Signals
went only one way through each ﬁber.)
The idea, dating back to the light-pipe schemes of the 1960s, was that
each wavelength could carry an independent signal through the ﬁber, with
optics at the far end directing them to different receivers. Will Hicks was
playing with the same concept of wavelength-division multiplexing in his loft
but using single-mode ﬁber. He thought Bell’s choice of graded-index ﬁber
was stupid and said as much in a letter to the president of AT&T in which
he predicted it would be the last graded-index installation in America. AT&T
never responded.93 Corning also suggested using higher-capacity single-mode
ﬁber in a complaint ﬁled with the Federal Communications Commission.94
However, the central issue for Corning was not the choice of technology
but the decision of who should build the system. AT&T wanted the job to go
to its Western Electric subsidiary (now the separate Lucent Technologies).
Corning argued that competitive bidding was vital to a healthy American
industry. Not surprisingly, Corning’s main concern was its own health—it
had to sell ﬁber to make money, and AT&T was its biggest potential customer.
If the phone company made its own ﬁber, Corning would be shut out of the
market. The FCC, starting to like the idea of competition, bought Corning’s
argument for open bids. It allowed AT&T to build part of the system from
New York to Washington but insisted on open bidding for the rest.95
The Boston–New York segment attracted bids from Europe and Japan as
well as America. AT&T decided to stay with three wavelengths through
graded-index ﬁbers. A major reason was that Bell did not trust the longevity
of 1.3-micrometer lasers. Its design called for lasers at 825 and 875 nano-
meters and an LED at the longer wavelength, with the same repeater spacing
on all three channels.96 Intense political maneuvering followed the bidding,
and in the end the foreign-owned winners were disqualiﬁed in favor of West-
ern Electric.97
Fiber technology moved steadily forward as AT&T assembled the system.
Transmission at 825 nanometers was doubled to 90 million bits per second
before the hardware went in. Long-wavelength lasers made the grade, so
AT&T used them to transmit 180 million bits per second and never bothered
with 875 nanometers.98 That brought total capacity to 270 million bits per
second per ﬁber.
But the wheels of progress ground slowly at the FCC, the courts, and the
giant telephone company. It took years to approve, build, and install the
system. The world had changed by the time the whole Northeast Corridor
was up and running in 1984. The Bell System had split into AT&T and seven
regional operating companies, and competing long-distance companies had
begun sending 400 million bits per second through single-mode ﬁbers. The
Northeast Corridor was almost instantly obsolete.

THREE GENERATIONS IN FIVE YEARS
197
A Bold Bet on Single-Mode
In retrospect, the trend toward single-mode should have been obvious earlier.
British Telecom and NTT reported encouraging progress on single-mode ﬁbers
at the annual Topical Meeting on Optical Fiber Communications in April
1982. AT&T’s manufacturing division called single-mode ﬁber ‘‘very prom-
ising for intercity and ocean applications involving repeater spans of 20 to
30 kilometers.’’99 Yet most American system makers and industry watchers
thought years would pass before single-mode ﬁbers became common.100 They
underestimated the momentum of single-mode technology and the daring of
the upstart MCI Corp.
The company’s charismatic leader, Bill McGowan, did not start MCI, but
he led its rapid growth.101 By 1982, he knew MCI needed a nationwide long-
distance network to compete head-on with AT&T. McGowan didn’t believe
long-distance carriers should develop new technology; he wanted his engi-
neers to pick the best equipment developed by outside companies. MCI
engineers visited British Telecom, where they learned the attractions of single-
mode ﬁber. They talked with Japanese companies, who were manufacturing
laser transmitters and receivers operating at 400 million bits per second,
faster than any AT&T product. They concluded the best approach was 1.3-
micrometer transmission through single-mode ﬁbers. Although loss was lower
at 1.55 micrometers, lasers were hard to make and pulse dispersion limited
the capacity of standard single-mode ﬁbers. Those problems looked solvable,
but MCI didn’t have time to wait.
MCI boldly asked how much Corning would want for producing 100,000
kilometers of single-mode ﬁber. It was almost exactly what Corning wanted
to hear. The company had poured millions of dollars into ﬁber optics, making
dramatic technological advances, but sales had stayed minuscule. Corning
had assigned a top manager, David Duke, to build ﬁber optics into a big
business. Duke had pushed ahead with a full-scale ﬁber production plant in
North Carolina, betting that large orders would follow. Unfortunately, he had
listened to Bell and other American phone companies and geared up to make
graded-index ﬁber. Single-mode would require changing equipment, but that
didn’t stop Duke. Corning developers had been working on single-mode ﬁber
for years. He signed a contract with MCI and went back to order changes at
the factory.102
MCI plunged in whole-heartedly, starting in December 1982 by leasing
Amtrak right-of-way from New York to Washington. MCI brashly boasted
single-mode technology would make its new system better than AT&T’s
Northeast Corridor system, which ran along the same route. The single-mode
ﬁbers carried data 50 percent faster at one wavelength than AT&T’s graded-
index carried at two. MCI’s repeater spacing of 30 kilometers (19 miles) was
over four times AT&T’s.103
British Telecom had switched to single-mode earlier, but its needs were
modest compared to MCI, which needed to build a whole new national long-
distance system in a much larger country. AT&T Long Lines signed its ﬁrst

198
CITY OF LIGHT
contracts for single-mode systems—from its manufacturing subsidiary—soon
after MCI, but they spanned only about a ﬁfth the distance.104 The world’s
biggest phone company already had a massive long-distance network and
was worried about interfacing with existing equipment. MCI could start from
scratch with single-mode ﬁbers.
The MCI contracts marked a turning point in America. Bill McGowan’s
gamble was right on the money; single-mode technology was ready. Graded-
index ﬁbers lingered for short systems, but almost overnight all the long-
distance companies—including AT&T—switched to single-mode ﬁber for their
nationwide backbone systems. The change came so fast that Northern Tele-
com ﬁnished building the loop around Saskatchewan with single-mode ﬁbers
carrying 565 million bits per second.105
The Corning Patent Wars
As the technology raced forward in the early 1980s, a long-stalled patent
battle came to a head. In 1973, the US Patent Ofﬁce began issuing a series
of patents to Corning covering fused-silica processes and ﬁber dopants. As
Corning strategists had intended, the patents essentially controlled access to
the technology; to make communication ﬁbers, you needed the Corning pat-
ents. Cross-licenses exempted Bell from paying royalties,106 but Corning was
not going to let anybody else get off that easily. Corning ﬁled its ﬁrst lawsuit
in July 1976, charging ITT with infringing Corning patents in making ﬁber
it sold to US military agencies.
International Telephone and Telegraph was a logical target because it
looked like it could become a formidable competitor. Standard Telecommu-
nication Labs was an important technology center; the conglomerate had sent
Charles Kao to head development at its American ﬁber group. He brought
with him a technique Phil Black had developed at STL to deposit glass soot
inside a tube that could be collapsed into a ﬁber. Black’s method closely re-
sembled the process John MacChesney developed at Bell Labs, but his August
1973 application earned ITT a British patent, and the company applied for
an American one.107 Corning claimed the ITT process infringed its fundamen-
tal patents. It didn’t matter if ITT had devised the process itself, or even if ITT
held a valid patent—Corning insisted that ITT couldn’t make ﬁbers without
using a patented Corning process.
The rest of the industry watched uneasily as lawyers for the two companies
spent years maneuvering for position. They grilled engineers and executives
on both sides. The case threatened to go on forever, but ITT caved in just
before a trial was set to start in 1981.108 In a consent decree, ITT admitted
infringement, agreed to pay a lump sum penalty, and licensed the Corning
patents.109 The last-minute decision surprised Black and other observers, who
thought ITT had a good case.110 However, to win ITT lawyers would have
had to break every applicable claim of every Corning patent involved in the
case. If they failed, Corning could legally refuse to license its patents and shut

THREE GENERATIONS IN FIVE YEARS
199
down ITT’s American ﬁber operations, as well as claiming ﬁnancial damages.
If Corning threatened to play that card if the suit came to trial, ITT may have
swallowed hard and signed a license rather than risk being shut out of the
American market.
With that suit settled, Corning started looking at other ﬁber companies.
They could do nothing about AT&T, but they could go after other competitors.
Valtec was at the top of the list, and Corning ﬁled suit in July 1982.111
Valtec was growing, but it still was losing money—$1.3 million in the last
three months of 1982—and its patent position was weak. M/A Com held on
for a few months, but in early 1983 it bailed out, selling its interest to Phil-
ips.112 The Dutch giant soon realized that it couldn’t win against Corning’s
formidable patent position, and put Valtec up for sale. With Corning’s lawyers
closing in, Philips was desperate to close a deal before the courts shut down
its ﬁber plant. They turned to ITT, now licensed for the Corning patents and
needing production capacity to ﬁll a big contract from AT&T.
With 14 days to go to the deadline, ITT sent three executives to Massa-
chusetts to close the deal. The three worked day and night, amazed to ﬁnd
how much Valtec had achieved with minimal resources. They closed the deal
on a Sunday morning, facing a midnight deadline, but that didn’t end the
crisis. Many top Valtec people didn’t want to work for ITT. Jim Kanely, the
cable industry veteran who had rebuilt Valtec, quit immediately as president.
Others followed, including Dobson and Hudson.113 Paul Lazay, who had left
Bell Labs to try his hand at business, shuttled from Virginia to Massachusetts,
trying to reassure employees and integrate operations.114
Corning turned its patent artillery elsewhere and soon forced small com-
panies to surrender. The toughest battle was with the Japanese giant Sumi-
tomo, which had built a ﬁber plant in North Carolina. Corning needed heavy-
duty maneuvering with the courts and the International Trade Commission
to extract hefty damages and force Sumitomo to idle its plant until the last
of Corning’s fundamental patents expired.115
A Technology Takes Off
The ﬁber-optics market took off in the mid-1980s. The deregulation of long-
distance telephone service in America created a market for long-distance
transmission. MCI, Sprint, and smaller carriers spread tendrils of ﬁber net-
works across the country, along railroad lines, gas pipelines, and other rights
of way. AT&T was not far behind.
As the largest independent American maker of long-wavelength lasers,
Lasertron was able to cash in on the growing market, although not without
problems. The Reagan Administration had settled into Washington, and fresh
Cold War chills blew through the Pentagon. Military planners counted on
American technology giving them an edge on the battleﬁeld, and they waxed
paranoid about potential enemies gaining American technology. Their main
worry was the Soviet Union, but the Chinese were communists, and com-

200
CITY OF LIGHT
munications was a vital technology. When Chinese engineers arrived in Bos-
ton to help Lasertron, government ofﬁcials hit the ceiling and demanded the
Chinese be sent home ‘‘tomorrow.’’116 Hsieh and Nill argued, but in the end
Lasertron had to perfect manufacturing technology by itself. By the mid-
1980s, it reached 350 employees and $28 million in sales. The Chinese even-
tually sold their stock back to the company, earning a healthy proﬁt but not
access to the new technology.117
Short of money to fund further development, Will Hicks sold 1984 Inc. to
Polaroid in 1982 for several million dollars.118 Polaroid’s legendary founder
Edwin Land was gone, but parts of the company retained his innovative spirit
and bet on Hicks’s plans to send tens of thousands of high-deﬁnition television
channels through one single-mode ﬁber. Hicks persuaded Polaroid to hire Eli
Snitzer to run the group while he continued research, but he still didn’t ﬁt
into a big company. Within a couple of years Hicks quit to return to running
his own tiny ventures.119 In time, Polaroid abandoned the program, although
the technology was promising, because its tremendous capacity ‘‘was too far
ahead of the commercial needs.’’120
The Right Technology at the Right Time
Looking back, single-mode ﬁber was the right technology at the right time
for the telephone industry. The breakup of AT&T and the deregulation of long-
distance service changed the rules, ending the era when stodgy corporate
bureaucrats slowed technology to a glacial pace. The new carriers needed
new national networks; AT&T needed new transmission lines to compete.
The burst of orders tipped the balance decisively toward single-mode. In
ﬁve short years, ﬁber-optic communications had gone through three tech-
nological generations. The consensus view of 1978 was obsolete in 1983.
Graded-index ﬁber left no room to grow;121 single-mode left plenty of room
for expansion. As F. F. Roberts had planned to say in the valedictory he did
not live to deliver, the barriers to single-mode technology were conquered.
The Northeast Corridor system that the cautious bureaucracy of AT&T had
intended to blaze a path to the future instead became an evolutionary dead
end. Like the millimeter waveguide, it was soon forgotten, an eight-track tape
player in the attic of outdated technologies. The wild-eyed visionaries had
won.

201
15
Submarine Cables
Covering the Ocean Floor with Glass
(1970–1995)
In the much more difﬁcult case of the sub-ocean routes, it
may take up to about 20 years to produce repeaters with
long enough average lives to give complete cables 5000
km long that will operate without maintenance for an av-
erage period of 20 years—but it can be and certainly will
be done.
—Alec Reeves, 19691
I
n the 1960s, it took a wild-eyed optimist like Alec Reeves to see a future
for ﬁber optics in one of the toughest jobs for any cable—crossing the ocean
depths to link continents. Yet by the mid-1970s, optical ﬁbers were the last
hope of salvaging an aging submarine cable industry besieged by rapid ad-
vances in satellite communications.
Submarine cable engineers had made considerable progress since TAT-1,
the ﬁrst telephone cable, crossed the Atlantic in 1956. They had multiplied
capacity of coaxial cables a thousandfold, cramming 4000 voice circuits
through the latest in the series. But there coaxial cables ran into a techno-
logical stone wall while satellites charged ahead. Only ﬁber optics offered any
hope for a new generation of submarine cables.
The Submarine Cable Business
Ocean-spanning cables are unique parts of the global telecommunications
network. The vast network on land is composed of many comparatively small

202
CITY OF LIGHT
elements. A call from Boston to Los Angeles hops across the continent from
point to point: through Hartford, New York, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Colum-
bus, Indianapolis, St. Louis, Kansas City, Cheyenne, Salt Lake City, and Las
Vegas. This modular structure makes the network easier to build, operate,
and maintain. If a town grows, a phone company can add cables from that
town to the nearest node on the national network. If a careless contractor
breaks a buried cable, the network switches signals around the break while
technicians ﬁx the damage. Total investment in the network is tremendous,
but individual links are relatively inexpensive.
In contrast, submarine cables can span thousands of kilometers (or miles)
of ocean and cost hundreds of millions of dollars; the biggest today have cost
over a billion dollars.2 Some run between two coastal landings, such as from
New Jersey to France; others land at several points on the coasts of different
countries. Virtually all the cable is submerged, and much lies in the deep sea,
far beyond the reach of technicians in four-wheel-drive trucks. Repairs mean
sending a cable ship to ﬁnd the damage and haul the cable to the surface for
repairs.
Repairs take so much time and money that undersea cable operators de-
mand the utmost in reliability. Their speciﬁcations insist on no more than
two failures in the cable’s quarter-century lifetime that require hauling the
cable to the surface. To meet those demands, cables must withstand pressures
to 10,000 pounds per square inch, without corroding in salt water. Repeater
housings must protect electronics from the same tremendous pressures, with-
out letting a drop of water touch sensitive components.
The deep sea shields cable from most disturbances save massive under-
water landslides or earthquakes. However, ﬁshing trawlers and ship anchors
threaten the ends in shallow water, which are armored with thick steel wires,
then buried in a protective trench cut into the ocean ﬂoor. Fishing is banned
from the zones around cable landings, and just to be sure, cable owners hire
patrol boats to warn away violators.
An Old Tradition of Bold Ventures
Submarine cables began carrying electrical telegraph signals in the mid-
nineteenth century. The ﬁrst crossed the English Channel in 1850. It didn’t
work well because it was poorly insulated, and a ﬁsherman soon cut it. But
the next year a better cable followed, bringing news to England as fast as to
the rest of Europe. American entrepreneur Cyrus Field soon decided to run a
cable from Newfoundland to England. Some eminent scientists thought the
idea was daft, but on the second attempt, Field laid a cable that in 1858
succeeded in relaying a handful of messages across the Atlantic before failing.
The Civil War delayed the ﬁrst permanent cable link across the Atlantic until
1866.3
A continuous cable running some 2000 miles (3200 kilometers) under the
sea was an impressive achievement for Victorian-era technology. One reason

SUBMARINE CABLES
203
for its success was the use of gutta percha, a hard plastic made from the sap
of tropical trees that remained the standard insulator until the invention of
polyethylene in the late 1930s. Another was that telegraph signals did not
need ampliﬁcation. Telephone signals did, so long-distance calling on land
had to await the invention of the vacuum tube. Early tubes were not ready
to go to the bottom of the sea; they drew too much power and could not
withstand the pressure. Instead, transatlantic telephony began with wireless
transmitters.
World War II highlighted the limits of radio telephones. Transmission was
noisy, vulnerable to changes in the atmosphere, insecure, and limited to 15
or 16 channels.4 The war also brought new durable, compact, and low-power
vacuum tubes, which the British Post Ofﬁce put into the ﬁrst submerged
repeater in the Irish Sea in 1943. AT&T used them in a 1950 cable between
Key West and Havana that remained America’s only direct link to Cuba until
1989.5
Satisﬁed that the shorter systems worked, the Post Ofﬁce and AT&T agreed
in 1953 to lay TAT-1, the ﬁrst transatlantic telephone cable. The cautious
phone companies didn’t trust new-fangled transistors, so they equipped the
pair of coaxial cables that ran 1,950 miles (3,100 kilometers) from Newfound-
land to Scotland with 51 vacuum-tube repeaters each. On September 25,
1956—a little over a year before Sputnik—the system started carrying 36
telephone circuits, one cable carrying the eastbound voices, the other the
westbound signals. It cost about a million dollars per two-way channel and
was used until 1979.6
More cables followed, with fatter coaxial cables that carried more channels.
Massive, costly cables crossed the Paciﬁc, stopping at Hawaii on their way to
Japan and Australia, tying the world together. Manufacturers replaced heavy
steel armor with a thick plastic covering for deep sea areas where cable dam-
age was unlikely, but were slow to adapt other new technology. They did not
lay the ﬁrst transistorized repeater until 1968.7
Submarine coax technology reached its high point in the sixth cable from
the United States to Europe, TAT-6, which in 1976 added 4000 new voice
circuits to the 1200 of the ﬁve previous TATs. At $179 million, TAT-6 cost
more than double TAT-5, but the cost per circuit was $45,000—less than
half that of TAT-5. The TAT consortium immediately started work on a du-
plicate, called TAT-7, to add 4000 more circuits in 1983.8
The End of the Line for Coaxial Cable
Engineers had developed many tricks to squeeze the most out of submarine
cables, such as packing ﬁve conversations into a single transatlantic voice
circuit. However, TAT-6 and-7 were at the practical limits of coax technology.
Increasing the number of voice circuits required transmitting at higher
frequencies, but higher frequencies suffer more loss in coaxial cables. Offset-
ting the higher loss required adding more repeaters and reducing the distance

204
CITY OF LIGHT
between them, and that was bad news. Repeaters are expensive and their
electronic innards are the parts of a submarine cable most likely to fail (ex-
cluding cable breaks). The more repeaters, the higher the cost and the more
likely trouble. AT&T designed a new coaxial cable to carry 16,000 voice
circuits, but it would have required twice as many repeaters as TAT-6—one
every 4.6 kilometers (2.9 miles), or a thousand to cross the Atlantic.9
You also need thicker cables to carry higher frequencies, and their bulk
posed another problem.10 The TAT-6 cable was 2.08 inches (5.28 centime-
ters) thick, and engineers worried that a fatter cable would not ﬁt on a single
cable ship, increasing installation costs. They also worried that bulky, inﬂex-
ible cables could be damaged more easily during installation or handling.
As coax looked worse and worse, satellites were looking better and better.
However, cable operators couldn’t simply switch to satellites; they had been
frozen out of the satellite business in the 1960s. Nor was it easy for cable
manufacturers to turn to making satellites. Moreover, while satellites bene-
ﬁted from the allure of space-age technology, they also suffered some technical
limitations that affected how they relayed telephone signals.
One is transmission delay. Standard communication satellites circle the
Earth exactly once a day, so they appear to park above a spot on the equator,
where they remain continually in range of ground stations.11 This requires
them to orbit 22,000 miles (36,000 kilometers) above the surface. Radio
signals travel at the speed of light, but at that distance radio waves take a
quarter-second to make the round trip. The number sounds vanishingly small,
but it’s enough to throw off your verbal timing in a call with one satellite
bounce. A second satellite bounce adds further delay, making conversation
difﬁcult.
Poor connections were a problem with the analog electronics used by sat-
ellites through the 1980s. Some circuits suffered annoying echoes; a few car-
ried screeching feedback. Sometimes only one side of the conversation went
through. If you made many international calls in the 1980s, you learned to
recognize satellite circuits and were ready to hang up and try again if you
needed a better circuit.
Satellite channels also lacked security. In the heyday of the Cold War,
Soviet and American security agencies tried to eavesdrop on each other’s
satellite links. They didn’t always get the information they wanted, but the
threat made military agencies prefer cable links.
Unwilling to abandon transoceanic communications, AT&T, the British
Post Ofﬁce, and Nippon Telegraph and Telephone sought alternatives to co-
axial cables for undersea transmission. With hollow millimeter waveguides
out of the question under four miles of water, optical ﬁbers were virtually the
only possibility. Engineers did not have to start from scratch. They could adapt
existing submarine cable structures to accommodate ﬁbers instead of coaxial
cables. Electro-optic repeaters could ﬁt into the same pressure-resistant hous-
ings as coaxial repeaters. As ﬁber-optic communications evolved, the main
issue became assessing different approaches.

SUBMARINE CABLES
205
The Allure of Single-Mode Fiber
When Alec Reeves suggested submarine ﬁber-optic cables in 1969, he ex-
pected repeaters to be only 2 to 3 kilometers (1.2 to 2 miles) apart, so a
couple thousand would be needed to cross the Atlantic. He thought that high
ﬁber capacity—allowing transmission at 10 billion bits per second, well over
a million voice channels—would offset the problems raised by so many re-
peaters.12 His estimates were based on ﬁber loss of 20 decibels per kilometer,
and within a few years it was clear he had been far too pessimistic.
It also became clear that pulse dispersion could not be neglected in graded-
index ﬁbers. That was not entirely Reeves’s fault for being overoptimistic. The
effect is proportional to distance; go ten times farther and pulses spread out
ten times farther. Dispersion that would be no problem over a couple of kil-
ometers could limit transmission speeds in cables spanning ten times that
distance.
Submarine cable developers also were much more concerned with reduc-
ing the number of repeaters than Reeves had been. That pushed them to seek
the utmost in transmission capacity and repeater spacing, which led them to
reconsider single-mode ﬁber. The usual objections to single-mode ﬁber cen-
tered on the demanding precision needed to align ﬁbers with each other and
with light sources. Attaining that precision was hardest in demountable con-
nectors—but they weren’t needed in submarine cables. Alignment was easier
in the factory than in the ﬁeld, and submarine cables were assembled with
repeaters in place, then loaded into cable ships. Warnings that single-mode
ﬁbers were years from practical use didn’t frighten submarine cable developers
accustomed to spending many years perfecting new systems. The next gen-
eration of submarine cables was not scheduled until the late 1980s; without
the best possible ﬁbers, it might never come.
Nonetheless, as long as ﬁber systems had to operate at 850 nanometers,
they did not offer dramatic advantages over coaxial cable. Loss of a few de-
cibels per kilometer meant a repeater was needed roughly every 10 kilometers
(6 miles), just a slight improvement over the coaxial cables used in TAT-6
and -7. Serious worries about laser lifetimes offset the attractions of using a
smaller cable. Material dispersion was high at 850 nanometers, so single-
mode ﬁbers did not offer dramatically higher transmission capacities than
graded-index.
The steady advance of ﬁber technology, the opening of the 1.3-micrometer
window, and the spread of digital transmission tipped the scales decisively
toward ﬁber for the next generation of submarine cables. Both loss and pulse
dispersion were much lower at the long wavelength than at 850 nanometers.
With the low loss at 1.3 micrometers, signals could travel 50 kilometers (30
miles) or more between repeaters. Graded-index ﬁber had lower dispersion at
1.3 micrometers than at 850 nanometers, but single-mode ﬁber had near
zero dispersion, promising much higher transmission speeds. The choice was
clear to AT&T, the Post Ofﬁce, and Standard Telecommunication Labs in

206
CITY OF LIGHT
1978, when they became the ﬁrst developers to commit to using single-mode
ﬁber for any real system.13 They had ten years to go before the scheduled
laying of the ﬁrst big submarine ﬁber system, TAT-8 across the Atlantic.
Serious Single-Mode Development
Bell Labs cautiously waited a few months before pulling the plug on devel-
opment of coaxial submarine cables. Some engineers doubted a ﬁber system
would be ready by the TAT-8 target date, but ﬁber was the last chance for
submarine cables. Coax had no prayer of keeping up with satellites.
Bell added ﬁber experts to the submarine cable group in Holmdel, which
began working with Bill French and Paul Lazay, who were drawing single-
mode ﬁber at Murray Hill. Peter Runge shifted from Stew Miller’s group to
take charge of developing submarine ﬁber cables. The task promised Runge
personal as well as professional rewards; the transplanted German engineer
had family on the other side of the Atlantic, familiar voices that passed be-
neath the sea.
Adapting the tried and true designs of submarine cables for ﬁbers was a
top priority. Cables are built outward from their centers. The starting point
for the submarine ﬁber cable was a copper-clad steel ‘‘king wire,’’ to provide
essential strength. A soft plastic cushion covered it, with up to a dozen optical
ﬁbers embedded in it, gently wound round and round the king wire in a helix.
Nylon covered the plastic, forming a core 2.6 millimeters (0.1 inch) thick.
Then heavy steel strands were wound around the core, strengthening and
shielding the ﬁber-optic heart of the cable. A welded copper tube covered the
steel wires; its role was to carry electric current to repeaters across the ocean.
A thick layer of solid white polyethylene covered the copper, making a 21-
millimeter (0.827-inch) cable ready to lay on the sea ﬂoor like a thick, fat
garden hose. The cablers wound extra heavy steel wires around lengths of
cable to be laid in shallow water, where ﬁshing trawlers might drag their
lines across it. Tests of 100-meter (330-foot) samples began in September
1979,14 in an artiﬁcial ocean Bell Labs had built at Holmdel to test the coaxial
cables for TAT-6. Elaborate instruments controlled temperature, pressure, and
cable tension.15 The results looked good.
Standard Telephones and Cables took undersea cables even more seriously.
They were an important part of the company’s business, and by 1978 the
submarine systems division was responsible for ﬁber manufacturing and the
main supporter of ﬁber development at STL.16 A major STL worry was that
the high pressure at the bottom of the ocean would cause the ﬁber to wrinkle
inside the cable, causing ‘‘microbends’’ that let light leak out. To assess the
problem, they designed a cable with four graded-index and two single-mode
ﬁbers inside an inner aluminum tube, which was surrounded by steel strength
wires, a concentric copper conductor, and an outer polyethylene layer, with
18 armored protective layers wound around the outside. They assembled 9.5
kilometers (5.9 miles) of cable, which the Post Ofﬁce carefully laid in Loch

SUBMARINE CABLES
207
Fyne, Scotland in February 1980; later they added a 140 million bit per
second repeater. Careful measurements showed the cable worked well in the
water.17 The single-mode tests added to the evidence that persuaded the Post
Ofﬁce to lay single-mode ﬁbers on land as well as at sea.
A Bold Move at Bell Labs
By 1980 the course of the future was clear for AT&T Submarine Systems.
Peter Runge told the world: ‘‘The next generation of coaxial cables will not
be developed because of ﬁbers.’’ When TAT-7 was laid in 1983, it would be
the last coaxial cable to cross the Atlantic. The next transatlantic cable, TAT-
8, would contain two pairs of single-mode ﬁbers each carrying 280 million
bits per second, the combined equivalent of 35,000 phone calls—nearly nine
times the capacity of TAT-7. Plans called for repeaters to be 30 to 35 kilo-
meters (19 to 22 miles) apart. He said the cost per channel should be only
20 percent that of TAT-6 and only half as much as the partly developed coax
system Bell had abandoned as impractical.18
Sitting in the audience as Runge spoke to a laser meeting, I recognized
a milestone. AT&T had just announced the Northeast Corridor system, but
that was only one link in a nationwide network. Submarine cables were the
highest-performance telecommunication systems on the planet, and ﬁber op-
tics would be the next generation, slated for operation in 1988. Fiber optics
had gone beyond a few guys with a draw tower in an old pickle factory. The
brash upstart had won a starring role.
Bell Labs tackled cable development itself. The submarine systems group
asked the single-mode ﬁber group at Murray Hill to supply 20 ﬁbers, each 20
kilometers (12 miles) long, for a cable to be tested in the North Atlantic. It
became a crash priority for a growing team that turned their Murray Hill
labs into a small-scale factory. The longest ﬁbers they could draw were ﬁve
kilometers. Splicing them together was a challenge, but the canny Paul Lazay
realized it also was an opportunity. He could measure subtle differences
among ﬁbers and predict the results of connecting two slightly different types.
By putting ﬁbers together in the right order, he could ﬁne tune their trans-
mission. Working intensely, Murray Hill made 22 ﬁbers, each 20 kilometers,
for the submarine cable group.
The Holmdel group testing long-distance single-mode transmission cast
eager eyes at those 400 kilometers (250 miles) of ﬁber. Lacking that much
ﬁber, they had been bouncing signals back and forth through shorter ﬁber
segments. Splicing those long ﬁbers together promised more realistic results,
but Lazay was not thrilled when Holmdel asked to borrow them. He was a
researcher himself—he knew the other researchers would ﬁnd excuses to play
with the ﬁbers, and he worried about possible damage. That wouldn’t do; the
ﬁbers were committed to the submarine cable experiment. On the other hand,
Lazay didn’t want to be seen as obstructing other Bell research groups. He
decided to let them borrow the ﬁber, but to protect it he spliced the 20 reels

208
CITY OF LIGHT
of ﬁber together and mounted them in a heavy locked wooden case. He left
a few meters of ﬁber hanging out at each end so Holmdel could send light
through the precious ﬁber, but the box kept them from messing around with
it. Then he loaded the crate into a station wagon and drove—very carefully—
to Holmdel, where he chained it to the massive optical table used for the
experiments.19
When the Holmdel tests were done, Bell shipped the single-mode ﬁber to
New Hampshire, where Simplex Wire and Cable put a dozen ﬁbers into an
18-kilometer cable. In September 1982, an AT&T cable ship laid part of the
cable and a prototype repeater 5.5 kilometers (3.4 miles) underwater on the
Atlantic ﬂoor. It was the ﬁrst ﬁber cable tested at that depth, and it worked
perfectly in the water.20 It continued to work when hauled back out; it re-
mains stored in a Holmdel basement for occasional tests.21
A Nasty Scare
The North Atlantic tests showed ﬁbers worked well for a short time under-
water. But by mid-1982, long-term tests in Japan and Britain were showing
some distressing trends.
Every profession has its own nightmares. Engineers dread ﬂaws that re-
main hidden until the hardware is in place. Imagine a crack in a crucial
beam supporting a bridge, which grows slowly as trucks rumble over it until
the beam fails, plunging vehicles into the river. The lack of long-term data
on optical ﬁbers worried engineers, so they monitored early systems carefully.
Land trials looked good, but undersea cables were a different environment.
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone spotted the problem in a couple of cables
it laid for ﬁeld trials in 1979. Initially transmission was excellent, but cautious
NTT engineers checked back every several months to monitor aging. In June
1982, they discovered the loss was increasing at 1.3 micrometers. They
looked for a bad component or splice, but their instruments told them the
loss was increasing in the whole ﬁber.22 STL saw the same pattern at Loch
Fyne, although it was not as severe.
Uneasy rumors started spreading through the ﬁber-optic world. Something
was wrong, and no one knew what. Anxiety churned in developers’ stomachs.
Uneasy engineers went back and measured their cables. Many found no
change, but some noticed disturbing increases in loss. In America, the prob-
lem hit a cable that crossed Lake Washington in Seattle.23 In Britain, a rise
in ﬁber loss knocked out a link operated by the Central Electricity Generating
Board. The problem ‘‘hit like a sledge hammer’’ in Britain, recalls John Mid-
winter.24 The Japanese were even more anxious; they had seen a cable go
totally dark.25 Developers of submarine cables had put all their bets in the
ﬁber-optic basket, and it looked like the bottom might drop out.
Bafﬂed engineers turned to careful detective work to pin down the problem.
Crucial clues came from a Japanese test of the long-held assumption that
water did not affect ﬁber transmission. In early 1982, Naoshi Uesugi of NTT

SUBMARINE CABLES
209
ﬁlled a cable with water and put an uncabled ﬁber in the same water to
compare what happened to transmission. After eight months, loss of the ca-
bled ﬁber increased dramatically at 1.08 to 1.24 micrometers and beyond 1.4
micrometers. Attenuation of the uncabled ﬁber had hardly changed.26
Those were the wavelengths where loss was mysteriously rising in other
ﬁbers. The shorter wavelengths were where hydrogen molecules absorbed
light. The longer wavelengths matched the absorption of the tiny amounts of
residual water that remained trapped in virtually all silica ﬁbers. That pointed
to hydrogen as the problem. Somehow the affected ﬁbers were soaking it up.
Yet the changes were inconsistent; they affected some ﬁbers and some cable
structures but not others.
Developers in Japan, America, and Britain set up task forces to attack the
problem. Once they focused on hydrogen, they began to see patterns. The
only ﬁbers affected were those containing phosphorus, which softened the
glass, making it easier to draw. British work showed that phosphorus was
the bad actor; it reacted with hydrogen, forming chemical bonds that ab-
sorbed light. The problem didn’t show up with a dash of phosphorus but
became serious if concentration reached about one percent.
Cable structure was important because some types accumulated hydrogen.
The high voltages carried by wires to power undersea repeaters caused metal
in the cable to react with the traces of water that inevitably seeped into the
cable.27 Sometimes submarine cables collected so much hydrogen that it could
be ﬂared off when the cable was hauled to the surface and opened for re-
pairs.28 Moisture also could build up in cables on land. The extent of the
problem depended on where the hydrogen collected in the cable; STL’s orig-
inal design had a problem because an internal barrier trapped hydrogen in
the same region as the ﬁber.29
With the culprit identiﬁed, developers attacked the hydrogen problem on
all fronts. Glass makers purged phosphorus from their preforms and their
vocabulary.30 Fiber drawers applied new coatings to keep hydrogen from seep-
ing into ﬁbers. Cable makers added hydrogen seals, eliminated plastics that
might release hydrogen, and sealed their cables tighter to keep water out.31
Engineers hooked measurement instruments to phosphorus-free ﬁbers in
hydrogen-free cables and watched carefully. They saw no changes. The great
hydrogen scare was over. Hearts resumed beating naturally; sighs of relief
echoed in Japan, Britain, France and America. Submarine ﬁber cables pushed
onward.
A Go-ahead for Submarine Cables
Plans for the massive TAT-8 project unfolded with little heed of the hydrogen
scare. The cable builders had no other options. In December 1982, an inter-
national consortium32 requested bids for a ﬁber-optic cable running from
Tuckerton, New Jersey, to a point off the European coast, where it split into
separate cables to France and England. AT&T, Standard Telephones and Ca-

210
CITY OF LIGHT
bles, and the French Submarcom consortium were the only bidders. AT&T
tried to land the entire project, citing the hydrogen problem in the Loch Fyne
cable.33 However, the cozy little world of international telephony usually split
contracts to assuage politicians and corporations. In the end, AT&T got the
lion’s share of the $335 million contract, from America to the branch point.
STL got the British section, and Submarcom the French part.34
A transpaciﬁc consortium was just months behind TAT-8, with service to
start in 1989. Cables had lagged far behind satellites across the wider Paciﬁc.
Submarine cables carried just under a thousand voice circuits from California
to Japan in 1984; 1460 more went from Canada to Australia via Hawaii.35
AT&T landed a contract to build the Hawaii-4 cable from California to Hawaii,
and the part of Trans-Paciﬁc Cable 3 from Hawaii to a branching point off
Japan. The Japanese Ocean Cable consortium won the contract to build the
rest of the system.
Meanwhile, work on smaller submarine cables went much faster. For each
massive cable like TAT-8, there are dozens of short ones, typically linking
offshore islands to the mainland or other islands, or linking major coastal
cities. The high capacity and long repeater spacing possible with ﬁbers also
were important for many of these systems. British Telecom was the ﬁrst to
use a ﬁber cable for a short submarine link carrying regular trafﬁc. In 1984,
it laid an eight-kilometer (ﬁve-mile) ﬁber cable from the coastal city of Ports-
mouth to the Isle of Wight in the English Channel. STC supplied the hardware,
which carried 140 million bits per second over each of four pairs of single-
mode ﬁbers. The whole system cost just $292,000 and contained no repeat-
ers, but it was a ﬁrst.36
More important was the ﬁrst ﬁber-optic addition to the array of cables
crossing the English Channel, UK-Belgium 5. Trafﬁc was growing between
Britain and Belgium, Germany, and the Netherlands; the carriers needed more
capacity, and they wanted digital transmission. STC won the job by offering
to lay a ‘‘fully engineered prototype’’ that would start with experimental serv-
ice, then phase into regular use. A dozen cables already ran from Britain to
Belgium and the Netherlands, carrying just over 23,000 voice circuits.37 The
ﬁber cable carried 11,500 voice circuits on three pairs of single-mode ﬁbers
operating at 280 million bits per second. The three repeaters in the 122-
kilometer (76-mile) cable were the ﬁrst on a submarine ﬁber cable to carry
regular telephone trafﬁc.38
Laying the main part of the cable took just ﬁve days in early 1986, al-
though it had to be buried in the seabed to prevent damage from trawlers
and ship anchors. A second cable ship laid the rest of the cable in shallower
water, where a submersible trencher buried it deeper in the sea bed. Tests
began as soon as engineers hooked up the cable; commercial service formally
began October 30, 1986, with a two-way video conference between London
and Ostend, Belgium.39
The Japanese bounced back from the hydrogen scare and kept pace. NTT
designed a system to transmit 400 million bits per second between islands in
the Japanese archipelago. After two years of shallow-water tests, in November

SUBMARINE CABLES
211
1984 they laid 28 kilometers (17 miles) of cable and two repeaters in the
deepest water handy, the eight-kilometer-deep Ogasawara Trench. Careful
tests showed little change, so reassured NTT engineers went ahead with plans
for a submarine cable between Japan’s two main islands.40
Shark Attack in the Canary Islands
With the lion’s share of the two biggest submarine ﬁber cables, AT&T was
not about to take chances on an untried technology. The Submarine Systems
division carefully planned another test of TAT-8 technology in the Canary
Islands off Africa, where the Spanish telephone authority wanted a link be-
tween Grand Canary and Tenerife islands. Canary Islanders got the latest
submarine cable technology in return for putting up with exhaustive tests of
the hardware, including trials of recovery of the cable from the ocean ﬂoor
and shipboard repairs.
AT&T got more than it bargained for. Installation of the 119-kilometer
(74-mile) cable went well, including a pair of repeaters 40 kilometers (25
miles) apart. Soon afterward, though, engineers noted a short-circuit in the
cable, caused by ocean water, which conducts electricity, reaching the central
conductor that carried electric power for the repeaters. The AT&T team wor-
ried how water was getting into the cable, but it wasn’t an immediate catas-
trophe because the cable was designed to withstand a single short. Then a
second short followed, knocking out repeater power and forcing AT&T to haul
the cable up from the ocean ﬂoor.
Examining the recovered cable, AT&T engineers found shark teeth embed-
ded in the outer plastic coating. Sharks had bitten the cable and left some of
their easily detached teeth behind. The engineers were amazed; no one had
ever seen sharks bite undersea coaxial cables, and they had no hint that
sharks might develop a taste for ﬁber. The marine biologists whom they called
also were amazed. The cable had been more than a kilometer (0.6 mile) deep,
and no one realized that sharks swam that deep.
It wasn’t the sort of thing that normally prompted AT&T press releases,
but word inevitably leaked out. An engineer working on the problem41 took
a section of cable and a handful of sharks’ teeth to a European conference,
where he showed them to a few insiders. The story was too good for his fellow
engineers to keep quiet. Once an enterprising reporter picked up the lead, it
was all over the papers and the technical press.
Sharks had ignored coaxial cables. Why should they turn their razor-sharp
teeth on ﬁber? Biologists suggested some experiments. They stretched a cable
across a tank ﬁlled with captive sharks and watched the animals. Nothing
happened until they switched on the current that normally powered repeat-
ers, which prompted some sharks to investigate the cable. The electric ﬁeld
from the current attracted the predators, who apparently use it in hunting.
Coaxial cable also carried a current, but its outer metal wrap blocked the
electric ﬁeld from reaching into the water. Nothing blocked the ﬁeld from

212
CITY OF LIGHT
reaching the water around the ﬁber cable, where the sharks could sense it.
Other factors also may have played a role. The Canaries cable hung above
the surface in some areas, and also vibrated, which may have attracted sharks
or simply gotten in their way as they swam.
Engineers took no chances when they returned the cable to the ocean
ﬂoor. To deﬂect sharks’ teeth and block at least part of the electric ﬁeld, they
wrapped the cable with a strong steel tape. They also extended the armor
normally used to protect the cable in shallow water to depths well below
where the sharks had bitten the cable. As they laid the cable, they made sure
it rested on the bottom rather than hung in the water where it might tempt
hungry sharks. ‘‘We haven’t had a shark bite since,’’ Runge told me with a
grin.42 The cable remains in regular service.
While shark bites grabbed the headlines, AT&T worried about semicon-
ductor lasers. Bell Labs had problems making long-wavelength lasers; they
had missed delivery schedules for the Bermuda trials,43 and reliability was a
continuing concern. Dreading the cost of hauling a repeater from the ocean
ﬂoor to replace a dead laser, engineers designed repeaters with three spare
lasers to back up each laser transmitting signals.44 However, long-wavelength
lasers improved as time passed, and by the time AT&T started building the
ﬁnal TAT-8 repeaters, they included just one backup laser per ﬁber.45 The
transmitters, cable, and receivers also worked better than had been expected
in 1980, allowing AT&T to double repeater spacing from the original plan of
30 kilometers to beyond 65 kilometers. STL and Submarcom were more cau-
tious, spacing repeaters about 40 kilometers in their parts of TAT-8.46
Turning the Tables on Satellites
In the mid-1970s, the communications satellite industry thought it might
vanquish costly cables from the transatlantic market.47 A decade later, ﬁber
optics had turned the tables.48 As TAT-8 moved toward completion, inter-
national consortia planned more submarine cables. In May 1986, AT&T, Brit-
ish Telecom, Teleglobe Canada, and the French and Spanish telephone au-
thorities agreed to plan and build TAT-9, with service to start in 1991.
The new cable was designed around a fourth generation of ﬁber technol-
ogy, operating at 1.55 micrometers, where ﬁber loss was lowest. Both Corning
and British Telecom were pushing the advantages of ﬁbers they had developed
with minimum pulse dispersion shifted to 1.55 micrometers.49 However,
AT&T chose instead to use lasers that emitted an extremely narrow range of
wavelengths, so pulses should suffer little dispersion at 1.55 micrometers.
Their design let them double transmission speed to 560 million bits per second
and stretch repeater spacing to a hundred kilometers in TAT-9. The same
technology later reached 140 kilometers.50
The satellite industry fought back. The International Telecommunications
Satellite Organization (Intelsat) promised to cut its rates and claimed that new
echo-cancellation circuits made complaints about satellite delays ‘‘spuri-

SUBMARINE CABLES
213
ous.’’51 As a frequent international caller, I knew better; satellites still had
delays and bad circuits. Each side claimed its service was cheaper, but satel-
lites were in retreat. As plans for new cables proliferated, the satellite industry
quietly turned to routes not well served by ﬁber cables and services other
than telephony, including video and data communications.
TAT-8 planners came remarkably close to their original plans of starting
operation in July 1988. Ironically, the delays were due to relatively mundane
electronic components, not ﬁbers, cable, or lasers. AT&T had problems with
one component; Submarcom had problems with another.52 In August, AT&T’s
cable ship Long Lines laid its portion of the cable, stopping at the branch point
off the French coast; French and British cable ships met it and laid the rest
of the cable from the branch point to land.53 After a few months of testing,
the cable went on line in late December,54 beating Alec Reeves’s prediction
of two decades earlier. By then, the Long Lines had almost ﬁnished laying the
ﬁrst transpaciﬁc ﬁber-optic cable.
The job was not ﬁnished. Strong currents off the French coast exposed the
buried cable, and trawlers snagged it in February and March, damaging the
wires carrying repeater power. In March, an electrical fault knocked out
the British leg of the cable; calls had to be rerouted via satellite until repairs
were ﬁnished and the cable buried deeper in early April.55 Meanwhile, the
transpaciﬁc cable began service to Japan.
The new cables did not revolutionize international communications over-
night, but I could see the improvement. My calls to London were more likely
to go through at the peak hours for transatlantic business. I got fewer bad
circuits with maddening echoes or dead air from England. More and more
calls were as clear as any long-distance call made over ﬁber-optic lines in
America. The most reliable sign of a transatlantic call became an English
accent on the other end.
Better Technology
Better technology brought higher cable capacity at lower cost per channel.
The demand for international telecommunications exploded, ﬁlling TAT-8 to
capacity soon after it began service. TAT-10 and-11 followed with the same
1.55-micrometer technology as TAT-9.
Meanwhile, a new technology arrived that dramatically improved sub-
marine cables—optical ampliﬁers that increase the strength of a light signal
without ﬁrst converting it to some other form. Alec Reeves had seen the
advantage of that approach back in the late 1960s, but he had thought
semiconductor devices would do the job. The new technology, ﬁber ampliﬁers,
grew from ideas Eli Snitzer developed in the early 1960s as he moved from
ﬁber optics to lasers at American Optical.
Lasers are light ampliﬁers. Shine the right wavelength into a laser, and
the light stimulates excited atoms to emit more light at that wavelength—
precisely in step with the input light. Radio astronomers use masers, the

214
CITY OF LIGHT
microwave counterpart of lasers, to amplify weak microwave signals. Snitzer
doped ﬁber cores with the rare earth neodymium and showed they could
amplify light.56 However, in the early days of lasers everybody wanted to
generate their own beams, so they put mirrors on both ends to make oscil-
lators.
By the late 1970s, Charlie Sandbank57 and a few others were thinking
about optical ampliﬁers but didn’t know how to make them. Will Hicks came
up with some novel schemes at 1984 Inc.,58 but the winner proved to be a
variant on Snitzer’s original idea: a ﬁber with a small amount of a rare earth
element in its core. The key was ﬁnding the right material to add to the ﬁber
core so it would amplify light at one of the ﬁber windows, 1.3 or 1.55 mi-
crometers. In the mid-1980s, Dave Payne at the University of Southampton
came upon erbium, which ampliﬁed 1.55 micrometers nicely when excited
by infrared light from a semiconductor laser.59 (See epilogue.)
The erbium-doped ﬁber is an almost ideal optical ampliﬁer. It works over
a range of wavelengths wide enough to amplify signals at dozens of different
wavelengths at once. It responds quickly to pulses, so pulse spreading is not
a problem. It has low noise. And ﬁber ampliﬁers ﬁt easily into the torpedo-
shaped cases designed to house undersea repeaters.
The latest generation of submarine cables use ﬁber ampliﬁers instead of
repeaters. The Simplex Wire and Cable plant in Newington, New Hampshire,
was humming with business when I visited in the fall of 1994. Cable ran
endlessly through the plant. I saw ﬁbers wrapped around the central steel
king wire, encased in plastic, armored lightly, covered with copper conductor,
then again encased in plastic. Heavy, sturdy, well-oiled machines wound the
armor; machines that had spun at their tasks for years seemed ready to roll
on forever.
The cable rolled through an overhead passageway onto a giant cable ship
docked in back of the factory, where workers looped it into giant ‘‘tanks.’’
They hung the ampliﬁer casings above the tanks, solid metal cylinders, lumps
in the thin coiled snake of white plastic cable. Today, that cable lies at the
bottom of the Paciﬁc, part of TPC-5, a 24,000-kilometer loop circling the
ocean, linking Oregon, California, Hawaii, Japan, and Guam.60 When I spoke
to Charles Kao in Hong Kong, the pulses of light that carried our words may
have been among the ﬁve billion bits per second that passed through each of
the two ﬁber pairs in that cable.
No technology is perfect, and submarine cables are no exception. Cable
breaks continue to be the main problem, despite air and sea patrols of cable
landing points, but modern cables reroute signals almost instantly around a
break, so callers hear only a small click as they talk. A few small cable im-
perfections have let salt water leak through, shorting out the electricity that
powers repeaters or optical ampliﬁers. The optics are doing ﬁne. Peter Runge
proudly tells me: ‘‘We have seen no device failures,’’ even among the lasers,
which were their biggest worries.61
Thanks to submarine cables, calling overseas means just pushing a
few more buttons on the dial. Words come clearly through the glass from

SUBMARINE CABLES
215
places as exotic as Egypt and Japan; the problems are time zones and lan-
guages.
Runge didn’t take transatlantic calls to his sister in their native Germany
lightly when he came to America in the 1960s. Now, he says, ‘‘We don’t
think twice any more to pick up the phone even for little things, just to say
hello.’’ His sister talks fast; spoiled by the quick response of ﬁbers; she hangs
up when she gets a satellite circuit, knowing that dialing again will likely
bring words as sharp and clear as glass. The impact has gone beyond their
personal lives. ‘‘I don’t know whether TAT-8 helped bring down the Berlin
Wall or not,’’ mused Runge as we sat in his Bell Labs ofﬁce, ‘‘but commu-
nication in general has had a major impact on politics of the world.’’62

216
16
The Last Mile
An Elusive Vision
These days when I watch television here at home, I have
my choice of four channels that I can get with reasonable
clearness and audibility. Even with only four channels at
their disposal, however, the television moguls can supply
me with a tremendous quantity of rubbish.
Imagine what the keen minds of our entertainment in-
dustry could do if they realized they had a hundred million
channels [the number of standard television channels that
he calculated could ﬁt in the visible spectrum] into which
they could funnel new and undreamed-of varieties of trash.
Maybe we should stop right now!’’
—Isaac Asimov, 19621
T
he last mile has been the hardest for ﬁber optics. Optical ﬁbers carry both
telephone and cable television signals to your town or neighborhood, but
except for a few experimental systems, the threads of glass do not reach
homes. Somewhere within few miles of your home the ﬁbers end in a box,
which converts their optical signals into electrical form and sends them to
copper wires. Telephone calls go over simple pairs of wires; cable television
uses coaxial cable, a thin central wire surrounded by an insulator, which in
turn is sheathed within a metal tube, then covered by protective plastic. Those
wires connect to your phone and television.

THE LAST MILE
217
Those wires also are bottlenecks. Telephone wires can connect you with
any other phone on the planet but only at limited capacity. Cable systems
have much higher capacity, but they connect you only to the cable company.
Why not use ﬁbers? Visionaries have asked that question for a quarter of
a century. The information capacity might not match the hundred million
channels estimated by Isaac Asimov, but it would more than sufﬁce for mod-
ern needs. Business managers counter that installing ﬁbers would cost too
much, and so far they have carried the day.
Wired Cities
Television pioneers hoped that their new medium would enlighten the public.
C. Francis Jenkins and John Logie Baird did not live to see modern television,
but it disappointed Vladimir Zworykin, the Russian-born engineer who led
RCA’s successful development team. ‘‘I hate what they’ve done to my child,’’
he complained. ‘‘I would never let my own children watch it.’’2
Asimov was not the only one complaining about televised trash in the
early 1960s. Newton Minow, freshly appointed to the Federal Communica-
tions Commission, earned sympathetic headlines by calling commercial tele-
vision a ‘‘vast wasteland.’’ Many critics sought to make television more in-
teractive, so viewers could do something besides passively staring at the
screen. The technological optimism of the era stimulated the dreamers who
always lurk in the communications world. They outlined futuristic visions of
‘‘wired cities’’ where advanced telecommunications services would link
homes, businesses, factories, and schools.3
They offered few speciﬁcs. ‘‘Advanced’’ video services often meant adding
more channels in the naive hope they would attract more intelligent pro-
grams. ‘‘Two-way’’ television rarely went beyond viewer participation in
game shows and televised debates on public policy. AT&T offered Picture-
phone. Utilities proposed automatic meter reading over phone lines; cities
suggested automatic ﬁre and burglar alarms. Others envisioned remote con-
trols to adjust home thermostats or turn on ovens from work. A few wild-
eyed visionaries proposed equipping home televisions with special controls
and keyboards to access graphic computer-based information services over
phone lines—a service called ‘‘videotex’’ that hinted at future development of
the World Wide Web and the Internet.
Early proposals to link homes with high-capacity coaxial cables soon ran
into the ugly reality of network design. Coaxial cables used in cable television
systems were good pipes for delivering the same signals to everybody, but
they worked poorly with switches that routed different signals to speciﬁc des-
tinations. In fact, standard cable television systems were almost pure pipe,
with virtually no switching capacity. The telephone network excelled at
switching, but its aging wires were tiny pipes unable to carry video signals.
Either the phone or the cable television network would require expensive

218
CITY OF LIGHT
rebuilding to provide two-way, high-capacity service with big pipes and good
switching.
That wasn’t an immediately fatal ﬂaw in an era of urban planning and
Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society program. ‘‘New towns’’ projects, some gov-
ernment funded, sought to build new communities in virgin territory.4 Vi-
sionaries hoped to make the new towns into ‘‘wired cities,’’ promising a more
equable, diverse, and democratic society. It was an enticing vision for a gen-
eration of idealists disturbed by pollution, the Vietnam War, and the nuclear
arms race.
The Federal Communications Commission liked the idea of interactive tele-
vision and decreed in 1972 that future cable systems must provide two-way
service. No such systems existed at the time, but the National Science Foun-
dation agreed to sponsor three experiments starting in early 1974. The
technology worked, but high costs and unclear beneﬁts later led the FCC to
drop its two-way requirements.5
The Fibered City
In the heyday of ‘‘new town’’ planning, GTE Laboratories designed a network
to carry the usual array of futuristic services to a couple thousand homes.
The plan called for a separate coaxial cable to run from each home to a
central facility. The logistics of handling all those cables left John Fulenwider
aghast in 1972. Each cable was large, and a couple thousand would require
serious, bulky plumbing to connect to the equivalent of a telephone switching
ofﬁce. A soft-spoken research engineer in his early forties with a passion for
jogging years before it was fashionable, Fulenwider had an eye for new tech-
nology and had already spotted ﬁber optics. He knew ﬁbers were thin and
ﬂexible—and that a lot would ﬁt into one 3/4-inch (1.9-centimeter) cable.6
He sketched out a design for a ﬁber-optic network for the new town. Good
semiconductor lasers were not available, so he proposed using LEDs to send
signals to homes and bulkier solid-state lasers for the longer distances between
regional distribution centers. Four multimode ﬁbers would run to each home.
Three would carry signals to the home, including color video-telephone, two
color television channels, FM radio, digital data, control signals, and two
ordinary voice phone lines. The fourth would carry signals in the other di-
rection. Like the telephone network, the ﬁber system would be switched, send-
ing users only signals they requested instead of all signals as in cable televi-
sion.7
The fundamental problem Fulenwider faced was network topology. Early
ﬁber systems ran between two points, but routing signals to many points was
much more difﬁcult—even worse than for coaxial cables. It required many
transmitters, many receivers, many ﬁber connections, and ways to split sig-
nals between ﬁbers that did not yet exist. Fulenwider did his best, but costs
were discouraging. A GTE economist calculated his design would take seven
years to earn back the investment; the developer wanted a two-year payback.

THE LAST MILE
219
The ﬁbers of the time were reasonable pipes, but they didn’t ﬁt very well with
the switches. Although nobody was going to build the system, Fulenwider
talked about it at the International Wire and Cable Symposium, December 5–
7, 1972, in Atlantic City.8 The audience was intrigued and asked probing
questions about device lifetimes and ﬁber loss, concerns everywhere ﬁber was
mentioned.
Back at the labs, Fulenwider persuaded GTE to buy a length of cable Corn-
ing had developed for the Navy. A pair of stiff Kevlar strength members kept
the cable from bending in one direction, but he strung it between two con-
ference rooms at opposite ends of the C-shaped GTE Labs complex. He hooked
up a prototype GTE videoconferencing system and ‘‘all sorts of nifty things.’’
Engineers used the cable as a testbed for 15 years, until it was removed during
laboratory renovations.9
Meanwhile, wired-city development sputtered to a halt in America.
Changes in the political climate ended government funding of new town pro-
jects. The government bolstered the regulatory wall separating the telephone
and cable television industries, effectively barring integration of phone and
cable service on a single network (except in sparsely populated rural areas).
A handful of industry experiments remained, most notably Warner Commu-
nications’ QUBE two-way cable trials from 1977 to 1984 in Columbus, Ohio.
Built entirely with coaxial cables, it tested pay-per-view programming and
MTV, helping shape modern cable television. However, the modest two-way
services attracted little interest and were shut down when the parent Warner
Company ran into ﬁnancial trouble.10
Japan’s Hi-OVIS Program
Japan’s interest in wired cities grew as America’s waned. In the early 1970s,
the powerful Ministry for International Trade and Industry began planning a
test of two-way video communications in a ‘‘new town’’ being built for Ja-
pan’s growing professional class. Initial plans called for coaxial cable, but MITI
shifted to optical ﬁbers before announcing the ﬁnal plan for Hi-OVIS, the
Highly Interactive Optical Visual Information System, in March 1976.11
Hi-OVIS provided two-way service to 158 homes and 10 public institutions
in the new town of Higashi-Ikoma. That choice mirrored a common vision
of providing new services for the professional elite living in a new town. Yet
Hi-OVIS also was a bold experiment for a traditionally cautious people, be-
cause it committed to running ﬁbers to homes while AT&T was warily testing
ﬁbers in ducts under its Atlanta parking lot.
The technological differences between Hi-OVIS and Atlanta reﬂected their
different missions. Bell designed the Atlanta system to carry many calls si-
multaneously between two points; the transmitters were expensive, but their
cost was shared among many customers. Hi-OVIS needed separate links to
each home, so they had to be inexpensive. AT&T could afford a few laser
transmitters; Hi-OVIS needed many cheap LEDs. AT&T wanted maximum

220
CITY OF LIGHT
transmission distance, so it paid the premium for graded-index ﬁbers. Hi-OVIS
wanted to minimize connection costs, and they could get away with large-
core multimode ﬁbers, despite their large pulse spreading, because the home
links were short.12
Video services went well beyond the usual retransmission of local television
broadcasts. Hi-OVIS had its own programming center; homes had their own
cameras and transmitters so residents could join in. The Japanese planners’
standard example was having women demonstrate how they made their fa-
vorite recipes in their own kitchens. Other services included displaying infor-
mation from computer ﬁles, such as weather forecasts, news highlights, or
train timetables. A video-on-demand service let viewers request programs
from the Hi-OVIS central library.13
As Japan built, Canada, Britain, France, and Germany planned their own
home ﬁber trials. The American telecommunications establishment dithered,
blocked by government regulations, the cable industry’s limited capital, and
the phone industry’s timidity. In July 1978, the Visual Information System
Development Association turned on Hi-OVIS. I watched from afar, fascinated
by the experiment and worried America was falling behind.
Program director Masahiro Kawahata made Hi-OVIS a showcase, hosting
a series of overseas visitors. Early results seemed good. The hardware worked,
although it was primitive by modern standards. People used the system, al-
though most were shy about getting in front of the camera, particularly the
women. Children learned the system quickly and requested some programs
over 500 times from the central library, literally wearing out the tapes.14 Hi-
OVIS ofﬁcials apparently did not consider the children’s choices wholesome
enough, so they did not replace the worn-out tapes.
Carefully reading an English-language preliminary report on Hi-OVIS, I
thought I saw the future of ﬁber to the home. The children of Higashi-Ikoma
wanted to pick their own programs, and it was only logical to think adults
would do the same. I envisioned a future where switched ﬁber networks
would retrieve programs from on-line video libraries. I decided video-on-
demand service could be the ‘‘killer application’’ that would pay for the new
technology. It was clear video telephones wouldn’t do the trick; Picturephone
had crashed and burned. Videotex and similar home information services
were struggling. I tried to stake my claim as a minor visionary with a talk at
a ﬁber-marketing conference and an editorial in Laser Focus.15
In one sense I was right. The videotape market proves that people want
to pick their own programs—but I expected them to select from on-line video
libraries, not by renting tapes. Yet my forecast missed the mark because I did
not realize the discouragingly high costs of both on-line video libraries and
home ﬁber-optic networks. Hi-OVIS proved extremely expensive. The Japanese
didn’t talk much about their expenses at the time, but afterward Kawahata
said they totaled about 10 billion yen, roughly $80 million, through the end
of the experiment in early 1986.16 That comes to a staggering $500,000 per
household served! The ﬁber-optic hardware was expensive, but the steepest
bills came from building and stafﬁng the local operations center.17

THE LAST MILE
221
Hi-OVIS had other weaknesses as well. While the tests showed what serv-
ices people used, subscribers didn’t have to pay the bills. In addition, telephone
service was missing because Nippon Telegraph and Telephone would not yield
its franchise. NTT and MITI were allied with rival bureaucracies in the Jap-
anese government. Looking back, Kawahata points with pride to creating a
sense of community among subscribers and fueling growth of Japan’s ﬁber-
optics industry, which has become a global powerhouse. He also claims credit
for laying the groundwork that led NTT in 1990 to set stringing ﬁber to every
Japanese home and business by 2015 as a long-term goal.18
However, NTT usually avoids mentioning Hi-OVIS, and has since backed
away from that goal, which a top ofﬁcial said later was ‘‘not a business plan
or an implementation schedule, just a wish list.’’19 As of late 1997, NTT
planned to install ﬁber-optic feeder cables to remote terminals near homes by
2010. With that network completed, the company says it ‘‘will be able to lay
optical ﬁber to the home within a week or so.’’20
Fiber to the Farm: The Elie System
I never got to Hi-OVIS, but I did see the next trial of ﬁber-optic links to the
home, in rural Canada. Canada wanted to enhance the quality of life on the
big, productive farms that sprawl across the prairie. Farming is a major Ca-
nadian industry, but the best and brightest young people tend to leave rural
areas. Canada’s Department of Communications decided to test ﬁbers for tele-
phone, television, and data transmission in the tiny towns of Elie and Ste.
Eustache about 50 kilometers (30 miles) west of Winnipeg.21
Elie was a little town, with small homes and a huge railside grain elevator
that towered over the ﬂattest landscape I have ever seen. Ste. Eustache was
smaller, but had more trees and seemed less stark. They were places that
desperately needed better communications. Party phones serving up to ten
households were standard, so one call could tie up many other lines. Televi-
sion was the four channels that tall antennas could pick up from Winnipeg.
In the winter, temperatures hit 40 below, the point at which the Centigrade
and Fahrenheit scales match and exposed skin freezes. The harsh weather
outside would test the hardware; the people inside would test the services.
The Department of Communications and Manitoba Telephone teamed with
Northern Telecom on a prototype system serving 150 homes, a third in the
country and the rest in the two towns. They budgeted $7.5 million, about
$50,000 per home, cheap compared to Hi-OVIS.22 Steady technical advances
gave Elie better ﬁber hardware than was available for Hi-OVIS. Service began
in late 1981, and when I visited the following June, residents were still de-
lighted with private phone lines. They also liked American television channels
brought to their homes for the ﬁrst time, somewhat to the annoyance of
Canadian ofﬁcials. The ﬁbers also connected them to Canada’s developmental
videotex system. Think of it as a primitive, extremely limited version of the
Internet accessed through an extremely slow modem and an antiquated com-

222
CITY OF LIGHT
puter that showed only boxy letters and pictures. To Elie in 1982, it was a
marvel of modern technology. A man who farmed nearly three square miles
used it to check grain futures and hog prices. Children mastered the new toy
quickly, brieﬂy overloading the system when they discovered video games.
The system was a humble wonder, serving everyday people. I talked with
them in the local headquarters, a carpeted trailer partly ﬁlled with electronics,
parked in back of the small block building that housed the local telephone
ofﬁce. They welcomed me, the visiting reporter from distant Boston, as part
of the exotic world that had entered their ordinary lives. I relaxed, reﬂected
on the future I thought was coming soon, and wrote an optimistic feature on
the future of ‘‘Fiberopolis’’ for Omni.23
The Canadian communications department and Manitoba Telephone were
less optimistic when they added up the numbers. Fiber-optic hardware
worked, but it was expensive. Funding for a planned second stage ﬁzzled, and
they shut the system down after 18 months.24
A Grand Plan for Biarritz
Meanwhile, France was trying to assemble the world’s biggest, boldest system,
serving 1500 homes in the coastal resort of Biarritz. Politics played a big role
in the decision. France was lagging badly in technology; in 1974, only 6.2
million phone lines served the country’s 53 million people, and cable televi-
sion was virtually nonexistent. The government pumped $30 billion into
France Telecom for a badly needed modernization program, which added 10
million more phone lines by the end of 1980.25 France became the only coun-
try to get videotex off the ground, by giving customers cheap terminals called
Minitels in lieu of phone directories.
French planners also embraced ﬁber optics with an enthusiasm that made
Hi-OVIS look almost timid. French engineers had returned to ﬁber optics after
Charles Kao generated global interest, building up a small ﬁber industry.26
Most observers thought France lagged well behind the United States, Britain
and Japan. The Biarritz project, announced in September 1978, was intended
to change that. Located on the Bay of Biscay near the Spanish border, Biarritz
is a ﬂashy resort with 28,000 year-round residents and an international rep-
utation. Cliffs rise above warm ocean beaches that are crowded with sun-
bathers in the summer. The famous playground was a striking contrast to
the upper-crust Japanese suburb and the tiny Canadian prairie towns.
The Biarritz system was designed to carry all the latest services—including
videotex, picture telephone, standard telephone, and radio and television sig-
nals.27 When initial contracts were signed at the end of 1980, the estimated
bill was $100 million, more per home than the less-ambitious Elie system,
but much less than Hi-OVIS.28
The initial goal was to connect 1500 homes in early 1983,29 with possible
later expansion to 5000 homes, but the schedule slipped because of laser
problems. The ﬁrst 50 homes went on line in 1984, and not until the summer

THE LAST MILE
223
of 1986 were 1500 homes connected.30 The delays didn’t discourage the
French government, which in November 1982 announced plans to string
ﬁber to 1.5 million homes in the next ﬁve years and expand service to 6
million homes (a third of the country) by 1992.31
Industry observers were unsure what to make of Biarritz. France couldn’t
match Japan, the United States, or Britain in high-speed, long-distance sys-
tems, low-loss ﬁbers, and high-performance lasers,32 but that wasn’t the tech-
nology needed for ﬁber to the home. French ofﬁcials made ﬁber optics a matter
of national pride and invested massive sums in the demonstration, although
today no one I could reach admits to knowing its total cost.
Once the system was installed, television service proved popular, particu-
larly because Biarritz had poor broadcast reception. As in Elie, users had a
choice of several channels, and the switching center routed the chosen chan-
nel to the home in about a second. Voice telephone and videotex signals also
came through the ﬁbers, but they also could have gone through ordinary
phone wires. Video phones sent images in standard television format but were
little used because service was limited to Biarritz.33
By the time results started coming in from Biarritz, the French government
was committed to launching cable television over ﬁber, another global ﬁrst.
Video telephones were discarded; voice and videotex could go over phone
lines. France Telecom kept analog LED transmitters and graded-index ﬁbers,
able to carry only a couple of user-selected television channels. They consid-
ered it a ﬁrst-generation system, and if not as ambitious as Biarritz was when
planned, it was bolder than the rest of the world, which had backed away
from ﬁber to homes after Hi-OVIS and Elie. In 1988, France Telecom con-
tracted for ﬁber-based cable systems in about a dozen communities, including
Montpellier, Rennes, Serves, and some districts of Paris. Fibers now connect
to some 200,000 homes in those areas and pass another half million who
don’t subscribe to the cable service.34 You cannot ﬁnd as many homes con-
nected to optical ﬁbers in all the rest of the world. However, the ﬁrst-
generation system was the last installed in France.
What is the legacy of Biarritz? ‘‘Nothing but a technical and economical
disaster,’’35 e-mailed a French ﬁber developer. The ﬁbers worked ﬁne in Biar-
ritz, but the laser transmitters suffered serious noise and reliability problems.36
That led engineers to shift to LED transmitters for the cable system, but the
LEDs left no room for expansion when customers wanted more channels and
services. For its second-generation systems, France Telecom used single-mode
ﬁber ‘‘trunks’’ to carry an array of many signals to neighborhood nodes but
distributed signals to homes through coaxial cables. It’s an approach now
used in many other countries. The original ﬁber lines work, but they are
technological orphans, incompatible with anything else anywhere else in the
world. They can be upgraded only with new transmitters and special equip-
ment.37 The Biarritz system itself is gone; France Telecom stopped the exper-
iment in early 1990, dismantled the network, and pulled the ﬁber cables from
underground ducts.

224
CITY OF LIGHT
Aftermaths of Early Experiments
Except for laser problems, hardware in the early trials worked reasonably well.
Successful installations eased widespread worries that telephone construction
crews couldn’t handle fragile glass ﬁbers. But it was expensive to adapt the
pipes to the switches, driving costs up. ‘‘The issue wasn’t technological, it
was ﬁnancial risk. Can you generate the revenues you need out of these kinds
of systems?’’ recalls Rod Kachulak, head of network engineering at Manitoba
Telephone who worked on Elie as a young engineer. ‘‘We couldn’t make the
economic case to get enough revenue from the subscriber base to justify the
investment of millions and millions of dollars.’’38
American phone companies started trials of ﬁber to the home as Biarritz
wound down in the late 1980s. They picked the most favorable possible
sites—new subdivisions of expensive homes, where the subscribers had plenty
of money and new services had to be installed anyway. Sometimes they bat-
tled with cable companies; sometimes they cooperated. But the plans were
never very ambitious, and most quietly ﬁzzled out. The ugly reality was that
the market wasn’t ready. Engineers were dazzled by the tremendous infor-
mation capacity of optical ﬁbers. The public was apathetic. The crystal clarity
of digital ﬁber-optic lines was not going to persuade them to pay more for
telephone service, although it could cut the phone company’s costs for in-
stalling second and third lines to homes. Fiber-optic transmission likewise
made little obvious difference to cable-television customers, although ﬁbers
cut costs in some parts of cable systems. The public paid no mind to videotex
and automated meter reading. Fire and burglar alarms could be hooked up
to regular phone lines. ‘‘Every trial was a technical success, but not a market
success,’’ says Paul Shumate, in charge of home transmission studies for Bell-
core. ‘‘There was nothing subscribers were willing to pay for.’’39
In the summer of 1993, I visited a system in Cerritos, California, that GTE
had heralded as ‘‘the largest and most advanced test of voice, video and data
services in the U.S.’’40 The phone company had teamed with the cable-
television company serving the Los Angeles suburb for the ﬁrst market tests
of how subscribers reacted to new services. They hooked up most of the
community with coaxial cables for television, and a few hundred homes with
ﬁbers for phone service. A few dozen got video through ﬁbers.41
I sampled the new services in a showplace viewing room in GTE’s Cerritos
ofﬁces, dominated by a wall-size entertainment center. Sitting on a long, over-
stuffed couch I clicked through displays with a remote control. The technol-
ogy had come a long way from Elie. The television was larger, with crisper
pictures; the room was a long way from the inside of a trailer. GTE’s Main
Street service offered nicer pictures than the Canadian videotex service but
didn’t deliver much more information.
The man in charge of the showroom told me about video on demand, pay-
per-view television, ﬁber-optic data transmission, and educational videocon-
ferencing. Yet only a couple of homes were set up to receive video on demand,
and their choice was among a mere ten programs. The town had 7500 cable

THE LAST MILE
225
subscribers, but only 250 paid $9.95 a month for Main Street. And GTE was
keeping the details of its market trials proprietary because it was paying a lot
for that data.
A bit disappointed, I cruised through Cerritos, looking for a sense of the
planned community. I found private streets that greeted me as a trespasser,
with high walls facing the public roads. The town had been dairy farms in
the 1960s; now it seemed a fortress. I drove away to visit an old friend in
another suburb where you could see yards, houses, and people from the street.
Kawahata had dreamed of building a futuristic community when he
planned Hi-OVIS. The Canadians had tried to tailor their technology to the
needs of a rural community in Elie. The French had wanted Biarritz to be a
showplace. In Cerritos, GTE ﬁt the mold of a subdivision, well planned and
tastefully arranged, yet somehow sterile. Other American phone companies
followed the Cerritos model, announcing home ﬁber trials in expensive new
developments with great fanfare yet never reporting results. Such silence is
the hallmark of failed experiments. The new technology had failed to grow
because it offered nothing new to the customers.
A New Generation
Many survivors of the ﬁeld trial wars have concluded that ﬁbers are simply
too expensive for home links. Bob Olshansky, now a top research manager
at GTE Labs, sees the future as connecting ﬁbers to copper telephone wires
in your neighborhood. Digitize the signals, add new transmitters and receiv-
ers, clean up the wires, and phone lines called digital subscriber lines can
carry millions of bits per second to the home, as long as it isn’t too far from
the phone company. That makes it attractive for Internet access, which he
considers a more attractive market than delivering video programs.42
On the other side of the debate is the ever-optimistic Paul Shumate of
Bellcore, who believes a new technology called Passive Optical Networks will
bring costs down. Pioneered by British Telecom Labs, it saves on costly laser
transmitters by splitting optical signals among 8 or 16 homes. New inexpen-
sive lasers could meet the modest needs of home transmitters while easing
the packaging requirements that account for most of the cost of modern la-
sers.43 New data-compression technology could pack more digitized signals
into ﬁbers. Other savings come from careful attention to design details, like
providing power for home telephones and other electronics and avoiding re-
pairs caused by corrosion of metal cables. Put it all together, says Shumate,
and ﬁber to the home already is cheaper than other technologies in rural
areas where there are a dozen homes or fewer along each mile of roadway
served. He expects the costs to keep coming down, but admits ‘‘the timetable
is not real clear’’ for widespread ﬁber links.44
In Japan, Nippon Telegraph and Telephone plans to run ﬁbers past every
home by 2010, but that’s more cautious than it sounds. So far, NTT has
concentrated on the easy parts, stringing ﬁber to businesses in large cities.45

226
CITY OF LIGHT
Although ﬁbers will pass every home in Japan, the phone company won’t
promise to run them the last few hundred feet to connect homes. Instead,
NTT plans to run wires from optical nodes along the street. That isn’t too
much different from American plans.
Will Hicks believes we have barely tapped the potential of ﬁbers. He says
that for $400 to $500 per user, he could build a ﬁber system to let people
pick from among 5000 video channels for each of three televisions, access
old television shows and a quarter of all the movies ever made, and call up
a wealth of written material. ‘‘I know there aren’t 5,000 TV programs. There
aren’t any at all worth seeing,’’ Hicks says, echoing Isaac Asimov 30 years
earlier. ‘‘But if there were, we could make them available.’’46
And there, in a sense, lies the central problem. Fiber optics may be too big
a pipe; it can deliver more information than anyone knows what to do with.
It can deliver an eight-lane freeway of information to our doorstep, when
most of us want only a sidewalk. The Internet and the World Wide Web may
change that. Try to download graphics-laden web pages and you quickly
realize how slowly information trickles through the network. However, you
often don’t do too much better with a bigger pipe; the switches have also
become bottlenecks. And despite all the wild-eyed optimists, the technology
for optical switching is not yet ready.
That may change with time. The whole network is creaking with a massive
and fast-growing load of trafﬁc today. Keeping up with the growth is a major
strain that has pushed a tremendous expansion in capacity of the ﬁber-optic
backbone network. On the horizon are new generations of switches, some
that route signals using optical technology instead of electronic circuits. Op-
tical switching technology isn’t easy; electrons are easier to manipulate be-
cause of their electric charges. Yet the demand for more bandwidth—for big-
ger switches as well as pipes—continues to escalate upward with little end in
sight. Yesterday’s ﬂeet new modems are today’s plodding dinosaurs. Engineers
are working fast and furious to consign today’s tired old telephone and cable
systems to the same fate. Stay tuned for more thrilling episodes.

227
17
Reﬂections on the City of Light
It is my ﬁrm belief that an almost ideal telecommunication
network . . . going a long way toward eliminating the ef-
fects of mere distance altogether, can be made—but only,
at least as now foreseeable, by optical means. I believe
too that within and between the highly developed regions
of the world such a technological revolution . . . will be
demanded by the public by the start of the next century. It
will be a real adventure, and lead too, to truly stimulating
new challenges in human behavior—in all of which John
Logie Baird, the pioneer in this venture whom we are com-
memorating tonight, would have been only too pleased,
through his own eyes and hands, to take part.
—Alec Reeves, John Logie Baird memorial lecture,
May 19691
A
lec Reeves saw only the ﬁrst steps toward ﬁber-optic communications,
and probably had no idea that John Logie Baird himself had played a bit
part in ﬁber-optic imaging. But he was prophetic in seeing the development
of ﬁber communications as an adventure.
It was a marvelous adventure for John Midwinter. ‘‘Everything we touched
turned to gold,’’ he recalls. ‘‘It was unbelievable. From 1974 onwards, it was
just one success after another. We had this wonderful group, with very strong
backing.’’ By 1984, British Telecom had effectively launched ﬁber optics, and

228
CITY OF LIGHT
it was time for him to move on to a new program, but he could see nothing
else as fascinating at Martlesham Heath. Instead, he accepted British Tele-
com’s offer to establish a professorship for him at University College, London.
It was a plum position, leaving Midwinter ample room to pursue his own
interests.
Over the years, his interests have evolved. He studies optical switching
now, a complex and elegant technology, but confesses ‘‘the thrill of publishing
yet another paper wears off.’’ His new passion is guiding government policy
on engineering, where he hopes to make greater contributions than in the
laboratory. He showed me a miniature wooden cofﬁn, a going-away present
from Martlesham Heath, which his former colleagues ﬁlled with ‘‘technologies
killed by ﬁber optics,’’ bulky metal cables and a long-vanished section of mil-
limeter waveguide. ‘‘It was a golden period,’’ he said nostalgically as we sat
in his ofﬁce, seven ﬂoors above London on a rainy December Monday.2
Don Keck’s ofﬁce at Corning’s Sullivan Park Research Center is only on
the second ﬂoor, but it offers a commanding view of the Chemung River
valley. In nearly three decades, he’s climbed one ﬂoor up the glass-walled
tower and a few levels up the corporate ladder to director of optics and pho-
tonics research. He thrives in the climate, like the plant that curls more than
halfway around the ceiling of his ofﬁce. I asked if he was nostalgic for the
days of one breakthrough after another. ‘‘It’s not over, Jeff,’’ he replied, still
full of energy and enthusiasm in his mid-ﬁfties. I had to agree as he listed an
impressive array of new optical wonders just presented at the Conference on
Optical Fiber Communications in California.3
The Triumph of Fiber
British Telecom was the ﬁrst phone company to commit to single-mode ﬁber,
but the British Isles are tiny compared to America. MCI’s decision to span the
continent with single-mode ﬁber opened the ﬂoodgates to success. Deregula-
tion of the long-distance telephone market created a tremendous demand for
long-haul transmission that millimeter waveguides could never have met.
Single-mode ﬁbers were the right technology in the right place at the right
time to become the national backbone of big digital pipelines. Sprint made
ﬁber optics a household word by advertising that you could hear a pin drop
through digital ﬁber lines. AT&T shifted gears and started installing single-
mode ﬁbers; smaller carriers followed.
The ﬁrst breakup of AT&T on January 1, 1984, shook Bell Labs far more
than British Telecom’s split from the Post Ofﬁce affected Martlesham Heath.
Stew Miller retired before the split of the labs where he had worked for 42
years.4 One of his lieutenants, Jack Cook, started a company to make ﬁber-
optic connectors using a design licensed from AT&T.5 Some ﬁber developers
went to Bellcore, the part of Bell Labs originally assigned to the seven regional
operating companies, and Miller followed as a consultant. The rest remained
with AT&T, most concentrating on long-distance, high-performance systems.

REFLECTIONS ON THE CITY OF LIGHT
229
As the atmosphere changed, some followed Miller into retirement, while oth-
ers left for industry or academia.
The young ﬁber industry scaled up rapidly, but for a while ﬁber was in
short supply. Even Corning hadn’t been ready for the sudden ﬂood of orders.
AT&T, Northern Telecom, and Siecor cranked out cable by the mile; Lasertron
and other companies sliced, diced, and packaged laser chips. New companies
emerged as the market grew, while some old ones faltered.6
The telephone industry adapted a new way of doing business. As a mo-
nopoly carrier, AT&T tested each new technological step exhaustively, like a
soldier crossing a suspected mine ﬁeld. As competition grew and ﬁber tech-
nology matured, phone companies moved faster to deploy new hardware.
MCI planned its ﬁrst systems to carry 400 million bits per second through
each pair of ﬁbers. The speed limit came from the transmitter electronics, not
the capacity of the single-mode ﬁbers. Faster transmitters came quickly, ﬁrst
at the European standard rate of 565 million bits per second, then at 800
million. By the time I ﬁnished the ﬁrst edition of Understanding Fiber Optics7
in 1986, AT&T had sent 1.7 billion bits per second through single-mode ﬁbers
installed to operate at 400 million bits per second. Nobody talked any more
about the Northeast Corridor system; it was a techno-artifact as obsolete as
a vacuum tube.
Single-mode ﬁber quickly conquered the market for cables running be-
tween switching centers as well as for long-distance systems. Single-mode
offered the compelling attraction of easy upgradability even for modest needs.
AT&T installed its ﬁrst single-mode ﬁbers in interofﬁce systems before using
them for long distance.8 Multimode survives only for short systems used
within buildings, where ease of connections is critical and the bandwidth of
graded-index ﬁbers is adequate.
Fiber proved amazingly durable in the right kind of cable. With the hy-
drogen problem licked, glass was almost immune to environmental insults
that corrode metal cables. The biggest hazard for ﬁber cables has been care-
lessness. Contractors and utilities who dig ﬁrst and ask questions later have
damaged more cables than all the sharks in the seven seas and all the hungry
cable-gnawing gophers of the Great Plains put together.9
The web of high-capacity ﬁber pipes branched and spread across America,
as similar backbone ﬁber webs spread in England, Japan, and western Europe.
The market for ﬁber boomed as the network spread, then brieﬂy slumped
before sales of shorter systems pushed the volume upward again. Phone com-
panies hauled old copper cables out of underground ducts, sold them for scrap,
and put four higher-capacity ﬁber cables in their place. As phone companies
installed new lines, they ran ﬁber cables from local switching centers to re-
mote boxes, where electronics transferred the signals to old-fashioned phone
wires. One pair of ﬁbers carried 96 phone lines.
Developing countries built their own ﬁber networks, leapfrogging whole
generations of technology, saving money and improving phone service. John
Fulenwider circled the globe for the Arthur D. Little consulting ﬁrm, helping
design ﬁber systems in China, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia.10 By 1988, Corning

230
CITY OF LIGHT
was selling ﬁber to many developing countries, including India, Brazil, Ar-
gentina, Mexico, Thailand, and Indonesia.11
Even undersea cable engineers, the most cautious of the traditionally con-
servative telephone engineers, embraced ﬁber. Before TAT-8 was up and run-
ning at 1.3 micrometers, they signed contracts for more submarine cables
operating at 1.55 micrometers. Satellite circuits were relegated to transmit-
ting the growing volume of data and other signals not sensitive to delays. It
seems years since I’ve recognized the delays of an overseas satellite circuit.
The Problem of the Future
This future has not been what the establishment expected. Thirty years ago,
Picturephone and the millimeter waveguide were the future of telecommu-
nications. The vision shifted continually. Fiber came and conquered, but the
logical compromise of graded-index ﬁbers turned out to be a dead end. Stew
Miller looked back in retirement and wrote in the introduction to a massive
1988 book he edited on ﬁber optics, ‘‘Perhaps the least predicted trend in the
last six years is the rapidity of the movement to single-mode ﬁbers as the
medium of choice.’’12 Yet that shift was a compellingly logical one, too, once
engineers solved the daunting but unglamorous problem of coupling light into
single-mode ﬁbers. The huge capacity of single-mode ﬁber pipes gave phone
companies room for future upgrades without the high cost of installing new
ﬁbers. Using a single type of ﬁber throughout the whole network greatly
simpliﬁed maintenance.
Miller was not an expressive man, but he must have been glad to see ﬁbers
succeed. Little legacy remains from other projects that occupied his 40 years
at Bell Labs. Millimeter waveguides and hollow light pipes had gone down
the tubes. His pet brainchild, integrated optics, has remained in the laboratory
for decades. But ﬁbers were a brilliant success. In February 1989, the Optical
Society of America gave him the John Tyndall award for his contributions to
ﬁber optics. He died a year later in New Jersey at 71.
As Miller’s career shows, predicting the course of technology is no easy
task. Fatal ﬂaws can lurk deep inside the hearts of bright ideas. New concepts
can outﬂank logical extrapolations of established knowledge, as the optical
ﬁber beat out the millimeter waveguide. A pure and elegant idea can trump
a technological compromise, as single-mode ﬁber proved far superior to
graded-index ﬁber. Experts enamored of their own approaches can completely
miss other possibilities, as Bell did when it ignored Charles Kao to concentrate
on hollow optical waveguides. And as Kao showed when he asked about glass
transmission, fundamental limits can be far more important than the state of
the art.
Yet you can twist those conclusions the other way by citing other exam-
ples. Many fundamental limits are out of reach; many technological compro-
mises yield workable and economic products. Most mistaken forecasts of
trends in ﬁber technology made eminent sense at the time. Single-mode ﬁber

REFLECTIONS ON THE CITY OF LIGHT
231
offered no compelling attraction until the 1.3-micrometer window opened.
Long-wavelength lasers looked like they should be more difﬁcult to make than
gallium arsenide lasers. Even the blind insistence that air had to be a better
transmission medium than glass was logical given the state of knowledge in
1966. Most errors stemmed more from ignorance than from stupidity.
The understanding of glass and optics circa 1950 was sufﬁcient to allow
the development of ﬁber bundles for imaging. Communication ﬁber optics
required pushing beyond that knowledge frontier into the unexplored territory
of ultratransparent materials. The breakthroughs came when people like Kao
asked the right questions and teams like Bob Maurer, Don Keck, and Peter
Schultz used their collective expertise to steer the right course across new
terrain. They took risks, evaluated their course, then corrected their direction
to aim at the most promising areas. Corning’s ﬁrst low-loss ﬁber would have
been merely an interesting data point if taken by itself. Corning’s true success
came from expanding on that work, replacing the troublesome titanium do-
pant with germanium to make a lower-loss, more durable ﬁber. They might
never have reached that end point without seeing promising results in their
earlier experiments with titanium.
Research is full of false starts and experiments that don’t work. It wouldn’t
be research if everything worked; you hope to learn from experiments. It’s
nice if the experiments conﬁrm your ideas, but if not, you try to learn from
your mistakes. Even when Maurer thought the odds were against success, he
hoped to learn something useful.
In many ways, Bell Labs was a surprising also-ran, a world-class laboratory
that scored few conceptual breakthroughs and spent untold millions chasing
dead ends. Bell suffered from being fat and happy and too quick to reject
outside ideas in favor of its own. The labs were slow to recognize problems
in its favorite ideas, notably the gas-lens optical waveguide and graded-index
ﬁbers, but that is not surprising. One of the hardest jobs for research managers
is to kill their own faltering projects before they grow into money pits con-
suming departmental budgets. It is harder to explain why the Bell environ-
ment only rarely sparked the creativity that ignited new ideas at Standard
Telecommunication Labs, British Post Ofﬁce/British Telecom, Corning, Lincoln
Lab, and Nippon Telegraph and Telephone. Had the prestigious lab become
stuck in the mud?
Nonetheless, Bell doggedly stayed in the ﬁber-optic race, often ﬁnishing a
respectable second and sometimes winning. Large and talented teams relent-
lessly beat problems to death. Zhores Alferov’s Russian group was only weeks
ahead of Mort Panish and Izuo Hayashi at Bell in making the ﬁrst room-
temperature semiconductor laser, and the Russians lacked the resources to
overcome the tough problem of laser reliability. It was the Bell Labs team led
by Barney DeLoach that had the skills and resources to make million-hour
lasers. Bell engineers did a superb job in designing and building the crucial
Atlanta and Chicago systems, which decisively made the case for ﬁber optics.
Peter Runge’s group succeeded in the singular challenge of adapting ﬁber
technology to the difﬁcult world of submarine cables. Today the labs, now

232
CITY OF LIGHT
part of Lucent Technologies after the second breakup of AT&T, are top com-
petitors at the forefront of ﬁber technology.
The Fiber-Optic Performance Olympics
Bell is usually in the thick of the ‘‘hero experiments’’ that seek to demonstrate
ever more spectacular feats of sending more information over greater dis-
tances. Teams of specialists boast of their achievements at the two big annual
meetings, the winter Conference on Optical Fiber Communications in America
and the fall European Conference on Optical Communications. They work
long hours ﬁne-tuning their experiments before dashing off to catch their
ﬂights, then report their latest and greatest results at special sessions of papers
that came in after the normal conference deadline.
There are no formal rules and no referees to declare the winners, but the
ﬁber-optic performance Olympics test the cutting edge of the technology. The
usual entrants come from the major industrial labs, including Bell Labs and
its spin-offs in America, NTT and some of the big electronics companies in
Japan, and British Telecom Labs in England. In the 1980s, hero experiments
laid the groundwork for long-distance systems on land and under the sea,
which now carry billions of bits per second through each ﬁber. They tested
ways of reducing the pulse dispersion that limited transmission speed at 1.55
micrometers. They stretched the spacing between repeaters and eventually
showed that optical ampliﬁers could replace repeaters.
They pushed the speed and distance frontiers further in the early 1990s.
For Bell Labs, a major goal was to develop better technology for a new gen-
eration of submarine cables. Neal Bergano at Crawford Hill and Linn Mollen-
auer at Holmdel took different approaches, using different types of light pulses.
Bergano used the standard pulses that spread gradually with distance, at the
mercy of the pulse dispersion inherent in ﬁbers. Mollenauer took more exotic
pulses, called solitons or solitary waves, which do not spread in the same
way.
Soliton transmission is among the boldest ideas to emerge from Bell Labs.
The allure of the soliton is its peculiar stability, ﬁrst seen in water waves that
retained their shapes for long distances along nineteenth-century canals. The-
oretical physicists explained the anomaly as a kind of balancing act, possible
only in certain materials when certain conditions were met. In 1973, Akira
Hasegawa, a Japanese theorist working at Bell Labs, found that optical ﬁbers
could carry soliton light pulses at wavelengths longer than 1.2 micrometers.
However, high ﬁber attenuation quickly dimmed them, making the idea seem
impractical.
That changed when ﬁber developers opened the long-wavelength window,
and Mollenauer soon produced solitons in ﬁbers. That renewed Hasegawa’s
interest, and he calculated that solitons could travel thousands of miles if the
pulses were ampliﬁed. Mollenauer started a new round of experiments but

REFLECTIONS ON THE CITY OF LIGHT
233
bogged down in developing special equipment for the tests. Although he
preached the gospel of solitons with missionary zeal, a couple of years passed
with little progress. Bell Labs managers gave Mollenauer a deadline to stop
playing and get back to work. Fortunately, he was already getting close and
soon sent solitons around and around a loop of ﬁber until they traveled more
than 4000 kilometers.13
Those experiments used an exotic process called Raman ampliﬁcation14
that Will Hicks had tested at 1984 Inc. It wasn’t very efﬁcient, but it was
spread along the length of the ﬁber, and it worked.15 Then erbium-doped ﬁber
ampliﬁers arrived, and they worked even better. Mollenauer kept reﬁning the
equipment, shifting to more practical lasers and to ﬁbers with near-zero dis-
persion at 1.55 micrometers. He added more reﬁnements to eliminate tiny
residual effects that built up over thousands of kilometers.
I was among the audience of 250 people who watched Mollenauer at the
1993 ﬁber-optic performance Olympics. It was a Thursday night at the San
Jose Convention Center, the traditional night for late papers at the Conference
on Optical Fiber Communications. Mollenauer had competition in the soliton
race, Masataka Nakazawa, a bespectacled clean-cut scientist from NTT Lab-
oratories. Nakazawa spoke with a thick accent that I had to strain to under-
stand, but his title made a bold claim: ‘‘soliton transmission over unlimited
distances.’’
He offered no optical perpetual motion machine. Two years earlier, he had
sent solitons through a million kilometers of ﬁber—more than enough to
reach the moon and return—but he could not show that the signals were
free of noise. Now he could. He sent 10 billion bits per second through a
series of ten separate 50-kilometer loops of ﬁber, with ﬁber ampliﬁers between
each pair of loops. Then he passed the output through a modulator to regen-
erate the signal before going back through the same loops. This left the optical
signal clear and clean after 180 million kilometers, far enough to reach the
sun. It could go on indeﬁnitely, he claimed.16
Mollenauer, sitting in the front row, ﬁred back a question. Then it was his
turn. A tall man of strong voice and opinion, he could not match 180 million
kilometers. Instead, he offered a simpler approach without a complex signal
regenerator or other components that required active controls. His method
sufﬁced to send 10 billion bits per second through 20,000 kilometers of ﬁ-
ber—the equivalent of halfway around the world. And when he added a
second series of pulses, at a slightly different wavelength, the combined 20
billion bits per second could travel through 13,000 kilometers of ﬁber.17
The numbers told one story: Nakazawa had won the distance race. Yet no
one needs a ﬁber-optic cable to the sun, and to reach that incredible distance
the NTT team needed complex optical regenerators to clean up the signal
every 500 kilometers. Mollenauer’s approach was simpler and could reach
halfway around the globe, adequate for all earthly communication systems.
Later, when I visited Mollenauer at Holmdel, he told me he had stretched
10 billion bit transmission to circle the earth, 40,000 kilometers or 25,000

234
CITY OF LIGHT
miles. Racks of equipment stood around the walls of his 20  30 foot labo-
ratory; they included eight or ten soliton transmitters operating at different
wavelengths, for experiments through a single ﬁber. In the middle were a pair
of massive black optical tables—built like pool tables covered with ﬂat alu-
minum plates painted a dull, reﬂectionless black. Fiber-optic cables dangled
from overhead runways, linking precision optics on the tables and equipment
racks to the basement, where Bell stored reels and reels and reels of ﬁber
forming a loop 2400 kilometers (1500 miles) long.18
A Trillion Bits a Second
At Crawford Hill, I visited a lab where Andy Chraplyvy and Bob Tkach set a
different target, packing a trillion bits per second through a single ﬁber. They
don’t use solitons and they don’t seek to span the globe. Several hundred
kilometers is adequate for their mission, new technology for long-distance
service on land.
A trillion bits per second is a tremendous pipeline. Tanned and enthusi-
astic, Chraplyvy told me it’s more than all the long-distance trafﬁc that usu-
ally ﬂows in the whole American telephone network.19 It’s the equivalent of
over ten million voice telephone circuits, or eight percent of all Americans
talking to each other at the same instant. Depending on how efﬁciently digital
video signals can be compressed, a trillion-bit ﬁber could carry a mind-
numbing hundreds of thousands of standard television channels, or perhaps
tens of thousands in high-deﬁnition format. You might wonder why anyone
would need that gigantic an information pipeline, but that was what people
said about ﬁbers carrying a billion bits per second a dozen years earlier.
You can’t turn a laser on and off a trillion times a second. The record
is around a hundred billion pulses a second, but that’s tough to achieve,
even at Bell Labs. What you want are many lasers at separate wavelengths,
each modulated very fast, to send signals through the same ﬁber. It’s the
same concept of wavelength-division multiplexing that Bell tried nearly two
decades ago in the Northeast Corridor system, but now it’s vastly more
sophisticated and easier. Erbium-doped ﬁber ampliﬁers can amplify all the
wavelengths between about 1.53 and 1.58 micrometers. The problem is how
close can you pack the wavelengths without the signals interfering with each
other.
When I visited in July 1995, Chraplyvy and Tkach had 17 laser trans-
mitters, each running at 20 billion bits per second. That comes to 340 billion
bits per second,20 more than all the long-distance trafﬁc in North America,
going through the 9-micrometer (0.009 millimeter) core of a single ﬁber.
It wasn’t an easy task. ‘‘The cost of these experiments is outrageous,’’ said
Chraplyvy. He showed me a metal laboratory rack about the size of a refrig-
erator holding eight laser transmitters. Their experiments demand lasers with
wavelengths that can be adjusted very, very precisely, to better than one part

REFLECTIONS ON THE CITY OF LIGHT
235
in 100,000. Each precision laser costs $60,000. To measure the power at
each wavelength used in the experiments you need several optical spectrum
analyzers, boxes that run about $50,000 each.
Generating 20 billion pulses a second is a stretch. The fastest test sets
produce only 10 billion per second and cost $400,000. It takes a separate
$100,000 box to double the speed to 20 billion bits. That’s half a million
dollars, so separate instruments for each channel would blow even Bell Labs’
budget. The Crawford Hill team instead runs all the channels through the
same test set, then splits them apart and adjusts them to make each signal
seem independent.
More costly and delicate instruments are scattered about the lab. A high-
speed oscilloscope to examine the shapes of the pulses runs $50,000. Optical
ampliﬁers are $20,000. Another rack has six shelves, each holding reels with
120 kilometers of ﬁber; three more racks bring the total to 3000 kilometers
in the lab. My eyes scanned the boxes and my mind ran a quick total: $2
million worth of instruments in a room about 20 feet (6 meters) square. The
staggering bill means that fewer and fewer groups can run system experi-
ments. It may be good for Bell Labs, said Chraplyvy, ‘‘but it’s bad for scientists,
because progress comes from a lot of people racing each other.’’21
Seven months later, Bell Labs reached the trillion-bit milestone. Chra-
plyvy’s group scraped together eight more lasers to make a total of 25. They
split each laser output into beams with two different polarizations, and mod-
ulated each of the 50 signals at 20 billion bits per second. Then they sent it
through 55 kilometers of ﬁber and reported the results at the annual hero
experiments session at the Optical Fiber Communications conference.22 By
then, the split of Lucent Technologies from AT&T had divided the group be-
tween AT&T Research and Bell Labs, although all still worked at the Crawford
Hill building.
However, the high cost of the experiments had not kept the Japanese out
of the race. In fact, Fujitsu Laboratories won it, by combining the signals from
55 lasers modulated at 20 billion bits per second. That yielded 1.1 trillion
bits per second, and Fujitsu sent the signals through 150 kilometers of ﬁber—
nearly three times as much as Bell Labs.23 It was an impressive, headline-
earning demonstration.
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Laboratories was not to be left out. At
the same conference, they reported sending a trillion bits per second through
40 kilometers of ﬁber using a different technique. They generated ten wave-
lengths from a single light source, and modulated each one at 100 billion
bits per second.24
To fans of the ﬁber-optic performance Olympics, those are elegant and awe-
inspiring demonstrations. A dozen years earlier, people dismissed Will Hicks
as a wild-eyed dreamer for suggesting such speeds might be possible. Today
they require extraordinary effort, and some techniques used to set records
may never prove practical. Yet others point the way to future developments,
and commerical versions of the equipment may be only a few years away.

236
CITY OF LIGHT
Today’s Technology
The latest generation of submarine cables operating as I write carry ten billion
bits per second through each ﬁber—2.5 billion bits at each of four wave-
lengths. Optical ampliﬁers simultaneously boost the strengths of all four wave-
length signals in each ﬁber. Because they use optical ampliﬁers, that trans-
mission rate can be multiplied by adding more laser transmitters at additional
wavelengths on each end. The most ambitious system in the works is called
Project Oxygen. It’s a $10 billion global network that is supposed to carry
160 billion bits per second on each ﬁber—10 billion bits per second at each
of 16 wavelengths. With four ﬁber pairs, each length of submarine cable will
carry up to 640 billion bits per second. That’s over a thousand times the
capacity TAT-8 offered a decade ago. When it’s up and running in 2003,
Project Oxygen’s 168,000 kilometers (100,000 miles) of cable will connect
99 points in 78 countries.25
On land, telecommunications companies are multiplying the capacity of
their long-distance systems by adding extra wavelengths. The ﬁrst systems
used four wavelengths, each operating at 2.5 billion bits per second, to send
a total of 10 billion bits per second. 26 In 1997, MCI started ﬁeld tests using
four wavelengths each carrying 10 billion bits per second, a total capacity of
40 billion bits per second. 27 By the end of 1998, Lucent Technologies prom-
ises to deliver a system that can pack a staggering 40 billion bits per second—
10 billion bits at each of 40 wavelengths—through a single ﬁber.28 Other
companies are not far behind.
In early 1997, I visited FiberFest, an exhibition run by the New England
Fiberoptics Council at a suburban Boston hotel, to keep up with the industry
and chat with old friends. It was just a little local show, but I counted 92
exhibitors—triple the size of the ﬁrst ﬁber industry shows I attended back in
1978. The technology ranged from the exotic to the mundane. The Optical
Corporation of America showed its latest devices for wavelength-division mul-
tiplexing, using ideas Will Hicks patented in 1987.29 Nearby, other tables
showed plastic trays for routing and organizing ﬁber-optic cables, products
that are useful, but hardly high-tech.
Bundles of imaging ﬁbers are still around. I stopped to look at one on a
table labeled Schott-CML Fiberoptics Inc. It’s a joint venture of the corporate
descendants of American Optical and Jim Godbey’s original ﬁber-bundle ven-
ture, Electro-Fiberoptics. The bundle is a prototype of a ﬁberscope for the do-it-
yourself market. You can use it to see what went down the drain or to guide
wires through holes in the wall. It’s just what Clarence Hansell was looking
for 70 years ago when he started writing the notes that became his patent
application. If all goes well, you should be able to buy one for under a hundred
dollars soon after this book is in print.
The City of Light has sprawled across the world, vast and complex. I’m
surprised how many people I encounter who know about ﬁber optics, or even
work with them. By one of the odd coincidences of life, one of C. W. Hansell’s

REFLECTIONS ON THE CITY OF LIGHT
237
granddaughters is a ﬁber-optic engineer who once worked for Charles Kao;
she had no idea of her grandfather’s contribution to her ﬁeld.
The Global Fiber Network
I have spoken to people on six continents through glass; my faxes and e-mail
follow the same routes around the globe, but sometimes via satellite links.
Only when I spoke to a scientist working in Antarctica was I sure the words
made part of their trip via satellite. The City of Light has become global.
Fiber-optic communications has spread beyond the ﬁxed telecommunica-
tions network. Compact, lightweight, durable, and high in capacity, optical
ﬁbers are standard equipment for on-the-spot television reporting of sports
and other events. Rich Cerny’s latest company, Telecast Fiber Systems, sup-
plies ﬁber systems for demanding jobs like covering the Olympics; he delights
in the adventures as well as the business. Scientist and explorer Robert Ballard
extols the virtues of ﬁber-optic cables for remote control of robotic vehicles
investigating the ocean ﬂoor by scientists on surface ships.
Fibers go beyond communications to deliver laser energy inside the body
for delicate orthoscopic surgery on joints. Optical ﬁbers molded into concrete
or plastic composites can monitor the strengths of structures from bridges to
aircraft. Subtle changes in light waves passing through ﬁbers looped many
times around a spool can measure rotation, serving as gyroscopes with no
moving parts. The wonders go on and on.
The next wave in ﬁber communications is likely to be networks that route
signals by their wavelength. Light is moving into switches. Africa One, a
submarine cable planned to circle Africa, will use that technology to drop
selected signals at different points. You can think of it as violet goes to Sen-
egal, blue to Zaire, green to Ghana, yellow to Nigeria, orange to Angola, and
red to South Africa, although all the wavelengths will be near 1.55 microm-
eters. Peter Runge says the system will be built, but negotiations among the
more than 40 parties in its international consortium have taken a long time.30
Bob Tkach at Crawford Hill is developing similar technology for use on land,
where the color routing would be to cities like Cleveland, Detroit, Pittsburgh,
and Cincinnati.
In Japan, Europe, and America, developers still talk about bringing ﬁbers
all the way to homes some day. The key is reducing the costs of ﬁber instal-
lations to match those of copper wires. NTT planners think the key is passive
optical networks, which contain few transmitters.31 Paul Shumate at Bellcore
tells me passive optical networks are the key to bringing ﬁber to American
homes as well.32
It’s about time. I live in an older suburb of Boston, where aging cables
make telephone repair trucks a common sight. Technicians spend a lot of
time down the manhole across the street and riding cherry pickers to work

238
CITY OF LIGHT
on the overhead cables. Each time I see them working, I ask hopefully if
they’re putting in ﬁber, but they invariably reply ‘‘no.’’
Erratic, intermittent noise plagues my phone line. It hit when I was talking
to Jason Stark, a Bell Labs scientist who devised an ingenious way to generate
206 wavelengths from a single laser source. He started with a pulse lasting
just a tenth of a trillionth of a second, which contained a wide range of
wavelengths. Passed through a 20-kilometer ﬁber, it stretched 200,000 times,
with the longer wavelengths leading the shorter ones. Then a modulator
chopped the long rainbow pulse into a couple hundred short ones, each of a
different color. Optics can sort the light, routing each color pulse to a different
destination. Thus, one laser transmitter could deliver signals to a couple hun-
dred homes.
The technology is not ready yet. Right now, it’s a big box sitting on a
bulky optical table in his lab. Stark has plans to modify it, squeezing the
components down to semiconductor devices that ﬁt on an integrated wafer.
He hopes that would help solve the problem of bringing ﬁbers to homes
economically.33
I could use it right now. One Friday morning, something knocked out a
cable that runs down my street, and two of my three phone lines died. As a
journalist, I live by the phone; I paced the ﬂoor because I couldn’t get urgent
calls returned. After a thoroughly frustrating day, I was surprised to hear the
phone ring about 5:30. Don Keck was returning a call from a few days earlier.
I apologized for my phone problems and complained about the poor service.
He said the phone company should have been working the light harder. ‘‘No,
Don,’’ I replied, ‘‘They’re still using obsolete old electrons.’’ We both laughed.

239
18
Epilogue
The Boom, the Bubble, and the Bust
Most of the very early optical repeaters, of small band-
widths, will almost certainly ﬁrst demodulate the optical sig-
nals to the base band, and then, via a suitable [electronic]
base-band ampliﬁer, remodulate a GaAs laser. Here well-
tried, almost conventional techniques can be used. But at
the future digital rates of 10 gigabits per second, or even
higher, it is difﬁcult to foresee economic remodulation at
the needed bandwidths . . . In any case, I believe ﬁrmly
that [an all-optical repeater] will prove cheaper. So I am
almost certain that it is in an all-optical version that the real
future lies.
—Alec Reeves, 19691
Unlike the concept of selling dog food on the Internet, tele-
com isn’t going away.
—John Ryan, chief analyst RHK Inc., 20022
I
ended the hardcover edition of this book with ﬁber optics a dramatic suc-
cess. Fiber networks had spread across the globe. Pioneers like Kao, Hock-
ham, Miller, Maurer, Keck, Schultz, and Snitzer were collecting well-deserved
awards. When the Nobel Committee decided to award the 2000 Nobel Prize
in Physics for the foundations of information and communication technology,
they split it between optics and electronics. Integrated-circuit inventor Jack
Kilby shared the prize with the developers of the heterostructures vital for
practical semiconductor lasers, Zhores Alferov and Herbert Kroemer. Other

240
CITY OF LIGHT
innovators were climbing ladders of success in industry and academia. The
revolutionary technology was being accepted into the establishment, where
old timers talked about the glory days.
Yet Keck was right; the revolution wasn’t over. Before things could get
seriously boring, a new generation of revolutionaries emerged from the labs.
They were armed with optical ampliﬁers and wavelength division multiplex-
ing, which let them process signals as light instead of as electrons. The second
ﬁber-optic revolution brought a bandwidth boom that carried ﬁber into the
spotlight, where the heat of the market created a bubble that—like all bub-
bles—led to a bust. Fiber rushed in to quench the Internet’s thirst for band-
width, and not even Alec Reeves could have foreseen that ﬁber could deliver
too much bandwidth.
The Quest for Optical Ampliﬁcation
The second ﬁber-optic revolution started quietly in the mid-1980s. Dave
Payne had not set out to start a revolution when he began the work at
Southampton that led to the erbium-doped ﬁber ampliﬁer. He hadn’t even set
out to invent an optical ampliﬁer. His goal was to develop optical ﬁbers with
unusual properties that let them sense changes in the surrounding environ-
ment. That meant exploring new territory, and scientists know that such
exploration can lead to breakthroughs.
Payne had stayed at Southampton after earning the university’s ﬁrst doc-
torate in ﬁber optics. Fiber sensing had become hot in the early 1980s. The
U.S. Naval Research Laboratory was developing ﬁber-optic acoustic sensors
to sit on the sea ﬂoor and listen for Soviet submarines. Payne was making
ﬁbers that controlled light polarization, which the Navy needed for its acoustic
sensors. But he kept his eyes open for other ideas, and spotted one from Eli
Snitzer, then at the United Technologies Research Center in Connecticut.
Snitzer had found that a ﬁber containing a dash of an element called neo-
dymium could sense temperature by variations in its light transmission.3
Payne’s specialty was making unusual ﬁbers, and in 1985 his group de-
veloped a new way to add a little neodymium to the core of a single-mode
ﬁber. The process could be used for a whole family of 14 elements called rare
earths, which included neodymium. Importantly, adding the rare earth had
little effect on ﬁber loss.4
Neodymium also made good lasers, so it was natural for Payne to try
making his neodymium-doped ﬁber into a laser. His group put mirrors on
both ends of a two-meter length, and ﬁred light from a gallium arsenide laser
down the ﬁber. The neodymium atoms absorbed that wavelength and released
the light energy as a laser beam, as they did in bulk glass.5 It wasn’t the ﬁrst
ﬁber laser, but it was a big advance over earlier ones, so Payne’s group began
playing with it. ‘‘We were making kilometer-long lasers just to see what hap-
pened,’’ Payne recalled.6

EPILOGUE: THE BOOM, THE BUBBLE, AND THE BUST
241
They noted that a ﬁber with a doped core could be used as an optical
ampliﬁer. All they needed was to remove the mirrors and ﬁre a weak pulse
of light at the right wavelength down the ﬁber. That input would stimulate
excited neodymium atoms to emit light at exactly the same wavelength, am-
plifying the signal. Initially the idea didn’t seem promising. Neodymium atoms
emitted at 1.06 micrometers, far from the best transmission windows of glass
ﬁbers. Stimulated emission from neodymium also didn’t seem strong enough.
To be useful for communications, an optical ampliﬁer had to multiply the
power of an input signal by a factor of 1000, or 30 decibels, which Payne
didn’t think was possible in a few meters of ﬁber. Instead, he played with
lasers, where power built up as light bounced back and forth between the
mirrors at the opposite ends of the ﬁber.
Other rare earth elements also had useful optical properties, so the South-
ampton group also added them to the cores of ﬁbers.7 They soon made lasers
from ﬁbers containing another rare earth called erbium, which emits strongly
at 1.53 micrometers. The wavelength was interesting because it is very close
to where silica ﬁbers are most transparent. Experiments showed the erbium
laser wavelength could be varied across a range of 25 nanometers.8
The physics of erbium didn’t look promising, but the Southampton group
studied it closely. Only slowly did they realize that the nature of their ﬁber
laser experiments was changing the rules. They excited the erbium atoms by
focusing the blue-green beam from an argon gas laser into the core of a single-
mode ﬁber. The power from the argon laser aimed into the ﬁber was modest,
but concentrating it in the tiny core excited most of the erbium atoms, elim-
inating the loss they had expected from unexcited erbium. ‘‘It took us 26
publications on ﬁber lasers before we realized that, if we took the mirrors off
and looked at what the gain was, we’d have a huge gain of 30 decibels’’
needed for an ampliﬁer, Payne recalled.9
Their ﬁrst experiments in late 1986 lived up to expectations. They recorded
peak ampliﬁcation of 26 decibels during pulses from the argon laser. Critically,
they also saw low noise, which is essential for practical optical ampliﬁcation.10
Later they boosted the peak gain to 28 decibels by exciting the erbium atoms
with red light from a different laser. They also made another critical discovery:
erbium atoms could amplify light by a factor of ten (10 decibels) across a 25-
nanometer range of wavelengths.11
The ﬁrst experiment suggested that optical ampliﬁers could extend the
reach of systems transmitting one signal per optical ﬁber. The second exper-
iment held out another hope—that erbium could multiply the bandwidth of
a single ﬁber by amplifying signals at two or more different wavelengths.
The idea is called wavelength-division multiplexing, and the old Bell Sys-
tem had tried it in its ill-fated Northeast Corridor system. The idea of sending
signals simultaneously at two different wavelengths wasn’t bad; the problem
had been the technology Bell used. Every seven kilometers the optical signals
had to be converted to electrical form and ampliﬁed, then used to drive a new
laser transmitter. That required separating the two signals by wavelength and
directing each one to a separate receiver and transmitter.

242
CITY OF LIGHT
The erbium ampliﬁer offered a way to get around that awkwardness. In
principle a single device could amplify signals at multiple wavelengths with-
out converting them into electronic format. The question was whether the
technology could be tamed.
Competition and Pump Bands
Southampton didn’t have the ﬁeld to itself. Other groups were already study-
ing ﬁber lasers, and it was only a small step to ﬁber ampliﬁers. French phys-
icist Emmanuel Desurvire led the charge at Bell Labs. He arrived in 1986,
fresh from a stint at Stanford University, and built his own erbium-ﬁber am-
pliﬁer. Although Southampton had built one ﬁrst, Desurvire made the detailed
measurements that he needed to develop a theoretical model that showed
how to optimize its length.12
The Southampton and Bell results lured others into the ﬁeld, but big prac-
tical problems remained. At the top of the list was the need for a better way
to power the ampliﬁer. The early experiments required massive and costly
lasers that needed tens of kilowatts of electricity, a continuous ﬂow of cooling
water, and tender loving care from laser specialists. They wouldn’t have a
prayer outside of a laser lab, but they were the only lasers that emitted the
right wavelengths.
What developers wanted was a compact and efﬁcient semiconductor diode
laser able to excite erbium atoms. The problem was to match a wavelength
that excited erbium with one emitted by a semiconductor laser. British Tele-
com Research Labs found several other wavelengths that could excite erbium
atoms.13 Southampton found that none were ideal. Only 980 nanometers
looked like it would excite erbium efﬁciently,14 and that wasn’t available from
a standard semiconductor laser. But the prospects were good enough that
Payne turned his attention to that wavelength.
Meanwhile, Eli Snitzer popped up with a different idea at Polaroid, where
Will Hicks had lured him to develop advanced ﬁber systems. Erbium absorbed
light as well as emitted it near 1530 nanometers. Everyone else thought the
emission would cancel the absorption, but Snitzer found an important differ-
ence. Absorption is much stronger at shorter wavelengths, so erbium atoms
can absorb light at those wavelengths faster than they can emit it. Nobody
had tried to use this effect before, but that didn’t scare Snitzer. In his ﬁrst
experiments, he showed that a laboratory laser emitting at 1490 or 1500
nanometers could power an erbium ampliﬁer.15 Desurvire reﬁned the idea,
and soon demonstrated an impressive 37 decibels of gain in an erbium ﬁber
ampliﬁer pumped at 1480 nanometers.16
The big appeal of 1480 nanometers was that semiconductor lasers could
be developed easily for that wavelength, but neither Snitzer and Desurvire
had them. Desurvire couldn’t interest Bell Labs specialists in developing semi-
conductor lasers for that wavelength.17 However, within a year after Snitzer’s

EPILOGUE: THE BOOM, THE BUBBLE, AND THE BUST
243
experiment the NTT Transmission Systems Laboratory had a 40-milliwatt
semiconductor laser pumping an erbium ﬁber ampliﬁer.18 Later that year, NTT
reached ampliﬁer gain of 46.5 decibels.19 Semiconductor lasers were harder
to make at 980 nanometers, but the old RCA Laboratories, by then spun off
as the David Sarnoff Research Center, soon succeeded.20
Promise and Problems
The rapid-ﬁre development of erbium-ﬁber ampliﬁers dazzled even the devel-
opers themselves. By 1989, they had reached the threshold of success, optical
ampliﬁers that could be powered with a semiconductor laser. That was an
improvement over the cumbersome old repeaters that had to convert optical
signals into electronic form for ampliﬁcation, but it was not a revolution.
The revolution would come if optical ampliﬁers could handle more than
one signal at once. That could multiply the ﬁber’s bandwidth by the number
of signals. Send signals through a system at 20 separate wavelengths, and
you multiplied its capacity twenty-fold. Payne had already shown that erbium
could amplify a range of wavelengths, but that might not be good enough.
Trying to amplify two or more signals at once runs the risk of crosstalk. Noise
from one signal might mix with the other signal, scrambling them together
in an unintelligible mess.
To assess the possibilities, Desurvire performed a crucial experiment. He
sent signals at two separate wavelengths through the same erbium ampliﬁer,
and carefully measured their properties. He modulated both signals at two
billion bits per second, and tested them at different pairs of wavelengths. He
found very low levels of crosstalk, indicating the two channels had minimal
effects on each other.21 Bell Labs was still pumping its ampliﬁers with bulky
argon lasers, but Desurvire said that detail shouldn’t matter. His test had
shown that erbium ampliﬁers could handle multiple wavelengths at once.
The next step for the technology was in the ﬁber-optic performance Olym-
pics informally called ‘‘hero experiments.’’ Teams of top engineers ﬁlled their
labs with costly equipment and set out to see how far and how fast they could
send signals through optical ﬁbers. Viewed from afar it seemed an eccentric
and costly competition, with rules continually redeﬁned. Whenever Bell Labs
jumped into the lead, they issued press releases heralding a record-setting
demonstration. Yet the hero experiments were serious probes of the ﬁber-
optic frontier. Not all the new ideas proved practical, even those that set
records, but many hero experiments foreshadowed the cutting edge of com-
mercial systems a few years later.
The state of the art in 1989 was ampliﬁcation of one wavelength at a time.
A group from Bellcore managed to transmit separate signals at 16 different
wavelengths through a single ﬁber, but they didn’t use optical ampliﬁers, and
each channel carried only a modest 155 million bits per second.22 The fol-
lowing year engineers from KDD, the Japanese overseas telephone company,

244
CITY OF LIGHT
sent signals at four separate wavelengths through a series of six erbium am-
pliﬁers and 459 kilometers of ﬁber.23 Each channel carried 2.4 billion bits per
second.
Other groups encoded their signals in fancy ways to try to make them
resistant to degradation. The KDD team didn’t bother. They just turned the
light from each transmitter off for zero bits and on for one bit, a coding called
NRZ that was used throughout the digital telephone network. It was far from
clear that they were blazing a trail for a revolution.
Despite all their attractions, optical ampliﬁers have a serious inherent lim-
itation. They depend on stimulated emission, which from an engineer’s view-
point is an analog process. At its best, an analog ampliﬁer merely multiplies
the strength of the signal it receives. If the input contains noise, it multiplies
the noise along with the signal. If dispersion has stretched the input pulses,
it multiplies the stretched-out pulses. In short, an optical ampliﬁer turns up
the power but does nothing to clean up the signal.
In contrast, sophisticated digital electro-optic repeaters do more than am-
plify the signal they receive. They regenerate the original series of digital
pulses. Discrimination circuits decide if the input power represents a zero or
a one. Timing circuits ﬁt the pulses into their proper time slots. After ﬁguring
out what the received signal should be, the electronics regenerate a nice clean
series of pulses. TAT-8 used such regenerators to send sharp digital signals
across the Atlantic.
Optical ampliﬁers produce some noise, but in practice the main concern
was the dispersion of pulses as they traveled long distances through the ﬁber.
Dispersion wasn’t a problem as long as single-mode ﬁbers were transmitting
near their zero-dispersion wavelength of 1.31 micrometers, with repeaters
about every 50 kilometers. However, erbium ampliﬁes at 1.55 micrometers,
where single-mode ﬁbers have higher dispersion. Realizing the promise of
erbium ampliﬁers required a way to control that dispersion.
One approach is to transmit signals in a form not affected by dispersion.
Linn Mollenauer of Bell Labs had already shown that special pulses called
solitons could overcome dispersion by delicately balancing it against another
effect called self-phase modulation that can distort light pulses in an optical
ﬁber. While dispersion tries to stretch the duration of the pulse, self-phase
modulation tries to stretch out the range of wavelengths it contains. As long
as the power is high enough to trigger the distortion, and the pulse has the
right shape, the tug of war between the two effects lets the pulse pass unal-
tered.24 Solitons needed optical ampliﬁcation to keep the pulses powerful
enough. Mollenauer had earlier tried an exotic ampliﬁcation process, but er-
bium ampliﬁers worked better. A series of experiments made the future look
bright for solitons and erbium ampliﬁers.
A different approach is to control dispersion of the ﬁber itself without doing
special tricks with the transmitted signals. In the early 1980s, both Corning
and British Telecom had designed special single-mode ﬁbers with complex core
structures which shifted their zero-dispersion wavelengths to 1.55 microme-
ters.25 The emergence of erbium ampliﬁers renewed interest in dispersion-

EPILOGUE: THE BOOM, THE BUBBLE, AND THE BUST
245
shifted ﬁber for long-haul systems. The Bell Labs submarine cable group set-
tled on dispersion-shifted ﬁber and erbium ampliﬁers for a new generation of
high-speed systems. Neal Bergano previewed the technology in a 1991 hero
experiment which transmitted ﬁve billion bits per second through 9000 ki-
lometers of dispersion-shifted ﬁber.26 Later AT&T used that technology for the
TAT-12 transatlantic cable switched on in 1996.
Multiplying Bandwidth
Wavelength-division multiplexing was simply a new approach to sharing a
limited spectrum. Radio stations do it by each broadcasting at a separate
assigned frequency. Each television channel likewise has its own frequency.
If the frequencies are assigned carefully, the signals don’t interfere with each
other.
The principle of wavelength-division multiplexing had been demonstrated
much earlier in ﬁbers. It is fairly simple over the short distances that ﬁbers
can carry light signals without ampliﬁcation. The biggest problem was com-
bining the light signals at the input and separating them at the output. De-
survire had shown that erbium ﬁber ampliﬁers could transmit signals at two
separate wavelengths. But as experimenters started adding new channels,
troubles mounted for both solitons and dispersion control.
Early soliton experiments looked encouraging. Bell noted that solitons at
different wavelengths ‘‘collided’’ with each other in their ﬁrst experiments,
but still managed to send a pair of signals at two billion bits per second
through a chain of optical ampliﬁers and ﬁber spanning 9000 kilometers.27
Mollenauer kept stretching the distance he could send a pair of channels, ﬁrst
to 11,000 kilometers,28 then to 13,000 kilometers.29 He also increased the
speed per channel, eventually to 10 billion bits per second. Yet soliton colli-
sions posed a serious problem. They were inevitable because the speed of light
in the ﬁber varies with wavelength, so pulses at the faster wavelength pass
those at the slower wavelength. And they were bad news because the signals
interacted enough to upset the delicate balancing act of soliton transmission.
That gave solitons ‘‘the jitters,’’ so the output pulses didn’t fall into the proper
time slots.
Adding wavelengths also produced problems in dispersion controlled sys-
tems. Engineers used ﬁbers with their zero dispersion point shifted to 1.55
micrometers to keep pulse dispersion from building up over long distances.
The problem is that signals transmitted near the zero dispersion wavelength
stay in phase with each other over long distances. The light signals interact
very weakly, but crosstalk builds up if the two wavelengths stay in phase for
hundreds or thousands of kilometers.
The dilemma looked bad at ﬁrst. Dispersion along a long run of ﬁber had
to be kept low or the pulses would run together. Yet if low dispersion kept
the pulses in phase over the whole ﬁber, crosstalk would scramble the signals.
Engineers solved the problem when they realized that they didn’t have to use

246
CITY OF LIGHT
the same type of ﬁber along the whole system. If they used two types with
different values of dispersion, the different dispersions could cancel each other
out. If one ﬁber let the short wavelengths fall behind, they could balance that
by adding a second ﬁber that let the short wavelengths go faster. At any point
along the ﬁber, the dispersion was high enough to prevent crosstalk. But the
sum total of dispersion in all the ﬁber segments would be low.
Corning developed a special ﬁber that allowed the slow wavelengths to
catch up with the fast ones, canceling out the dispersion of other ﬁbers, which
solved the problem.30 By 1995, NTT was able to send 10 billion bits per
second at each of 16 separate wavelengths through 1000 kilometers of ﬁber
using dispersion compensation and erbium ampliﬁers.31 Solitons, which had
gotten off to an early lead, were now falling behind. Dispersion control was
simpler and easier, and it was ready when the need came for more bandwidth.
Internet Bandwidth
Bandwidth in communications always seemed like closet space in a house—
you could never have enough. Through the 1990s, experience conﬁrmed that
analogy. Long-distance companies had tried to build ample bandwidth during
the ﬁrst ﬁber-optic boom of the 1980s, often including extra ﬁbers for future
growth. But by the mid 1990s those ﬁber cables were ﬁlling up. Fibers had
brought down the cost and increased the demand for long-distance calls. Fax
machines were humming with trafﬁc that would have gone by mail or express
carrier a few years earlier, further increasing demand. But the real growth
was in computer data.
The spread of personal computers in the 1980s created a demand for data
connections. They began with 300-baud modems linking computers to each
other through the phone network. Commercial digital communication ser-
vices followed, with modem speeds increasing. The Internet followed. It began
as a network linking computers at a number of government and academic
research centers. It grew as new users adapted it for electronic mail. It took
off with the spread of the World Wide Web. Launched in 1991 by a group
at the European Center for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Switzerland, the web
had only 500 servers at the start of 1994. By the end of the year 10,000
servers were connected.32 That drew more users, and business smelled money
and followed.
Low-bandwidth modem connections were ﬁne for text-only e-mail. The
graphics-intensive Web needed much more bandwidth. Corporate data trans-
mission requirements also were growing. Data trafﬁc exploded. For a brief,
heady interval in 1995 and 1996, Internet trafﬁc doubled every three to four
months, as hordes of new users discovered the net. That was a factor of 10
or more a year, an incredible growth rate by any standard. Internet trafﬁc
was but a small fraction of the volume of ordinary telephone trafﬁc. Yet
telephone trafﬁc was growing a mere 10% a year. It seemed only a matter of
time before the Internet would dwarf the venerable telephone industry.

EPILOGUE: THE BOOM, THE BUBBLE, AND THE BUST
247
Venture capitalists and entrepreneurs arrived on the Internet scene with
gold glittering in their eyes and briefcases crammed with business plans. They
were all too eager to believe the Internet would continue doubling every three
or four months. Soon, that growth rate became an Internet myth, repeated
time and again and quoted everywhere, but with its sources always vague.
In reality, the growth rate settled down to a respectable doubling every year
by 1997, but nobody noticed.33 Or, more to the point, nobody wanted to
notice.
Like any gold rush, the ﬁrst people on the scene staked the most obvious
claims, and some made serious money selling out to newcomers. Their proﬁts
drew more investors, ready to throw money at anything related to the Inter-
net. No one seemed to care that few of the new businesses were proﬁtable.
Everyone was looking to the future. Businesses were warned that the Internet
was changing everything; life was accelerating to ‘‘Internet speed.’’ Wild
claims were made that the Internet economy would replace old fashioned
‘‘bricks and mortar’’ stores.
As hype eclipsed reality, the Internet boom became the Internet bubble.
Investors fell for it hook, line, and sinker. More investors followed, fearing
they might miss their chance to grow rich from the Internet revolution. Other
investors, thinking they had lost their chance to get in on the ground ﬂoor
of the Internet, looked around for related ﬁelds where they might have a
chance to cash in. Their eyes soon fell on telecommunications.
The connection was clear. Telecommunications was the infrastructure vi-
tal for operating the Internet. Network operators were adding new ﬁbers to
handle the new trafﬁc generated by the Internet, creating a market for new
hardware. Fiber-optic technology was advancing steadily. And telecommu-
nications seemed to offer a safer bet for the cautious investor. Communication
systems were solid compared to ephemeral ‘‘dot.com’’ companies. Commu-
nication systems were real hardware, more substantial than a business that
consisted of a web site, an advertising program, and a warehouse full of pet
food.
The Telecom Boom
Wavelength-division multiplexing emerged from the lab as the Internet was
going through its peak growth in 1995 and 1996. The cable division of the
Italian giant Pirelli, the Lucent Technologies group spun off from AT&T in
October 1996, and a Maryland-based startup named Ciena all introduced
commercial systems.34 Ciena squeezed an impressive 16 channels into the
range of erbium optical ampliﬁers, with wavelengths only 1.6 nanometers
apart.
In theory, multiplying the number of optical channels could multiply a
ﬁber’s capacity. You could start with a single wavelength, and add new wave-
lengths as you needed to upgrade the capacity. In practice, it wasn’t that
easy. Many old ﬁber systems wouldn’t meet the new transmission require-

248
CITY OF LIGHT
ments. Nor could you add new wavelengths to an erbium ﬁber ampliﬁer with-
out adjusting its performance. Yet the potential capacity was there, and that
was important because of the way large telecommunications networks are
built.
Long-distance networks require rights of way to route their cables. Often
these lie along railroad lines, highways, electric transmission lines, or gas
pipelines, although some run through farmland. Network operators lease the
right of way and dig holes in which they lay plastic ducts that hold the cable.
These days the holes often cost much more than the hardware that goes into
them. Urban construction is particularly expensive because it requires open-
ing existing streets, working around other utilities, then neatly repairing the
street. The hardware for wavelength division multiplexing is expensive, but
it’s cheaper than digging new holes in downtown Boston or Manhattan.
Deregulation also opened the door for new companies to build their own
networks. Some had their own rights of way, like Williams, which owned a
network of gas pipelines. Others leased right of way along railroads or high-
ways. Submarine cables began to proliferate. Project Oxygen (see chapter 17)
never raised the $14 billion it needed to build its global network, but another
company emerged to ﬁll that market niche. Founded in 1997, Global Crossing
started with a transatlantic cable called Atlantic Crossing, and at its peak in
2001 had ﬁber routes spanning 100,000 miles on sea and land.35
The demand seemed inexhaustible, especially to planners trained to think
that long-distance networks could never have enough capacity. Like their
Internet counterparts, telecommunication companies began to believe ‘‘if you
build it, they will come.’’ It cost much less to add extra ﬁbers to a cable for
future growth, or to add more wavelengths to an installed ﬁber, than it did
to dig a whole new hole in the ground.
Meanwhile, ﬁber technology advanced at a breakneck pace. Engineers mul-
tiplied the speed per channel to 10 billion bits per second, but the biggest
advances came in channel count. Optics specialists sliced the spectrum into
thinner and thinner slivers. The thinner the slices, the more optical channels
they could ﬁt into the range of the erbium ampliﬁers. Then they invented a
new type of erbium ampliﬁer that worked at wavelengths from about 1.57
to 1.61 micrometers.
Hero experiments had packed signals at enough wavelengths to squeeze a
trillion bits per second through a single ﬁber in 1996, but the signals couldn’t
go very far. The imperfections of erbium optical ampliﬁers had limited them
to a mere 150 kilometers, too short a distance for long-distance networks.
The hero experiment groups cracked the distance barrier at the February
1998 Optical Fiber Communications Conference in San Jose. Bell Labs reached
400 kilometers using 100 channels, each carrying 10 billion bits per second.36
NTT pushed to 600 kilometers using 50 channels, each carrying 20 billion
bits per second. A record attendance of 8446 people showed the healthy
growth of the industry.
Commercial systems couldn’t match that speed, but they were improving
quickly. The fastest systems in use by early 1998 carried 2.5 billion bits per

EPILOGUE: THE BOOM, THE BUBBLE, AND THE BUST
249
second on each wavelength, and could carry up to 64 channels per ﬁber. It’s
unlikely that any then carried a full load of channels, but higher speeds were
still in the ofﬁng. At the 1998 conference, Lucent claimed that by the end of
the year it would deliver systems that could transmit 10 billion bits per second
on 40 separate wavelengths through a single ﬁber—40% of the rate achieved
in its hero experiment.37
The Bubble
The manic momentum of the stock market shifted into high gear in 1999.
In 1998, the technology-laden NASDAQ index rose from 1574 to 2193, a
healthy 39%. In 1999 it nearly doubled, reaching 4069 at the end of Decem-
ber. The bubble that started with dot.com companies in the Internet market
had spread to communications.
The rationale was simple and compelling if you breathed the heady air of
the market. The Internet was going to revolutionize commerce, so big gains
would come to those who ramped up quickly to stake their claims. The tele-
communications industry would build the infrastructure needed for electronic
commerce. The ﬁber-optics industry would supply the hardware to meet the
booming demand.
In some ways, telecommunications seemed a safer investment than the
dot.coms. A telecommunications network was a solid physical entity. A
dot.com was little more than a Web site, a marketing campaign, and a ware-
house. Investors not ready to take the plunge into all-new Internet ventures
could feel safe with a telecommunication network that seemed sure to remain
in operation. If nobody bought dog food over the Internet, somebody would
still call long distance.
Deregulation spawned a small army of new telecommunications compa-
nies, and they raised money to build their networks. Global Crossing was
most ambitious, but other companies had their own plans for international
networks and national backbone systems. Other companies aimed to build
regional networks. Metromedia Fiber Networks set out to build ﬁber-optic
loops around major cities that would connect to large businesses. Meanwhile,
cellular telephone companies were buying new spectrum to expand mobile
phone services.
The doors to opportunity seemed to be opening. A record 10,206 people
attended the optical ﬁber conference in February 1999, which had outgrown
the San Jose Convention Center and moved to San Diego. For the ﬁrst time
in three years, a hero experiment took a big step upward in speed, as NTT
reached three trillion bits per second through 40 kilometers of ﬁber.38 The
technology didn’t look very practical, but the speed was impressive.
The business was thriving. A few new companies appeared, promising
faster and better components and systems. Established companies stepped up
their development pace. Entrepreneurs with business plans in hand made the
rounds of venture capitalists. In March, the Dow-Jones industrial average

250
CITY OF LIGHT
passed 10,000 for the ﬁrst time. In May 1999, a then little-known energy
company called Enron created a market for telecommunication companies to
trade bandwidth on their ﬁbers.39 The NASDAQ composite average kept climb-
ing, crossing the 3000 level in November, and closing the year just above
4000.
On March 7, 2000, the NASDAQ crossed the 5000 mark for the ﬁrst time
and the annual Optical Fiber Communication conference opened in Baltimore.
Reﬂecting the boom, the opening plenary speaker was George Gilder, a tech-
nology writer and analyst who heralded the potential of ﬁber in the pages of
his Gilder Technology Report. Will Hicks had inspired Gilder’s vision of virtually
unlimited ﬁber bandwidth, and Gilder, in turn, inspired a small army of well-
heeled investors to bet on ﬁber.
The place was mobbed, overwhelming the conference staff. Lines wound
around the outside of the convention center, where people waited hours to
get in. Business reporters thronged the press room, traditionally the realm of
technology writers. Venture capitalists and ﬁnanciers roamed the crowded
convention ﬂoor. When the dust ﬁnally settled, the organizers put attendance
at a record 16,934.40
I wandered the show ﬂoor, amazed at the scale of the exhibits sprawling
over 121,000 square feet of ﬂoor space. I was surprised to run into a laser
physicist who had worked for many years at a government laboratory. When
I asked what he was doing at a ﬁber meeting, he told me he’d done a bit of
consulting some years back for a laser company called Uniphase, and had
taken his pay in stock. A series of mergers had followed, building a company
called JDS Uniphase into a giant in the ﬁeld, and his little stake into some
serious money. He didn’t say how much, but I guessed from the gleam in his
eyes it was several million.
The NASDAQ closed at 5046.86 on Thursday, March 9, the last day the
show exhibits were open, up 149 points and the ﬁrst closing over 5000. It
opened at 5060.34 on Friday, and later hit a record 5132.52 before closing
at 5048.62. That marked the peak of the bubble. The following Monday the
NASDAQ closed at 4907.24. It was all downhill from there, but no one re-
alized it was the beginning of the end.
At ﬁrst, it looked like investors were nervous about the dot.coms. They
had ample reason to be nervous. Some were obviously losing cash; hardly
any were obviously proﬁtable. The ﬁrst big failures came in May and June.
By late summer, dot.coms were dropping like ﬂies, and the NASDAQ was
drifting downward.
The telecommunications bubble continued. In part, it was sheer momen-
tum. It takes a long time to gear up to build a large network. Construction
has to be arranged months in advance. Equipment must be ordered. Some
optical hardware had been in short supply, so companies had placed multiple
orders with different suppliers, ﬁguring they would need it all anyway. In
part, telecommunications investors recognized that some dot.com deaths were
inevitable because too many companies were competing in some ﬁelds.

EPILOGUE: THE BOOM, THE BUBBLE, AND THE BUST
251
Yet in part the industry had fallen into the peculiar reality distortion ﬁeld
of a market bubble. My phone was ringing constantly with questions about
ﬁber optics, many of them naive. Venture capitalists were ﬂooded with busi-
ness plans, but more than a few were dubious. Companies were deluged with
orders, but didn’t check to see if their new customers could pay their bills.
We deluded ourselves into thinking it could go on forever.
The ﬂow of capital continued. Start-ups sprouted like weeds. Narinder Ka-
pany returned to entrepeneurship, as chairman of a company called K2 Op-
tronics in Sunnyvale, California, with his son Raj Kapany as president and
chief executive. Will Hicks continued working on high-bandwidth projects.
Dozens of engineers and executives struck out on their own with business
plans in hand.
Mergers took stock values into the stratosphere. In July 2000, JDS Uni-
phase announced plans to merge with another maker of ﬁber-optic compo-
nents, SDL Inc. On the day of the announcement, the deal was worth $41
billion in JDS stock, just a few billion less than the gross domestic product of
oil-rich Kuwait. The ﬁber-optic bubble had created incredible wealth. Suc-
cessful entrepreneurs I had known for years were worth hundreds of millions
of dollars on paper. At the peak, the president of SDL was worth over a billion
dollars, putting him number 218 on the Forbes list of 400 richest Americans
that was compiled in August 2000.41
By the fall of 2000, telecommunications stocks were slipping from their
peaks. The NASDAQ composite sank below 4000 in early September, and by
mid-December was below 3000 for good. Yet the industry didn’t want to
believe the gold rush was over. One day, in a contrary mood, I suggested to
someone that ‘‘tulips’’ might be a good image for the market. ‘‘Don’t say
that,’’ he warned, as if mentioning the infamous seventeenth century Dutch
bubble might deﬂate the ﬁber bubble.
The real danger to the ﬁber-optic bubble was reality. Telephone trafﬁc was
growing at only a modest rate. Internet growth had slowed to roughly dou-
bling every year. But contractors were working overtime laying new long-
distance ﬁber-optic cables on land and at sea. Analysts began to wonder if
the supply was exceeding the demand. Like tulips, the possibility of a ﬁber
glut was something the industry did not want to consider.
The Bust
The Optical Fiber Communication conference moved to Anaheim, California
in March 2001, across the street from Disneyland. The choice had nothing
to do with being next door to the ‘‘magic kingdom.’’ The affair had reached
a size where few convention centers could handle it. The organizers expected
more than 30,000 people, and they counted 38,015 from March 19–22,
more than double the Baltimore crowd. The trade show also more than dou-
bled in size, with 970 companies spread through 270,000 square feet of

252
CITY OF LIGHT
space. Anyone who tried to see all the exhibits would have had less than a
minute and a half per booth.
Don Keck stood in Corning’s sprawling booth when I stopped by. I asked
if the ﬁeld’s ﬁrst technical conference, back in 1975, could have ﬁt into the
Corning booth. He looked around and said it probably could have. The booths
were bigger and more elaborate than ever before, and hundreds of new com-
panies had showed up. Many were start-ups, funded during the preceding
two years of frantic growth, and making their ﬁrst public appearance.
The hero experiments were out in full force. A team from Japan’s NEC
Corp. had pushed a record 10.92 trillion bits per second through 117 kilo-
meters of ﬁber, by using a new developmental type of optical ampliﬁer along
with erbium ampliﬁers. Alcatel engineers squeezed 10.24 trillion bits per sec-
ond through 100 kilometers with only erbium ampliﬁers by packing the
wavelengths closer together.42 Both were elegant experiments, but lacked the
practical impact of demonstrations that spanned transoceanic distances. An-
other Alcatel team sent three trillion bits per second through 7380 kilometers
of ﬁber, enough to span the Atlantic. A team from TyCom Laboratories, the
part of the old Bell Labs that had developed submarine cables, sent a trillion
bits through 9000 kilometers, enough to span the Paciﬁc.43
Top executives generally were optimistic at a forum held before the con-
ference at the Disneyland Hotel. They talked about plans to boost transmission
speeds on each optical channel to a staggering 40 billion bits per second. It
wasn’t clear how they would solve the formidable technical problems, but no
one saw show-stoppers.
Looking back, there were warnings that all was not rosy. In the opening
talk, John Dexheimer, a consultant with years of experience in investment
banking, warned of a $250 billion ‘‘debt hangover’’ of money borrowed to
build new networks. He noted that failures had gone beyond on-line pet shops
to include a well-funded telecommunications start-up, Ironbridge, which had
hired Paul Lazay as its CEO. Looking back over the past year, Dexheimer said
that the demand for optics stock had exceeded the supply, and some stupid
ideas had been funded. ‘‘I got a couple of invitations to hear pitches for a
company that could transport light at twice the speed of light,’’44 he said,
drawing laughter from a technically savvy audience that appreciated the ab-
surdity.
Walking the exhibit ﬂoor, I saw the truth of Dexheimer’s warning that too
many companies were trying to do the same things. I also saw elaborate and
expensive booths that offered no real information about what the companies
did. Yet those problems hardly seemed to threaten the whole industry.
In reality, the air of optimism was piped direct from Fantasyland. The
industry had charged ahead so fast that it had run off the edge of a cliff
without realizing it. The laws of cartoon physics held across the street from
Mickey Mouse’s kingdom. Cartoon characters don’t feel the pull of gravity
until they look down. Yet like Wile E. Coyote in hot pursuit of Roadrunner,
the ﬁber industry eventually noticed the lack of foot traction and looked down.

EPILOGUE: THE BOOM, THE BUBBLE, AND THE BUST
253
Then the unfriendly pull of gravity took hold, and the industry dropped
like a rock. Stock prices ended up as ﬂat as Wile E. Coyote at the base of the
cliff.
Cutbacks began over the summer, as telecommunication stocks hit the
skids. By September a grim joke was making the rounds. If you’d invested
$1000 in Nortel stock a year earlier, at the peak of the market, you would
have only $72 left. You would have done better by investing the $1000 in
Budweiser—the beer, not the stock. If you lived in a state with a deposit law,
you could have cashed in the empties for $76.45 The joke left open the ques-
tion of whether you got a worse hangover from buying the stock or drinking
the beer. In any case, some serious sobering up was necessary.
In the cold, hard light of morning, the hung-over telecommunications in-
dustry found itself in a big, ugly mess. It had run up hundreds of billions of
dollars of debt building new networks. In the process it had overbuilt and
overbought. Internet growth had fallen far short of the wild projections that
the industry had wanted to believe. Companies had installed too many cables,
and prices had dropped too fast for them to make any money.
The ﬁber glut was real. At the start of 2003, the consulting ﬁrm Tele-
geography estimated that only 10 percent of the long-distance ﬁbers in the
United States were lit, and that those ﬁbers carried only 10 percent of their
maximum capacity.46 Only one percent of the network’s ultimate capacity
was in use.
Yet that number is deceptive because the economics of ﬁber-optic systems
are peculiar. Networks need spare capacity because their loads vary over time.
Buying rights of way and digging holes to install cables is very expensive.
Network operators plan for the long term, and it makes economic sense for
them to put extra ﬁbers in the cables, and lay extra ducts for future cables.
In the long run, that costs far less than going back and digging another hole
in the ground. Adding extra wavelength to existing ﬁbers isn’t cheap; it re-
quires special optics and transmitters that ﬁt into particular wavelength slots.
Network operators didn’t spent 100 times too much money laying ﬁber—
maybe only double or triple what they should have.
The 2002 Optical Fiber Communication Conference was held at the same
place and time as the 2001 show, but the magic was gone. The number of
paid exhibitors rose more than 20%, from 970 to 1204, but many were
running on fumes. Weeks before the show, one ailing company tried to peddle
its booth space on-line for half price. Others never showed up because they
were out of money, leaving a scattering of empty booths. Attendance slipped
to about 33,000, a small drop compared to the job cuts at some companies.
The management forum had a different air as well. Gone were worries
about ‘‘feeding the beast’’ of tremendous growth. Instead, the still-stunned
survivors tried to understand how the train wreck had happened and how to
get back on the tracks. There were no easy answers. Top market analyst
John Ryan called 1999 through 2001 ‘‘the drunken sailor years,’’ where the
telecommunications companies spent nearly $50 billion to buy equipment

254
CITY OF LIGHT
they didn’t need yet. The industry would need time to recover, but Ryan
remained optimistic. ‘‘Unlike the concept of selling dog food on the Internet,
telecom isn’t going away,’’ he declared.47 The audience laughed, a bit un-
easily.
The aftermath of the bubble took a heavy toll on companies that had
boomed. JDS Uniphase wrote off more than $50 billion, more than the gross
domestic product of Kuwait. Big companies including JDS Uniphase, Corning,
Lucent, and Nortel laid off two-thirds to three-fourths of their employees as
their stocks sank to a few percent of their peak values. Corning brieﬂy
stopped producing ﬁber because its warehouses were full.48 Dozens of start-
ups died stillborn. Global Crossing sank into bankruptcy under the load of
$12 billion in debt, making it the ﬁfth largest bankruptcy in American his-
tory in January 2002. WorldCom beat that record in July 2002, becoming
the largest corporate bankruptcy in American history as its ﬁnancial state-
ments turned out to be the stuff of fantasy. Corporate executives, stock mar-
ket analysts, and accountants were charged with assorted frauds. Investors
were left badly burned, and seriously disillusioned with telecommunications
and ﬁber optics.
The 2003 Optical Fiber Communications Conference was a shadow of itself
in the bubble years. Attendance was half the year before, leaving wide-open
spaces in Atlanta’s sprawling convention center. Shell-shocked survivors tried
to persuade themselves it couldn’t get much worse as they walked past empty
booths. It felt like a smoking crater.
An orgy of wild ﬁnancial speculation created the bubble. In hindsight,
investors didn’t just fail to use critical judgement—they seem to have taken
leave of their senses. Hard questions should have been asked about who was
going to buy dog food on the Internet and why they would bother. If any
small boys asked why the emperors of ﬁnance were parading naked down
the street, no one paid them enough heed.
What strange vapors created the heady air inside the bubble? There were
many factors, and their importance will be debated for years. Wall Street was
in the mood for a strong bull market, and bid stock prices upward with little
thought or analysis. Baby boomers needed retirement investments. Optimism
spun wildly out of control. After a lucky few reaped huge proﬁts, others
crowded into the market, smelling money. Easy money bred greed, and greed
shaded into fraud. Top executives fudged ﬁnancial statements, and enlisted
analysts and accountants to pump up stock values. Too many people wanted
instant rewards, and pumped money into companies that chanted fashionable
buzzwords no one understood. Eventually the people who had paid too much
for stock could no longer ﬁnd ‘‘greater fools’’ willing to buy the overpriced
paper.
All of us who spent time inside the bubble have our own theories. But at
least at the time, we were inside the bubble because we wanted to believe in
it.

EPILOGUE: THE BOOM, THE BUBBLE, AND THE BUST
255
A Technology Too Good
Ironically, the dramatic success of ﬁber-optic technology also played a role in
the vicious cycle of the boom, the bubble, and the bust. Neither the market
nor the telecommunications industry was prepared for a technology that
could supply more bandwidth than anyone knew what to do with. The com-
bination of optical ampliﬁers and wavelength-division multiplexing had made
ﬁber too good for its own good.
The 2001 hero experiments sent a mind-boggling 10 trillion bits per sec-
ond through a single ﬁber. Hook up a pair of ﬁbers so they carry signals at
that rate in opposite directions, and they could carry 129 million simulta-
neous telephone calls. What does that mean? The 2000 census counted 281
million people living in the United States. Roughly 23 million are children 5
years of age or younger. You could divide the remaining 258 million people
into two equal groups, and run that pair of ﬁbers between them. If you had
enough phones and suitable interfaces, everyone in one group could talk to
someone in the other group at once through those same two ﬁbers.
You couldn’t buy such a system today, but that’s just as well. Nobody
needs it. Fiber optics have already given long-distance communications more
transmission capacity than it knows what to do with. The TAT-8 transatlantic
cable was shut down in 2002 because other cables could carry 5000 times
as much bandwidth on the same route. Fiber has broken the bandwidth bot-
tleneck of limited capacity. George Gilder predicted a decade ago that ﬁber
would have such tremendous capacity that bandwidth would be virtually
free.49 The problem is that once bandwidth becomes really cheap, it’s hard to
make money selling it.
Fiber-optic technology won’t fade away. It’s simply too good to give up.
Bandwidth is addictive. Few people with working broadband Internet con-
nections want to go back to dial-up modems. Businesses want more band-
width. One big reason that the big long-distance ﬁber-optic pipelines are
empty is that local connections are not very good. It’s like having to go
through a snarl of narrow, winding, potholed local streets to get to an empty
12-lane superhighway.
Fiber now reaches a small but growing number of homes. The Fiber to
the Home Council50 listed 50 sites as of August 2002, and the number is
growing steadily. Many are new developments, where construction started
from scratch and the builders decided they should look to the future. Others
are rural communities where ﬁber offers the best way to span wide open
spaces. A few are trials in parts of cities. For now, the big phone companies
are sticking with the plain old copper cables they already have laid else-
where.
Look back a little over a century, and you can ﬁnd historical parallels with
the ﬁber-optic bubble. Overbuilding of railroads triggered ﬁnancial panics in
1873 and 1893. Speculative pressure drove the railroad bubble, and the af-
termath bankrupted some railroad companies. Like ﬁber, the railroads were
a dramatic advance over the older generation of horse and wagon technology.

256
CITY OF LIGHT
Like the ﬁber bubble, the railroad bubble caused economic upheaval. Yet the
railroads eventually found uses for their surplus track, and remained the
backbone of transportation through the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century.
Today’s overbuilt ﬁber-optic networks will be the backbone of twenty-ﬁrst
century telecommunications.

257
Appendix A
Dramatis Personae: Cast of Characters
Alferov, Zhores: Russian semiconductor laser pioneer; made ﬁrst room-
temperature diode lasers at Ioffe Physico-Technical Institute. Nobel Laureate
in Physics.
American Optical Corporation: Manufacturer of spectacles and optical instru-
ments founded in nineteenth century that became an early developer of im-
aging ﬁber optics.
Armistead, Bill: Research director at Corning Glass Works.
AT&T: American Telephone and Telegraph Corporation, the company founded by
Alexander Graham Bell that was a monopoly in most of America until it
divested local telephone service in 1984. It split off its equipment business in
1996 as Lucent Technologies, leaving AT&T a long-distance phone company.
Babinet, Jacques (1794–1872): French physicist, ﬁrst to report light guiding
in bent glass rods in 1842.
Baird, John Logie (1888–1946): Scottish inventor of mechanical television,
patented sending an image through array of glass rods in 1920s.
Barlow, Harold: Professor at University College, London; leader in developing
millimeter waveguides.
Bechmann, G.: Chief water engineer for Paris, designer of illuminated fountains
for 1889 Universal Exposition in Paris.
Bell, Alexander Graham (1847–1922): Inventor of the telephone in 1876, and
the Photophone—which sent voices through the air optically—in 1880.
Bell Laboratories: Originally Bell Telephone Laboratories, the research arm of
AT&T when it was America’s telephone monopoly. In 1984, part was di-
vested as Bellcore, at ﬁrst owned by the seven regional Bell operating com-
panies. In 1996, AT&T divested Bell Labs as part of Lucent Technologies,
keeping some operations as AT&T Laboratories.

258
CITY OF LIGHT
Bergano, Neal: Bell Labs developer of high-speed ﬁber-optic systems.
Berreman, Dwight: Bell Labs physicist who invented the gas lens.
Black, Phil: Fiber developer at Standard Telecommunication Labs.
Bolton, Sir Francis (1830–1887): English engineer, London city water inspec-
tor, and designer of illuminated fountains for 1884 London exhibition.
Boys, Charles Vernon (1855–1944): British physicist who made strong quartz
ﬁbers for mechanical measurements.
Bray, John: Research director at British Post Ofﬁce Research Station from 1966
to 1975.
British Post Ofﬁce Research Station: Research arm of the British Post Ofﬁce,
which operated the country’s telephone system until British Telecom was
formed around 1980. Initially at Dollis Hill in London, the research group
moved to Martlesham Heath in the early 1970s and became British Telecom
Research Laboratories, now British Telecom Laboratories.
British Telecom: British telephone company, originally part of the British Post
Ofﬁce.
Brouwer, Willem: Student of van Heel’s who worked on ﬁber bundles and pro-
posed image scramblers; immigrated to America in 1953 and became noted
optical designer.
Cerny, Rich: Fiber-optic marketeer and entrepreneur at Valtec and other com-
panies.
Chown, Martin: Engineer who developed early ﬁber systems under Charles Kao
at Standard Telecommunication Labs.
Chraplyvy, Andy: Bell Labs developer of high-speed ﬁber-optic systems.
Chynoweth, Alan: Director of materials research at Bell Labs in Murray Hill in
1970s and 1980s.
Colladon, J. Daniel (1802–1891): Swiss physicist and engineer, demonstrated
light guiding in a jet of water in 1841, a principle later used in illuminated
fountains.
Cook, Jack: Fiber-optic group manager working for Stew Miller at Bell Labs; later
founded Dorran Photonics.
Courtney-Pratt, Jeofry: British physicist who patented the ﬁber-optic faceplate;
later worked at Bell Labs.
Curtiss, Lawrence: Made ﬁrst practical glass-clad ﬁbers while an undergraduate
student at the University of Michigan; co-developer of ﬁrst practical ﬁber-optic
endoscope.
Daglish, Hugh: Early ﬁber developer at British Post Ofﬁce.
DeLoach, Barney: Bell Labs semiconductor specialist; led group that made mil-
lion-hour diode lasers.
de Re´aumur, Re´ne´: French industrialist and engineer who made spun glass
ﬁbers for artiﬁcial heron feathers in early 1700s.
Desurvire, Emmanuel: Developer of erbium optical ampliﬁers at Bell Labs.
Dobson, Paul: Engineer who started communication ﬁber optics at Valtec.
Drendel, Frank: Head of Comm/Scope, later chairman of Valtec.
Duke, David: Manager of Corning’s ﬁber business from 1976 through 1980s;
retired as Corning vice chairman in 1996.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE: CAST OF CHARACTERS
259
Dyment, Jack: Diode laser developer who made ﬁrst narrow-stripe lasers at Bell
Labs.
Dyott, Richard B.: Early ﬁber developer at British Post Ofﬁce; left to join Andrew
Corporation in America in 1975.
Eaglesﬁeld, Charles C.: Electronic engineer at Standard Telecommunication
Labs; proposed transmission through reﬂective pipes in 1960s.
Epworth, Richard: Engineer at Standard Telecommunication Labs; discoverer of
modal noise.
French, William: Early ﬁber developer at Bell Labs.
Fulenwider, John: GTE Laboratories research engineer; ﬁrst to suggest ﬁber op-
tics to homes.
Gambling, William Alec: Professor at University of Southampton, England, and
early ﬁber developer.
Geneen, Harold: Chairman of ITT; built company into a powerful conglomerate.
Gloge, Detlef: German-born Bell Labs communications researcher; studied con-
focal lens waveguides and ﬁber optics.
Godbey, Jim (1935–1978): Founder of Electro-Fiberoptics, and later president
of Valtec who launched the company into the ﬁber-optic communications
business.
Goubau, Georg: German-born engineer and waveguide developer at Army Elec-
tronics Command.
Gould, Gordon: Received a series of patents on lasers based on notebooks he
wrote in 1957 while a graduate student at Columbia; later co-founded a small
ﬁber-optics company, Optelecom.
Hall, Robert: Made ﬁrst semiconductor laser at General Electric Research and
Development Center in Schenectady, New York.
Hammesfahr, Herman: German glass blower who made glass ﬁber fabrics for
1892 World’s Fair in Chicago.
Hansell, Clarence W. (1898–1967): American electronic engineer who re-
ceived over 300 patents while working for RCA, including one in 1930 for
image transmission through bundles of optical ﬁbers.
Hartman, Robert: Bell Labs semiconductor specialist; helped develop million-
hour diode lasers.
Hayashi, Izuo: Japanese physicist who co-developed ﬁrst American room-
temperature diode laser while working at Bell Labs.
Heckingbottom, Roger: Fiber-optic system developer at British Post Ofﬁce.
Hicks, J. Wilbur ‘‘Will’’: Independent-minded physicist, inventor, entrepreneur,
and visionary who led development of glass-clad ﬁbers and image scram
blers at American Optical, then left to found Mosaic Fabrications in 1958.
Later patented designs and components for high-capacity telecommunica-
tions.
Hirschowitz, Basil (1925–): South-African born gastroenterologist; developed
ﬁrst practical ﬁber-optic endoscope at University of Michigan.
Hockham, George: Engineer at Standard Telecommunication Laboratories; co-
author with Charles Kao of paper concluding ﬁber loss could be reduced
below 20 decibels per kilometer.

260
CITY OF LIGHT
Holonyak, Nick, Jr.: Pioneer in LEDs and diode lasers at General Electric and
University of Illinois.
Hopkins, Harold H. (1918–1994): British physicist and optical designer who
proposed and developed imaging bundles in 1950s.
Hopkins, Robert: Succeeded Brian O’Brien as head of the University of Roch-
ester’s Institute of Optics.
Horiguchi, Masaharu: Nippon Telegraph and Telephone co-developer of ﬁrst
ﬁbers with low loss at 1.3 and 1.55 micrometers.
Hsieh, J. Jim: Chinese-born American physicist who made ﬁrst long-wavelength
diode lasers at MIT Lincoln Lab, then founded Lasertron to manufacture
them.
Hudson, Marshall: Fiber engineer at Corning and Valtec.
Hyde, Frank: Corning Glass Works chemist who developed ﬂame hydrolysis pro-
cess to make fused silica in 1930s.
ITT: Originally International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation, which be-
came a conglomerate in the 1960s under Harold Geneen, but later sold its
communications business.
Jacobs, Ira: Director of digital transmission at Bell Labs, Holmdel; headed devel-
opment of early ﬁber systems.
Jaeger, Ray: Early ﬁber developer at Bell Labs; later founded Spectran Corpora-
tion.
Javan, Ali: Invented helium-neon laser at Bell Labs.
Jenkins, C. Francis (1867–1934): American inventor of movie projector and
mechanical television; used glass rods to guide light in one patented television
receiver.
Kahn, Irving (1917–1994): Cable-television promoter and ﬁber-optic entrepre-
neur.
Kaiser, Peter: Bell Labs specialist in gas lenses and ﬁber optics.
Kao, Charles Kuen (1933–): Engineer who proposed that ﬁber-optic loss could
be reduced below 20 decibels per kilometer, launching modern ﬁber-optic
communications. Led ﬁrst ﬁber-optic communications research program at
Standard Telecommunication Laboratories. Later president of Chinese Uni-
versity of Hong Kong.
Kapany, Narinder S. (1927–): Indian-born physicist and entrepreneur who
earned ﬁrst doctorate in ﬁber optics for research directed by Harold H. Hop-
kins; a proliﬁc author who popularized ﬁber optics.
Kapron, Felix: Theoretical physicist who calculated and measured properties of
Corning’s ﬁrst low-loss ﬁber.
Karbowiak, Antoni E.: Engineering manager at Standard Telecommunication
Labs; worked on millimeter waveguides and early thin-ﬁlm and ﬁber-optic
communications.
Kawahata, Masahiro: Director of Japan’s Hi-OVIS project for ﬁber to the home.
Kawakami, Shojiro: Fiber developer at Tohoku University; improved graded-
index ﬁbers.
Keck, Donald: Physicist on Corning team that made ﬁrst low-loss ﬁber; later
director of optics and photonics research at Corning.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE: CAST OF CHARACTERS
261
Kessler, John: Wrote ﬁrst article on ﬁber optics for Electronics magazine; later
founded market-research ﬁrm.
Keyes, Robert: Early semiconductor laser researcher at MIT Lincoln Laboratory.
Kiyasu, Zen-ichi: Engineering professor at Tohoku University; early Japanese
ﬁber developer.
Kompfner, Rudolf (1909–1977): Manager of transmission research and head
of Bell Labs in Crawford Hill.
Kressel, Henry: Head of RCA’s semiconductor laser development group.
Kroemer, Herbert: Co-inventor of semiconductor heterojunction used in room-
temperature lasers. Nobel Laureate in physics.
Lamm, Heinrich (1908–1974): First person to transmit images through a bun-
dle of optical ﬁbers in 1930, while a medical student at University of Munich.
Became a surgeon in Texas after ﬂeeing Nazi Germany.
Lazay, Paul: Bell Labs physicist who set up ﬁrst ﬁber measurement lab at Murray
Hill; later an executive who managed Valtec group for ITT.
Lewin, Len: Division manager at Standard Telecommunication Laboratories, re-
sponsible for early optics research.
Li, Tingye: Fiber-optic group manager under Stew Miller at Bell Labs.
Lucy, Chuck: Business manager of Corning’s early ﬁber-optics program.
MacChesney, John: Developed ﬁber deposition process at Bell Labs.
MacNeille, Steve: High-level research manager at American Optical.
Maiman, Theodore: Built ﬁrst working laser in 1960 at Hughes Research
Labs.
Marcatili, Enrique ‘‘Henry’’: Communications theorist and manager at Bell
Labs under Stew Miller.
Marsh, Jock: Managing director of Standard Telecommunication Laboratories.
Maurer, Robert: Corning Glass Works physicist; directed development of ﬁrst
low-loss ﬁbers as manager of a small glass research group.
McGowan, Bill: Chairman of MCI.
Midwinter, John: Managed British Telecom Research Labs ﬁber-optics program
from 1977 to 1984, succeeding F. F. Roberts.
Miller, Stewart E. (1919–1990): Managed guided-wave transmission research
at Bell Labs in Crawford Hill, including millimeter waveguides, hollow optical
light pipes, and ﬁber optics.
Mollenauer, Linn: Bell Labs physicist who developed soliton transmission.
Møller Hansen, Holger (1915–): Danish inventor who proposed and demon-
strated imaging bundles and recognized the need for clad ﬁbers, but failed to
secure a Danish patent in 1951.
Mosaic Fabrications: Founded by Will Hicks in 1958 to make imaging ﬁber
optics; later Galileo Corporation.
Nelson, Herb: RCA engineer who developed liquid-phase epitaxy for semicon-
ductor lasers.
Newman, David: Semiconductor laser developer at British Post Ofﬁce.
Newns, George R.: Early ﬁber developer at British Post Ofﬁce.
Nichizawa, Jun-ichi: Early Japanese ﬁber developer at Tohoku University.
Nill, Ken: Co-founder of Lasertron with J. Jim Hsieh.

262
CITY OF LIGHT
Norton, Frederick H. ‘‘Ted’’: Retired MIT glass scientist who consulted with
American Optical.
NTT: Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, Japan’s national telephone company.
O’Brien, Brian (1898–1992): Eminent American optical physicist who proposed
cladding optical ﬁbers to improve image transmission; left University of Roch-
ester to head research at American Optical Corporation.
O’Hara, Sidney: British Post Ofﬁce semiconductor laser developer and ﬁber-optic
project manager.
Ogilvie, Graeme: Australian metallurgist who developed liquid-core ﬁbers.
Olshansky, Robert: Theoretical physicist who joined Corning ﬁber group in
1973; now at GTE Laboratories.
Osanai, Horoshi: Fujikura Cable Works co-developer of ﬁrst ﬁbers with low loss
at 1.3 and 1.55 micrometers.
Panish, Mort: Bell Labs chemist and co-developer of ﬁrst American room-
temperature diode laser.
Payne, David: Engineer at University of Southampton; developed early solid-and
liquid-core ﬁbers with Alec Gambling; also developed ﬁber ampliﬁers.
Pearson, David: First ﬁber developer at Bell Labs.
Peters, C. William ‘‘Pete’’ (1919–1989): Optics professor at University of Mich-
igan; co-developer of practical ﬁber-optic endoscope.
Pierce, John R.: Bell Labs engineering manager and developer of millimeter wav-
eguide and communications satellites. Headed the Holmdel lab; later became
a professor at Caltech and Stanford.
Potter, Robert: Earned ﬁrst American doctorate in ﬁber optics from University
of Rochester; developed measurement techniques and ﬁber-optic reader of
punched computer cards.
Quist, Tom: Early semiconductor laser researcher at MIT Lincoln Laboratory.
Ramsay, Murray: Physicist at Standard Telecommunication Labs; managed ﬁber
optic communication development after Charles Kao.
Randall, Eric: Fiber developer at Corning, Valtec, and other companies.
RCA: Radio Corporation of America, founded in 1920 as a radio patent trust.
Became a leader in electronics and radio and television broadcasting; later
bought by General Electric.
Rediker, Robert: Early semiconductor laser researcher at MIT Lincoln Labora-
tory.
Reeves, Alec Harley (1902–1971): English engineer and inventor of pulse-
code modulation for digital communications; godfather of ﬁber-optic com-
munications as a research adviser at Standard Telecommunication Labs.
Ritchie, Simon: Semiconductor laser developer at British Post Ofﬁce.
Roberts, Frederick Francis ‘‘F. F.’’ (1917–1977): Crusty engineering manager
at British Post Ofﬁce who pushed ﬁber communications research; headed BPO
program from 1965 to 1977.
Runge, Peter: Director of submarine ﬁber-optic cable development at Bell Labs.
Ryan, John: Cofounder and chief analyst at market-research ﬁrm RHK.
Saint-Rene´, Henry C.: Teacher at French agriculture school in Crezancy and

DRAMATIS PERSONAE: CAST OF CHARACTERS
263
would-be inventor of television, who in 1895 proposed sending an image
through a bundle of bent glass rods.
Sandbank, Charles: Division manager at Standard Telecommunications Labo-
ratories; responsible for optical communications research from mid-1960s.
Schindler, Rudolf: German-born developer of semiﬂexible gastroscope replaced
by ﬁber optics.
Schultz, Peter: Glass chemistry specialist on Corning team that made ﬁrst low-
loss ﬁber, now president of Heraeus Amersil Inc.
Schwalow, Arthur L.: Co-author of key paper on laser theory with Charles
Townes; later Nobel Laureate for development of laser spectroscopy.
Shumate, Paul: Bellcore engineer who directs development of broad-band home
systems, including ﬁber optics.
Siegmund, Walter: Former student of Brian O’Brien’s who headed ﬁber optic
development at American Optical from the late 1950s.
Simon, Jean-Claude: Director of CSF central research laboratory in France.
Smith, David D.: Patented bent glass rod as dental illuminator in 1890s.
Snitzer, Elias: American Optical scientist who formulated theory of single-mode
ﬁbers and developed ﬁber-optic lasers. Later worked at Polaroid and Rutgers
University.
Spitz, Eric: Head of microwave lab at CSF Central Research Laboratory in France.
Standard Telecommunication Laboratories: Harlow, England-based research
arm of Standard Telephones and Cables, a British subsidiary of ITT. Now part
of Northern Telecom (Nortel).
Steventon, Alan: Semiconductor laser developer at British Post Ofﬁce.
Stewart, Walter: President of American Optical Corporation.
Stone, Julius: Bell Labs physicist; developer of liquid-core ﬁbers.
Tillman, Jack: Deputy research director at British Post Ofﬁce during early ﬁber
development.
Tillotson, Leroy: Managed research on communications through the atmosphere
at Bell Labs in Crawford Hill.
Tkach, Bob: Bell Labs developer of high-speed ﬁber-optic systems.
Todd, Mike (1907–1958): American entertainment impresario and promoter of
wide-screen movies.
Townes, Charles H.: Nobel laureate in physics for inventing the fundamental
principles of maser and laser operation while at Columbia University.
Tyndall, John (1820–1893): Irish-born British physicist who demonstrated light
guiding in a water jet in 1854.
Uesuge, Naoshi: Nippon Telegraph and Telephone engineer who identiﬁed hy-
drogen problem in submarine cables.
Upton, Lee: Glass specialist at American Optical.
Valpey, Ted: Chairman of Valtec.
van Heel, Abraham C. S. (1899–1966): Professor of optics at the Technical
University of Delft in the Netherlands and leader of Dutch optical community,
who proposed imaging bundles and made ﬁrst bundles of clad optical ﬁbers.
Werts, Alain: French engineer at CSF central research laboratory who published

264
CITY OF LIGHT
proposal for ﬁber communications with loss of 20 decibels per kilometer two
months after Kao and Hockham.
Western Electric Company: Former name for the manufacturing operations of
AT&T, which were divested along with most of Bell Labs as Lucent Tech-
nologies.
Wheeler, William (1851–1932): American engineer who patented light pipes
to distribute light from a central electric arc throughout homes.
White, Robert Williamson: Manager of a waveguide development section at
British Post Ofﬁce Research Station.
Williams, Don: Early sponsor of ﬁber-optics research at Royal Signals Research
and Development Establishment at Christchurch, England.
Zimar, Frank: Corning scientist who drew early fused silica ﬁbers.

265
Appendix B
A Fiber-Optic Chronology
Circa 2500 BC:
Earliest known glass.
Roman Times:
Glass is drawn into ﬁbers.
1713:
Re´ne´ de Re´aumur makes spun glass ﬁbers.
1790s:
Claude Chappe invents ‘‘optical telegraph’’ in France.
1841:
Daniel Colladon demonstrates light guiding in jet of
water in Geneva; it also is demonstrated in London
and Paris.
1842:
Daniel Colladon publishes report on light guiding in
Comptes Rendus; Jacques Babinet also reports light
guiding in water jets and bent glass rods.
1853:
Paris Opera uses Colladon’s water jet in the opera
Faust.
1854:
John Tyndall demonstrates light guiding in water jets
at the suggestion of Michael Faraday, duplicating
but not acknowledging Colladon.
1873:
Jules de Brunfaut makes glass ﬁbers that can be wo-
ven into cloth.
1880:
Alexander Graham Bell invents Photophone.
1880:
William Wheeler invents system of light pipes to illu-
minate homes from an electric arc lamp in base-
ment, Concord, Mass.
1884:
International Health Exhibition in South Kensington
district of London has ﬁrst fountains with illumi-
nated water jets, designed by Sir Francis Bolton.
Colladon republishes his 1842 paper to show the
idea was his.

266
CITY OF LIGHT
1887:
Charles Vernon Boys draws quartz ﬁbers for mechan-
ical measurements.
1887:
Royal Jubilee Exhibition in Manchester has illumi-
nated ‘‘Fairy Fountains’’ designed by W. and J.
Galloway and Sons.
1888:
Dr. Roth and Prof. Reuss of Vienna use bent glass
rods to illuminate body cavities for dentistry and
surgery.
1889:
Universal Exhibition in Paris shows reﬁned illumi-
nated fountains designed by G. Bechmann.
1892:
Herman Hammesfahr shows glass dress at Chicago
World’s Fair.
1895:
Henry C. Saint-Rene´ designs a system of bent glass
rods for guiding light in an early television scheme
(Crezancy, France).
1898:
David D. Smith of Indianapolis applies for patent on
bent glass rod as a surgical lamp.
1920s:
Bent glass rods common for microscope illumina-
tion.
June 2, 1926:
C. Francis Jenkins applies for US patent on a me-
chanical television receiver in which light passes
along quartz rods in a rotating drum to form an
image.
October 15, 1926:
John Logie Baird applies for British patent on an ar-
ray of parallel glass rods or hollow tubes to carry
image in a mechanical television. He later built an
array of hollow tubes.
December 30, 1926:
Clarence W. Hansell proposes a ﬁber-optic imaging
bundle in his notebook at the RCA Rocky Point
Laboratory on Long Island. He later receives
American and British patents.
1930:
Heinrich Lamm, a medical student, assembles ﬁrst
bundle of transparent ﬁbers to carry an image (of
an electric lamp ﬁlament) in Munich. His effort to
ﬁle a patent is denied because of Hansell’s British
patent.
December 1931:
Owens-Illinois mass-produces glass ﬁbers for Fiber-
glas.
August 20, 1932:
Norman French of Bell Labs applies for patent on an
‘‘optical telephone system’’ using quartz rods.
Mid-1930s:
Frank Hyde develops ﬂame hydrolysis to make fused
silica at Corning Glass Works.
1939:
Curvlite Sales offers illuminated tongue depressor and
dental illuminators made of Lucite, a transparent
plastic invented by DuPont.
October 31, 1945:
Ray D. Kell and George Sziklai apply for patent on

APPENDIX B
267
transmitting signals through quartz or glass rods,
issued May 9, 1950.
Circa 1949:
Holger Møller Hansen in Denmark and Abraham
C. S. van Heel at the Technical University of Delft
begin investigating image transmission through
bundles of parallel glass ﬁbers.
April 11, 1951:
Holger Møller Hansen applies for a Danish patent on
ﬁber-optic imaging in which he proposes cladding
glass or plastic ﬁbers with a transparent low-index
material. Patent claim is denied because of Hansell
patent.
October 1951:
Brian O’Brien (University of Rochester) suggests to
van Heel that applying a transparent cladding
would improve transmission of ﬁbers in his imag-
ing bundle.
July 1952:
Harold Horace Hopkins applies for a grant from the
Royal Society to develop bundles of glass ﬁbers for
use as an endoscope at Imperial College of Science
and Technology. Hires Narinder S. Kapany as an
assistant after he receives grant.
Early 1953:
O’Brien joins American Optical as vice president and
research director. His top priority is developing a
wide-screen movie system for promoter Mike Todd;
ﬁber optics is sidetracked.
Spring 1953:
Hopkins tells Fritz Zernicke his idea of ﬁber bundles;
Zernicke tells van Heel, who decides to publish
quickly.
May 21, 1953:
Nature receives brief paper by van Heel on simple
bundles of clad ﬁbers.
June 12, 1953:
Dutch-language weekly De Ingeneur publishes van
Heel’s ﬁrst report of clad ﬁber.
November 22, 1953:
Nature receives paper on bundles of unclad ﬁbers for
imaging written by Hopkins and Kapany.
January 2, 1954:
Nature publishes papers by Hopkins and Kapany and
by van Heel. The long delay of the van Heel paper
has never been explained.
1954:
Basil Hirschowitz visits Hopkins and Kapany in Lon-
don from the University of Michigan.
September 1954:
American Optical hires Will Hicks to develop ﬁber-
optic image scramblers, proposed by O’Brien to the
Central Intelligence Agency.
Summer 1955:
Kapany completes doctoral thesis on ﬁber optics un-
der Hopkins, moves to University of Rochester.
Summer 1955:
Hirschowitz and C. Wilbur Peters hire undergraduate
student Larry Curtiss to work on their ﬁber-optic
endoscope project.

268
CITY OF LIGHT
1956:
First transatlantic telephone cable, TAT-1, goes into
operation. It uses coaxial cable to carry 36 voice
circuits.
Summer 1956:
Curtiss suggests making glass-clad ﬁbers by melting a
tube onto a rod of higher-index glass. Peters and
other Michigan physicists push plastic-clad ﬁbers,
which Curtiss makes instead.
October 1956:
Frederick H. Norton starts consulting with American
Optical on ﬁber development. Later he suggests
ways to make glass cladding.
October 1956:
Curtiss and Peters describe plastic-clad ﬁbers at Opti-
cal Society of America meeting in Lake Placid,
New York. Kapany also presents a paper. Hicks at-
tends but does not give a talk.
December 8, 1956:
Curtiss makes ﬁrst glass-clad ﬁbers by rod-in-tube
method; they are much clearer than plastic-clad ﬁ-
bers.
February 18, 1957:
Hirschowitz tests ﬁrst ﬁber-optic endoscope in a pa-
tient.
Early 1957:
Hicks experiments with glass-clad ﬁbers and fusing
many ﬁbers into a rigid bundle, an idea suggested
by Norton.
May 1957:
Hirschowitz demonstrates ﬁber endoscope to Ameri-
can Gastroscopic Society.
Mid-1957:
Kapany leaves Rochester to head group at Illinois In-
stitute of Technology Research Institute in Chi-
cago.
Mid-1957:
Image scrambler project ends after Hicks tells CIA
the code is easy to break. American Optical shifts
to developing faceplates, adding more people as
Todd-AO wide-screen movie project fades.
1957:
Hirschowitz, Peters, and Curtiss license gastroscope
technology to American Cystoscope Manufacturers
Inc.
Late 1957–Early 1958: Charles Townes and Arthur Schawlow outline princi-
ples of laser operation. Gordon Gould starts work
on his own laser proposal.
Early 1958:
Hicks develops practical ﬁber-optic faceplates for mili-
tary imaging systems.
1958:
Hicks, Paul Kiritsy, and Chet Thompson leave Ameri-
can Optical to form Mosaic Fabrications in South-
bridge, Mass., the ﬁrst ﬁber-optics company.
1958:
Alec Reeves begins investigating optical commun-
ications at Standard Telecommunication Laborato-
ries.
1959:
Working with Hicks, American Optical draws ﬁbers

APPENDIX B
269
so ﬁne they transmit only a single mode of light.
Elias Snitzer recognizes the ﬁbers as single-mode
waveguides and applies for a patent (with Hicks)
in 1960.
May 16, 1960:
Theodore Maiman demonstrates the ﬁrst laser at
Hughes Research Laboratories in Malibu.
December 12, 1960:
Ali Javan makes ﬁrst helium-neon laser at Bell Labs,
the ﬁrst laser to emit a steady beam.
Circa 1960:
George Goubau at Army Electronics Command Labo-
ratory, Stew Miller of Bell Telephone Laboratories,
and Murray Ramsay of Standard Telecommunica-
tion Laboratories begin investigating confocal opti-
cal waveguides with regularly spaced lenses.
January 1961:
Charles C. Eaglesﬁeld of STL proposes hollow optical
pipeline made of reﬂective pipes.
May 1961:
Eli Snitzer of American Optical publishes theoretical
description of single-mode ﬁbers.
1961:
Narinder Kapany founds Optics Technology Inc.
1962:
Experiments at STL show high loss in Eaglesﬁeld’s
hollow optical pipeline.
1962:
AT&T starts converting to digital telephone transmis-
sion.
September-
October 1962:
Four groups nearly simultaneously make ﬁrst semi-
conductor diode lasers, which emit pulses at liquid-
nitrogen temperature. Robert N. Hall’s group at Gen-
eral Electric is ﬁrst.
1962:
Dwight Berreman of Bell Labs proposes gas lens wav-
eguide.
1962–1963:
STL abandons millimeter waveguide development.
Alec Reeves pushes optical waveguides but sees
problems with confocal lens waveguides.
1962–1963:
Experiments show high loss when sending laser
beams through atmosphere.
1963:
Heterostructures proposed for semiconductor lasers.
1963–1964:
Antoni E. Karbowiak of STL realizes that unclad
transparent optical waveguides would have to be
impractically thin. He considers clad optical ﬁbers,
but thinks a ﬂexible thin-ﬁlm waveguide would
have lower loss.
October 1964:
Charles Koester and Eli Snitzer describe ﬁrst optical
ampliﬁer, using neodymium-doped glass.
December 1964:
Charles K. Kao takes over STL optical communica-
tion program when Karbowiak leaves to become
chair of electrical engineering at the University of
New South Wales. Kao and George Hockham soon

270
CITY OF LIGHT
abandon thin-ﬁlm waveguide in favor of single-
mode clad optical ﬁber.
February 1965:
Stewart Miller of Bell Labs applies for patent on
graded-index waveguides for light and millimeter
waves.
Autumn 1965:
Kao concludes that the fundamental limit on glass
transparency is below 20 decibels per kilometer,
which would be practical for communications.
Hockham calculates that clad ﬁbers should not ra-
diate much light. They prepare a paper proposing
ﬁber-optic communications.
January 1966:
Kao tells Institution of Electrical Engineers in London
that glass ﬁbers could be made with loss below 20
decibels per kilometer for communications.
Early 1966:
F. F. Roberts starts ﬁber-optic communications re-
search at British Post Ofﬁce Research Laboratories.
July 1966:
Kao and Hockham publish paper outlining their pro-
posal in Proceedings of the Institution of Electrical
Engineers.
July 1966:
John Galt at Bell Labs asks Mort Panish and Izuo
Hayashi to ﬁgure out why diode lasers have high
thresholds at room temperature.
September 1966:
Alain Werts, a young engineer at CSF in France,
publishes proposal similar to Kao’s in French-
language journal L’Onde Electronique, but CSF does
nothing further for lack of funding.
1966:
Roberts tells William Shaver, a visitor from the Corn-
ing Glass Works, about interest in ﬁber communi-
cations. This leads Robert Maurer to start a small
research project on fused-silica ﬁbers.
1966:
Kao travels to America early in year but fails to in-
terest Bell Labs. He later ﬁnds more interest in Ja-
pan.
Early 1967:
British Post Ofﬁce allocates an extra £12 million to
research; some goes to ﬁber optics.
Early 1967:
Shojiro Kawakami of Tohoku University in Japan
proposes graded-index optical ﬁbers.
Summer 1967:
Corning summer intern Cliff Fonstad makes ﬁbers
with Frank Zimar. Loss is high, but Maurer decides
to continue the research using titania-doped cores
and pure-silica cladding.
October 1967:
Clarence Hansell dies at 68.
Late 1967:
Robert Maurer recruits Peter Schultz from Corning’s
glass chemistry department to help make pure
glasses.

APPENDIX B
271
January 1968:
Donald Keck starts work for Maurer as the ﬁrst full-
time ﬁber developer at Corning.
August 1968:
Dick Dyott of British Post Ofﬁce picks up suggestion
for pulling clad optical ﬁbers from molten glass in
a double crucible.
1968:
Kao and M. W. Jones measure intrinsic loss of bulk
fused silica at 4 decibels per kilometer, the ﬁrst ev-
idence of ultratransparent glass, prompting Bell
Labs to seriously consider ﬁber optics.
1969:
Martin Chown of Standard Telecommunication Labs
demonstrates ﬁber-optic repeater at Physical Soci-
ety exhibition.
April 1970:
STL demonstrates ﬁber-optic transmission at Physics
Exhibition in London.
Spring 1970:
First continuous-wave room-temperature semicon-
ductor lasers made in early May by Zhores Al-
ferov’s group at the Ioffe Physical Institute in Len-
ingrad (now St. Petersburg) and on June 1 by
Mort Panish and Izuo Hayashi at Bell Labs.
June 30, 1970:
AT&T introduces Picturephone in Pittsburgh. The
telephone monopoly plans to install millimeter
waveguides to provide the needed extra capacity.
Summer 1970:
Maurer, Donald Keck, and Peter Schultz at Corning
make a single-mode ﬁber with loss of 16 decibels
per kilometer at 633 nanometers by doping tita-
nium into ﬁber core.
September 30, 1970:
Maurer announces Corning’s ﬁber results at London
conference devoted mainly to progress in millime-
ter waveguides.
November 1970:
Measurements at British Post Ofﬁce and STL conﬁrm
Corning results.
Late Fall 1970:
Charles Kao leaves STL to teach at Chinese Univer-
sity of Hong Kong; Murray Ramsay heads STL ﬁ-
ber group.
1970–1971:
Dick Dyott at British Post Ofﬁce and Felix Kapron of
Corning separately ﬁnd pulse spreading is lowest
at 1.2 to 1.3 micrometers.
May 1971:
Murray Ramsay of STL demonstrates digital video
transmission over ﬁber to Queen Elizabeth at
the Centenary of the Institution of Electrical Engi-
neers.
October 13, 1971:
Alec Reeves dies in London.
1971–1972:
Unable to duplicate Corning’s low loss, Bell Labs, the
University of Southampton, and CSIRO in Austra-
lia experiment with liquid-core ﬁbers.

272
CITY OF LIGHT
1971–1972:
Focus shifts to graded-index ﬁbers because single-
mode offers few advantages and many problems at
850 nanometers.
June 1972:
Maurer, Keck, and Schultz make multimode ger-
mania-doped ﬁber with 4 decibel per kilometer loss
and much greater strength than titania-doped ﬁ-
ber.
Late 1972:
STL modulates diode laser at 1 billion bits per sec-
ond. Bell Labs stops work on hollow light pipes.
December 1972:
John Fulenwider proposes a ﬁber-optic communica-
tion network to carry video signals to homes at
International Wire and Cable Symposium.
1973:
John MacChesney develops modiﬁed chemical vapor
deposition process for making ﬁber at Bell Labs.
Mid-1973:
Diode laser lifetime reaches 1000 hours at Bell Labs.
Spring 1974:
Bell Labs settles on graded-index ﬁbers with 50 to
100 micrometer cores.
December 7, 1974:
Heinrich Lamm dies at 66.
January 1975:
First technical meeting, Topical Conference on Opti-
cal Fiber Transmission, Williamsburg, Virginia.
February 1975:
Bell completes installation of 14 kilometers of milli-
meter waveguide in New Jersey. After tests, Bell
declares victory and abandons the technology.
June 1975:
First commercial continuous-wave semiconductor la-
ser operating at room temperature offered by Laser
Diode Labs.
September 1975:
First nonexperimental ﬁber-optic link installed by
Dorset (UK) police after lightning knocks out their
communication system.
October 1975:
British Post Ofﬁce begins tests of millimeter wave-
guide; like Bell it declares the tests successful, but
never installs any.
1975:
Dave Payne and Alex Gambling at University of
Southampton calculate pulse spreading should be
zero at 1.27 micrometers.
January 13, 1976:
Bell Labs starts tests of graded-index ﬁber-optic sys-
tem transmitting 45 million bits per second at its
plant in Norcross, Georgia. Laser lifetime is main
problem.
Early 1976:
Valtec launches Communications Fiberoptics division.
Early 1976:
Masaharu Horiguchi (Nippon Telegraph Telephone
Ibaraki Lab) and Hiroshi Osanai (Fujikura Cable)
make ﬁrst ﬁbers with low loss—0.47 decibel
per kilometer—at long wavelengths (1.2 micro-
meters).

APPENDIX B
273
March 1976:
Japan’s Ministry for International Trade and Industry
announces plans for Hi-OVIS ﬁber-optic ‘‘wired
city’’ experiment involving 150 homes.
Spring 1976:
Lifetime of best laboratory lasers at Bell Labs reaches
100,000 hours (10 years) at room temperature.
Summer 1976:
Horiguchi and Osanai discover third ﬁber-optic trans-
mission window at 1.55 micrometers.
July 1976:
Corning sues ITT alleging infringement of American
patents on communication ﬁbers.
Late 1976:
J. Jim Hsieh makes indium-gallium arsenide-
phosphide (InGaAsP) lasers emitting continuously
at 1.25 micrometers.
Spring 1977:
F. F. Roberts reaches mandatory retirement age of 60;
John Midwinter becomes head of ﬁber-optic group
at British Post Ofﬁce.
April 1, 1977:
AT&T sends ﬁrst test signals through ﬁeld test system
in Chicago’s Loop district.
April 22, 1977:
General Telephone and Electronics sends ﬁrst live
telephone trafﬁc through ﬁber optics (6 million bits
per second) in Long Beach, Calif.
May 1977:
Bell System starts sending live telephone trafﬁc
through ﬁbers at 45 million bits per second ﬁber
link in downtown Chicago.
June 1977:
British Post Ofﬁce begins sending live telephone traf-
ﬁc through ﬁbers in underground ducts near Mar-
tlesham Heath.
June 29, 1977:
Bell Labs announces one million hour (100 year) ex-
trapolated lifetime for diode lasers.
Summer 1977:
F. F. Roberts dies of heart attack.
October 1977:
Valtec ‘‘acquires’’ Comm/Scope, but Comm/Scope
owners soon gain control of Valtec.
Late 1977:
AT&T and other telephone companies settle on 850-
nanometer gallium arsenide light sources and
graded-index ﬁbers for commercial systems operat-
ing at 45 million bits per second.
1977–1978:
Low loss at long wavelengths renews research inter-
est in single-mode ﬁber.
May 22–23, 1978:
Fiber Optic Con, ﬁrst ﬁber-optic trade show.
July 1978:
Optical ﬁbers begin carrying signals to homes in Ja-
pan’s Hi-OVIS project.
August 1978:
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone transmits 32 mil-
lion bits per second through a record 53 kilome-
ters of graded-index ﬁber at 1.3 micrometers.
September 1978:
Richard Epworth reports modal noise problems in
graded-index ﬁbers.

274
CITY OF LIGHT
September 1978:
France Telecom announces plans for ﬁber to the
home demonstration in Biarritz, connecting 1500
homes in early 1983.
1978:
AT&T, British Post Ofﬁce, and Standard Telephones
and Cables commit to developing a single-mode
transatlantic ﬁber cable, using the new 1.3-
micrometer window, to be operational by 1988.
By the end of the year, Bell Labs abandons devel-
opment of new coaxial cables for submarine sys-
tems.
Late 1978:
NTT Ibaraki lab makes single-mode ﬁber with record
0.2 decibel per kilometer loss at 1.55 micrometers.
January 1980:
AT&T asks Federal Communications Commission to
approve Northeast Corridor system from Boston to
Washington, designed to carry three different
wavelengths through graded-index ﬁber at 45 mil-
lion bits per second.
February 1980:
STL and British Post Ofﬁce lay 9.5-kilometer subma-
rine cable in Loch Fyne, Scotland, including single-
mode and graded-idex ﬁbers.
Winter 1980:
Graded-index ﬁber system carries video signals for
1980 Winter Olympics in Lake Placid, New York,
at 850 nanometers.
September 1980:
With ﬁber optics hot on the stock market, M/A Com
buys Valtec for $224 million in stock.
1980:
Bell Labs publicly commits to single-mode 1.3-
micrometer technology for the ﬁrst transatlantic ﬁ-
ber-optic cable, TAT-8.
July 27, 1981:
ITT signs consent agreement to pay Corning and
license Corning communication ﬁber patents.
1981:
Commercial second-generation systems emerge, oper-
ating at 1.3 micrometers through graded-index ﬁ-
bers.
1981:
British Telecom transmits 140 million bits per second
through 49 kilometers of single-mode ﬁber at 1.3
micrometers, starts shifting to single-mode.
Late 1981:
Canada begins trial of ﬁber optics to homes in Elie,
Manitoba.
1982:
British Telecom performs ﬁeld trial of single-mode ﬁ-
ber, abandons graded-index in favor of single-
mode.
December 1982:
MCI leases right of way to install single-mode ﬁber
from New York to Washington. The system will
operate at 400 million bits per second at 1.3 mi-
crometers. This starts the shift to single-mode ﬁber
in America.

APPENDIX B
275
Late 1983:
Stew Miller retires as head of Bell Labs ﬁber develop-
ment group.
January 1, 1984:
AT&T undergoes ﬁrst divestiture, splitting off its
seven regional operating companies but keeping
long-distance transmission and equipment manu-
facture.
1984:
British Telecom lays ﬁrst submarine ﬁber cable to
carry regular trafﬁc, to the Isle of Wight.
1985:
Single-mode ﬁber spreads across America to carry
long-distance telephone signals at 400 million bits
per second and up.
Summer 1986:
All 1500 Biarritz homes connected to ﬁber to the
home system.
October 30, 1986:
First ﬁber-optic cable across the English Channel be-
gins service.
1986:
AT&T sends 1.7 billion bits per second through sin-
gle-mode ﬁbers.
Early 1987:
David Payne reports making the ﬁrst erbium-doped
optical ﬁber ampliﬁer at the University of South-
ampton.
November 1987:
Emmanuel Desurvire develops model to predict be-
havior of erbium optical ampliﬁer at Bell Labs.
January 1988:
Eli Snitzer reports that erbium ampliﬁers can be
pumped at 1.48 micrometers.
1988:
Linn Mollenauer of Bell Labs demonstrates soliton
transmission through 4000 kilometers of single-
mode ﬁber.
December 1988:
TAT-8, ﬁrst transatlantic ﬁber-optic cable, begins
service using 1.3-micrometer lasers and single-
mode ﬁber.
Early 1989:
Emmanuel Desurvire measures very low crosstalk
when signals are transmitted through an erbium
ampliﬁer at two separate wavelengths, pointing to-
ward wavelength division multiplexing.
November 1989:
NTT reports gain of 46.5 decibels in erbium ampli-
ﬁer excited by 1.48 micrometer laser.
January 1990:
KDD transmits 2.4 billion bit per second signals at 4
wavelengths through 6 erbium ampliﬁers and 459
kilometers of ﬁber.
February 1991:
Neal Bergano of Bell Labs transmits ﬁve billion bits
per second through 9000 kilometers of ﬁber. That
design later selected for TAT-12 cable.
February 1991:
Masataka Nakazawa of NTT sends soliton signals
through a million kilometers of ﬁber.
February 1991:
Mollenauer transmits solitons at two wavelengths
through 9000 kilometers of ﬁber.

276
CITY OF LIGHT
February 1993:
Mollenauer transmits 10 billion bits per second
through 20,000 kilometers of ﬁbers with a simple
soliton system.
1994:
World Wide Web grows from 500 to 10,000 ser-
vers.
February 1995:
NTT transmits 10 billion bits per second on each of
16 wavelengths through 1000 kilometers of ﬁber
using dispersion compensation.
1995–1996:
Internet trafﬁc hits peak growth, doubling in 3–4
months.
February 1996:
Fujitsu, NTT Labs, and Bell Labs all report sending
one trillion bits per second through single ﬁbers in
separate experiments.
1996:
Commercial wavelength-division multiplexing sys-
tems introduced.
1996:
TAT-12 transatlantic cable put in service, the ﬁrst
with optical ampliﬁers.
October 1996:
Lucent Technologies splits from AT&T, taking most
of Bell Labs.
May 15, 1997:
Amazon.com has initial public offering of stock early
in Internet boom.
February 1998:
NTT transmits 1 trillion bits per second through a
series of optical ampliﬁers and 600 kilometers of ﬁ-
ber; Bell Labs does similar experiment through
400 kilometers of ﬁber.
1998:
First long-distance submarine cables with
wavelength-division multiplexing. Commercial sys-
tems transmit dozens of wavelengths at 2.5 billion
bits per second. Developers promise systems trans-
mitting 10 billion bits per second on dozens of
channels.
February 1999:
NTT reaches three trillion bits per second through
40 kilometers of ﬁber.
1999:
NASDAQ average nearly doubles as the bubble
takes off.
March 7–10, 2000:
NASDAQ hits record high of 5132.52. Optical Fiber
Communication Conference attracts record crowd
of 16,934 to Baltimore.
July 2000:
Peak of telecom bubble. JDS Uniphase announces
plans to merge with SDL Inc. in stock deal valued
at $41 billion.
March 19–22, 2001:
Optical Fiber Communication Conference attracts
record crowd of 38,015 to Anaheim, with 970
companies exhibiting.
March 22, 2001:
NEC Corp. reports transmitting 10.92 trillion bits
per second through 117 kilometers of ﬁber.

APPENDIX B
277
Spring and
Telecom bubble deﬂates and stocks tumble. Layoffs
Summer 2001:
begin.
December 2001:
TAT-8 submarine cable fails. It is later retired be-
cause repairs would be too expensive and other
transatlantic cables have extra capacity.
July 21, 2002:
WorldCom ﬁles for bankruptcy, the largest bank-
ruptcy in U.S. corporate history.
January 2003:
Total transatlantic transmission capacity in use is
2700 billion bits per second, about 5000 times
that of TAT-8. Total potential capacity is 12,300
billion bits per second.

This page intentionally left blank 

279
Notes
Chapter 1
1. Daniel Colladon, ‘‘On the reﬂections of a ray of light inside a parabolic liquid
stream,’’ Comptes Rendus 15, pp. 800–802 (Oct. 24, 1842), translated by Julian
A. Carey, Apr. 1, 1995.
2. The number keeps increasing and is likely to be outdated by the time you
read this. Phone companies do not yet need all that capacity. In practice, the
signals consist of bit streams sent simultaneously using different colors of light. A
single ﬁber can carry 1.6 trillion bits per second as 160 different wavelengths
each carrying 10 billion bits per second.
3. Tiles installed on the inbound side of the Kendall Square station, which
serves MIT, chronicle a century of inventions and the growth of MIT. The 2002
World Almanac says the same thing in its list of inventions.
Chapter 2
1. David Napoli, ‘‘The luminous fountains at the French Exposition,’’ Scientiﬁc
American, Dec. 14, 1889, pp. 376–377, translated from the French La Nature.
2. French embassy, in response to telephone query.
3. Napoli, ‘‘The luminous fountains.’’
4. This account draws heavily on unpublished research by Kaye Weedon, a
Norwegian engineer who collected information on Colladon’s and Babinet’s work
and gave several talks on the origins of ﬁber optics around 1970. Jeofry Courtney-
Pratt kindly gave me copies of Weedon’s unpublished manuscripts. Sadly, Weedon
died in 1992, shortly before I began research on this book.
5. Savart died Mar. 16, 1841, shortly before Colladon repeated his experiment.
‘‘Felix Savart’’ entry in Charles Coulston Gillespie, ed., Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Bi-
ography (Vol. XII; Scribner’s, New York, 1976, pp. 129–130).

280
NOTES TO PAGES 13–17
6. Daniel Colladon, ‘‘On the reﬂections of a ray of light inside a parabolic liquid
stream,’’ Comptes Rendus 15, (Oct. 24, 1842), pp. 800–802, translated by Julian
A. Carey, Apr. 1, 1995.
7. Rene´ Sigrist, cites an unpublished manuscript by Pierre Speziali; (personal
communication, Oct. 10, 1995), Colladon’s Comptes Rendus paper cites a London
demonstration but does not say who conducted it.
8. Colladon cited experiments by Joseph Plateau, who steered light around
curves in a different way. See Joseph Plateau, ‘‘On a curious consequence of the
laws of light’s reﬂection,’’ Bulletins de l’Academie Royale des Sciences et Belles Lettres
de Bruxelles IX 2d, Partie (1842), pp. 10–14, read July 4, 1842, translated by
Jean-Louis Trudel.
9. A device he invented to measure polarization, called a Babinet Compensator,
is still widely used by optical specialists. Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography (Vol. I,
‘‘Jacques Babinet,’’ pp. 357–358).
10. Jacques Babinet, ‘‘Note on the transmission of light by sinuous canals,’’
Comptes Rendus #15, (Oct. 24, 1842) p. 802, translated by Julian A. Carey, Apr.
1, 1995; also Kaye Weedon, unpublished manuscript.
11. T. K. Derry and Trevor I. Williams, A Short History of Technology: From the
Earliest Times to A.D. 1900 (Dover, New York, 1993 (reprint of 1960 edition),
pp. 84–85).
12. Specimen in Corning Glass Museum.
13. The colors of the rainbow come from a combination of two effects: total
internal reﬂection and differences in the refractive index of water with wave-
length. Light rays that enter a water droplet are reﬂected back around the sphere,
emerging back toward the sun (which is why we see the rainbow when the sun
is behind us). Water refracts different wavelengths at different angles, so the
angle at which the light rays emerge depends on their wavelength, creating the
rainbow.
14. Rene´ Sigrist, personal communications, Oct. 10, 1995, and Nov. 13,
1995, citing Pierre Speziali, ‘‘La physique,’’ in Jacques Trembley, ed., Les Savants
Genevois dans l’Europe intellectuelle (Journal de Geneva, Geneva, 1987, p. 154).
15. David E. Nye, Electrifying America: Social Meanings of New Technology (MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1990); see chap. 2, ‘‘The Great White Way.’’
16. Go¨sta M. Bergman, Lighting in the Theatre (Rowman and Littleﬁeld, Totowa,
N.J.; and Almqvist & Wiskell International, Stockholm, 1977, pp. 278–280).
17. ‘‘Preparations for the holding of the international health exposition,’’ Na-
ture, Feb. 21, 1884, pp. 388–389; Leslie Stephen and Sidney Lee, eds., Dictionary
of National Biography: Vol. 22 Supplement (Oxford University Press, London,
pp. 230–231).
18. Bolton was not a specialist in optics, and the importance of total internal
reﬂection may have eluded him. It deﬁnitely eluded the writers of contemporary
accounts, and it takes careful analysis of published drawings to deduce how the
fountains guided light. ‘‘Illumination of fountains by the electric light,’’ Scientiﬁc
American Supplement #847, p. 7774 (May 2, 1885).
19. ‘‘The fountains at the health exhibition,’’ The Illustrated London News, Aug.
2, 1884, p. 106.
20. ‘‘Health Exhibition-X: the electrically illuminated fountain,’’ The Electrician
13, pp. 456–457 (Sept. 27, 1884); ‘‘The illuminated fountains at the Healtheries,’’
Nature, Nov. 6, 1884, pp. 11–12.
21. D. Colladon, ‘‘La Fontaine Colladon,’’ La Nature, 2nd half year 1884,

NOTES TO PAGES 17–21
281
pp. 325–326. In a brief introduction, editor Gaston Tissandier says he requested
the paper. Translated as Daniel Colladon, ‘‘The Colladon Fountain,’’ Scientiﬁc
American, Dec. 6, 1884, p. 359.
22. That was a large sum in the 1880s. Andrew A. Gillies, ed., Report of the
Executive Committee, Royal Jubilee Exhibition Manchester 1887 (John Heywood,
Manchester, 1888, p. 189).
23. Charles John Galloway and John Henry Beckwith, British Patent 1460,
‘‘An improvement in illuminated fountains,’’ ﬁled Jan. 29, 1887, accepted Nov.
8, 1887.
24. Ofﬁcial Guide to the Royal Jubilee Exhibition, Manchester 1887 (John Hey-
wood, Manchester, 1887, p. 9).
25. Perilla Kinchin and Juliet Kinchin, Glasgow’s Great Exhibitions (White
Cockade Publishers, 1988); quoted in letter to author from Glasgow City Library
dated Dec. 5, 1995.
26. ‘‘Glasgow International Exhibition,’’ The Electrician 21, June 29, 1888,
pp. 239–241.
27. Although he obviously paid attention to the illuminated fountains, he lists
the wrong dates for the British exhibitions. He puts Glasgow in 1884, followed
by London and Manchester, and does not mention other European fairs with great
fountains, such as one held in Barcelona in 1888. Jean-Daniel Colladon, Souvenirs
et Memoires, Autobiographie Aubert-Schuchardt, Geneva, 1893, p. 289).
28. Napoli, ‘‘The luminous fountains.’’
29. G. Bechmann, ‘‘Fontaine Lumineuse,’’ Le Grand Encyclopedie: Vol. 17
Fanum-Franco Lamirault, Paris, 1886–1902 p. 733). It includes the clearest draw-
ings I have found of vertical and parabolic fountains.
30. Nye, Electrifying America (pp. 38–39).
31. Woodward Hudson, ‘‘William Wheeler, December 6, 1851–July 1, 1932,’’
Social Circle Memoirs (Social Circle, Concord, Mass., pp. 331ff). Clark was a colorful
and controversial ﬁgure whose shorter stay left him a legend in Japan. See Robert
H. Guest, ‘‘The rise and fall of an Amherst immortal,’’ Amherst, Summer 1983,
pp. 66–67, 78–79.
32. William Wheeler, US Patent 247,229, ‘‘Apparatus for lighting dwellings
or other structures,’’ ﬁled Dec. 10, 1880, granted Sept. 20, 1881.
33. Ibid., p. 1, ll. 27–40.
34. Wheeler served as company president, per state records; he also was an
engineering consultant. A leading citizen of Concord, he moved in the same social
groups as the intellectual Emerson family, and was deeply involved in town gov-
ernment, until shortly before his death in 1932. The Story of Massachusetts: Per-
sonal and Family History (Vol. 4: The American Historical Society, New York,
1938, pp. 129–132). Wheeler Reﬂector was still advertising in the Oct. 1958 issue
of The American City (p. 143).
35. ‘‘A new method of illuminating internal organs,’’ The Lancet, Jan. 5, 1889,
p. 52; the same brief note was reprinted in Scientiﬁc American 60, p. 14 (Apr. 6,
1889). The original Lancet piece is by-lined Vienna, Dec. 1888. The two men were
identiﬁed only as ‘‘Dr. Roth and Professor Reuss.’’
36. David D. Smith, US Patent 624,392, ‘‘Surgical lamp,’’ ﬁled Apr. 25, 1898,
issued May 2, 1899. At least two similar patents were issued many years later:
Isaac J. Smit, US Patent 1,246,338, ‘‘Illuminated transparent retractor,’’ ﬁled Aug.
21, 1916, issued Nov. 13, 1917; Frank G. Young, Jr., US Patent 1,246,338,
‘‘Light projector,’’ ﬁled Mar. 26, 1926, issued Sept. 13, 1927.

282
NOTES TO PAGES 23–27
37. It was known as Lucite in America and Perspex in England; its proper
name is polymethyl methacrylate. It also was used in tongue depressors. ‘‘Cold
light (Lucite) surgical instruments,’’ Scientiﬁc American, Feb. 1939, p. 99; see also
‘‘Piped light aids surgeons and dentists,’’ Popular Science, Mar. 1939, p. 108.
38. Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography (Vol. XIII, ‘‘John Tyndall,’’ pp. 521–524).
39. John Tyndall, notebook preserved at Royal Institution, London, dated Fri-
day evening, May 19, 1854.
40. John Tyndall, ‘‘On some phenomena connected with the motion of liq-
uids,’’ Proceedings of the Royal Institution of Great Britain 1, pp. 446–448 (1854).
He says his demonstration repeats Savart’s work on ﬂuid ﬂow.
41. Faraday’s memory failed gradually, beginning around 1840; the problem
was episodic, so he was able to work much of the time but could not concentrate
at other times. He became quite senile before his death in 1868 and probably
suffered from what we now call Alzheimer’s disease. L. Pearce Williams, Michael
Faraday: A Biography (Basic Books, New York, 1965).
42. Colladon in Comptes Rendus says the water-jet apparatus was demonstrated
in London, probably in 1841, but does not say where or by whom. Faraday gave
two or three lectures at the Royal Institution in 1841, which was the worst year
of his ﬁrst breakdown in health. His topics almost certainly did not include light
guiding. There is no evidence that either Colladon or de la Rive spoke at the Royal
Institution at the time, although they could have lectured elsewhere in London,
such as at the Adelaide Galleries or the London Institution. Faraday spent much
of his time that year in Switzerland away from other scientists, as he tried to
recover his faculties, but even if he did not see the demonstration, he must have
heard of it. (Frank James, Royal Institution, e-mail Sep. 14, 1998).
43. The mistaken crediting of Tyndall with ﬁrst guiding light in a water jet is
a reminder of how easily and widely mistakes can spread. Tyndall’s original 1854
account (Tyndall, ‘‘On some phenomena’’) does not claim the idea of light guiding
is new, but also does not explicitly attribute it to someone else. He wound up
credited with the idea half a century after his death largely because he described
the experiment in one of his widely-circulated popular books, where it was redis-
covered in the 1950s (an American edition is John Tyndall, Light and Electricity,
Appleton & Co., New York, 1871, pp. 41–43). It was natural to credit the eminent
Tyndall with the discovery. The ﬁrst publication I have found to credit Tyndall is
Narinder S. Kapany, ‘‘Fiber optics,’’ Scientiﬁc American 203 (5), 72–81, November
1960, and Kapany told me he found the reference (telephone interview, Feb. 13,
1996). Kapany’s thesis advisor Harold H. Hopkins may have played a role in
ﬁnding the Tyndall reference; he was well read and had a large library of old
science books. As ﬁber optics spread, most people—including myself—accepted
Tyndall as the originator of the idea. The Optical Society of America later named
its major ﬁber-optics award after Tyndall. The late Kaye Weedon uncovered Col-
ladon’s and Babinet’s 1842 reports in the late 1960s, but although he gave sev-
eral talks on their work, he never published an account, and few others took
notice.
Chapter 3
1. Charles Vernon Boys, ‘‘Quartz ﬁbres,’’ Nature, July 11, 1889, pp. 247–251.
2. Oszkar Knapp, Glasfasern (Glass Fibers) (Akademiai Kaido, Budapest, 1966,
p. 9; translation by Max J. Riedl).

NOTES TO PAGES 28–34
283
3. The oldest mention of glass ﬁbers is in a book by Antonio Neri called L’Arte
Vetraria, published in Florence in 1612. David G. Mettes, ‘‘Glass ﬁbers,’’ in George
Lubin, ed., Handbook of Fiberglass and Advanced Plastics Composites (Krieger,
Huntington, N.Y., 1975, p. 143).
4. Knapp, Glasfasern (pp. 9–12); Mettes, ‘‘Glass ﬁbers’’ (p. 143).
5. K. L. Lowenstein, The Manufacturing Technology of Continuous Glass Fibres
(Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1983, p. 1).
6. Johann Georg Kru¨nitz, ‘‘Perru¨cke, Glas,’’ O¨konomischtechnologische Encyclo-
pa¨die (Berlin, 1808), cited in Hanne Frøsig, ‘‘A glass wig,’’ Journal of Glass Studies
16, pp. 92–94 (1974).
7. An English silk weaver named Louis Schwabe in 1842 drew ﬁbers this way
and wove them into fabric on a spinning machine. Knapp, Glasfasern (pp. 9–12).
8. ‘‘The uses of spun glass,’’ Scientiﬁc American, Supplement 1706, Sept. 12,
1908, p. 163.
9. ‘‘Glass spinning,’’ Art Workman 15, p. 240 (1873). The best ﬁbers were
made by Jules de Brunfaut; see a clipping dated July 10, 1895 (p. 17) quoting the
‘‘Pottery Gazette,’’ obtained from the Corning Glass Museum, possibly from a mag-
azine called China, Glass, and Lamps. Other sources, also from the ﬁles of the Corn-
ing Glass Museum, are ‘‘Cloth made of glass,’’ Health and Home 4, No. 51, Dec.
21, 1872, and ‘‘Glass spinning.’’
10. Charles C. Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Bibliography (Vol. XV, Suppl.
1: Scribner’s, New York, 1978, pp. 59–61). Apologists add that Boys later became
‘‘an able expositor,’’ but Boys was hardly the only eminent scientist whose class-
room manner was less than effective.
11. Boys, ‘‘Quartz ﬁbres.’’
12. Charles Vernon Boys, ‘‘On the production, properties, and some suggested
uses of the ﬁnest threads,’’ Philosophical Magazine 23, No. 145, pp. 489–499, (June
1887). (p. 492)
13. Ibid., (p. 493).
14. Knapp, Glasfasern (pp. 9–12).
15. Dorothy Stafford, ‘‘Glass dress, now at art museum, was World Fair
sensation in 1892,’’ Toledo Blade, Jan. 21, 1951, p. 7; also Can This Be Glass?
booklet published for 1939 World’s Fair by Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp., To-
ledo, Ohio.
16. H. S. Souttar, ‘‘Demonstration of a method of making capillary ﬁlaments,’’
Proceedings of the Physical Society of London 24, No. 3, pp. 166–167 (1912).
17. C. C. Hutchins, ‘‘How to make quartz ﬁber,’’ Scientiﬁc American Supplement,
Aug. 17, 1912, p. 100.
18. The odd spelling allowed them to trademark the word ‘‘ﬁberglas.’’
19. Can This Be Glass?
Chapter 4
1. Quoted in Milton Wright, ‘‘Successful inventors VIII: they seek more than
money, says one of them,’’ Scientiﬁc American, Aug. 1927, pp. 140–142.
2. Albert Abramson, The History of Television, 1880–1941 (McFarland & Co.,
London, 1987, p. 6).
3. ‘‘Seeing by electricity,’’ Scientiﬁc American 42, p. 373 (June 12, 1880). The
inventor was George R. Carey.

284
NOTES TO PAGES 35–39
4. H. C. Saint-Rene´, ‘‘On a solution to the problem of remote viewing,’’
Comptes Rendus 150, pp. 446–447 (1910), translation by Jean-Louis Trudel, Oct.
1994.
5. Kaye Weedon found this detail when he examined the packet that Saint-
Rene´ had sent to the French Academy; it was not published in Comptes Rendus.
Kaye Weedon, unpublished manuscript.
6. Hubert Masson, letter to author, May 10, 1996. Masson is vice president
of the agriculture school and deputy mayor of Crezancy.
7. Michael Ritchie, Please Stand By: A Prehistory of Television (Overlook Press,
Woodstock, N.Y., 1994, p. 24).
8. See, e.g., R. W. Burns, ‘‘J. L. Baird: success and failure,’’ Proceedings IEE 126,
No. 9, pp. 921–928 (Sept. 1979); Archer S. Taylor, ‘‘Origins of British television,’’
CED: Communications Engineering and Design, June 1995, p. 162.
9. J. L. Baird, British Patent 285,738, ‘‘An improved method of and means for
producing optical images,’’ ﬁled Oct. 15, 1926, issued Feb. 15, 1928.
10. Ray Herbert, letter to author, Aug. 17, 1994. Herbert worked with Baird.
11. David E. Fisher and Marshall Jon Fisher, Tube: The Invention of Television
(Counterpoint, Washington, D.C., 1996).
12. Jenkins’s importance in early motion-picture development is controversial.
He and Thomas Armat patented a projector called the Phantoscope (US Patent
586,953, issued July 20, 1897) but later split, with Armat obtaining a later patent
on a variant projector. Jenkins insisted he projected the ﬁrst motion pictures, but
his claims were never veriﬁed. Armat claimed he deserved sole credit for inventing
the projector, because the Jenkins-Armat patent was impractical. Armat licensed
his patents to Thomas Edison, leading to the common perception that Edison
invented motion pictures. Edison’s contribution was the camera. See Raymond
Fielding, ed., A Technological History of Motion Pictures and Television (University of
California Press, Berkeley, 1967), especially F. H. Richardson, ‘‘What happened in
the beginning’’ (pp. 23–41). Jenkins’s gift for self-promotion earned him ﬂattering
magazine proﬁles: ‘‘The original movie man and his ﬁrst ‘show,’ ’’ The Literary
Digest, Apr. 30, 1921, pp. 38–39; Homer Croy, ‘‘The infant prodigy of our indus-
tries: the birth and growth of motion pictures,’’ Harper’s Monthly 135, pp. 349–
357, (Aug. 1917).
13. Wright, ‘‘Successful inventors,’’
14. Hugo Gernsback of Radio News (who would soon publish the world’s ﬁrst
science-ﬁction magazine) and Watson Davis of Popular Radio.
15. Background on Jenkins and his mechanical television systems comes
from Albert Abramson, ‘‘Pioneers of television—Charles Francis Jenkins,’’ Jour-
nal of the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers, Feb. 1986, pp. 224–
238.
16. C. Francis Jenkins, US Patent 1,683,137, ‘‘Method of and apparatus for
converting light impulses into enlarged graphic representations,’’ ﬁled June 2,
1926, issued Sept. 4, 1928.
17. Technical details from Abramson, ‘‘Pioneers of television.’’
18. ‘‘Broadcasts pictures,’’ New York Times, May 6, 1928, p. 3.
19. Ritchie, Please Stand By; (pp. 22–31); for a fuller account, see Fisher and
Fisher, Tube.
20. Frank Melville Jr. Memorial Library, State University of New York, Stony
Brook, Special Collections Dept.: Clarence Weston Hansell Collection, Collection
209, biographical sketch of Hansell.

NOTES TO PAGES 39–44
285
21. Orrin E. Dunlap, Jr., Radio’s 100 Men of Science (Harper & Brothers Pub-
lishers, New York, 1944, pp. 269–272).
22. James Hillier, telephone interview, May 19, 1994.
23. Clarence W. Hansell, US Patent 1,751,584, ‘‘Picture transmission,’’ ﬁled
Aug. 13, 1927, issued Mar. 25, 1930.
24. Hansell notebook dated Apr. 11, 1925–Sep. 12, 1930, Clarence Weston
Hansell Collection, Special Collections Dept., State University of New York, Stony
Brook.
25. Daniel M. Costigan, Electronic Delivery of Documents and Graphics (Van Nos-
trand Reinhold, New York, 1978), p. 5.
26. Howard Rosenthal, telephone interview, May 19, 1994.
27. Patricia (Hansell), Sisler, telephone interview, Dec. 29, 1995.
28. William P. Vogel, Jr., ‘‘Inventing is vision plus work,’’ Popular Science, Oct.
1947, pp. 97–101.
29. The physician was Adolf Kussmaul. Basil I. Hirschowitz, ‘‘Development
and application of endoscopy,’’ Gastroenterology 104, pp. 337–342 (1993).
30. Unnamed source, quoted in H. H. Hopkins, ‘‘Optics in clinical medicine,’’
presidential address, physics and mathematics section, British Association meet-
ing, Sept. 1977, typed manuscript.
31. Audrey B. Davis, ‘‘Rudolf Schindler’s role in the development of gastros-
copy,’’ Bulletin of the History of Medicine 46, No. 2, pp. 150–170 (Mar.–Apr.
1972).
32. Hirschowitz, ‘‘Development.’’
33. Sam Carter, MD, telephone interview, Sept. 9, 1994; he remembers taking
a course from a Prof. Rose who in the 1930s had a solid ‘‘bundle that looked like
a garden house,’’ 8 to 10 feet long. ‘‘He put a light source at one end of it . . .
and by golly . . . the light would show up at the end of the bundle.’’
34. Heinrich Lamm, ‘‘Biegsame optische Gera¨te’’ (Flexible optical instruments),
Zeitschrift fur Instrumentenkunde 50, pp. 579–581 (1930), translated by Lamm
many years later.
35. Lamm, ‘‘Biegsame optische Gera¨te,’’ p. 580.
36. The British patent was a duplicate of Hansell’s American patent; RCA
assigned the British rights to the Marconi Company as part of a broader patent
agreement. The British patent was issued before the American one. Clarence Wes-
ton Hansell, British Patent 295,601, ‘‘Improvements in or relating to means for
transmitting radiant energy such as light and to apparatus for use therewith,’’
ﬁled Aug. 13, 1928, accepted Feb. 21, 1929 (US Patent 1,751,584, ‘‘Picture
transmission,’’ ﬁled Aug. 13, 1927, issued Mar. 25, 1930).
37. Lamm, ‘‘Biegsame optische Gera¨te,’’ p. 581.
38. Almost 30 years later, Schindler was in the audience at a small conference
where the ﬁrst successful gastroscope was described. He stood up after the talk,
and recalled that Lamm had suggested the idea in 1928 or 1929. ‘‘We put bundles
of glass ﬁbers together, but we failed. . . . There was not yet any coating and, more
important, we lacked the advice of physicists . . .’’ (Basil I. Hirschowitz et al, ‘‘Dem-
onstration of a new gastroscope, the ‘ﬁberscope,’ ’’ Gastroenterology 35 pp. 50–53,
July 1958, Schindler quoted in discussion section, p. 52). Unless Schindler had
forgotten Gerlach’s help, that indicates Lamm worked with the physicist indepen-
dently. Lamm may have turned to Gerlach after early experiments with Schindler
failed. Schindler was quite busy with other activities at the time, including per-
fecting his own semi-rigid gastroscope and conducting the Physicians’ Orchestra

286
NOTES TO PAGES 44–50
of Munich (Martin Carey, personal communication). Interestingly, Schindler knew
where Lamm was working in the late 1950s, but the two were not in regular
contact, and there is no evidence Schindler ever told Lamm about the later suc-
cessful gastroscope.
39. Lamm, ‘‘Biegsame optische Gera¨te,’’ p. 581.
40. Schindler, whose father was Jewish, spent six months in jail before emi-
grating to America. Davis, ‘‘Rudolf Schindler’s role.’’
41. Rudolf Hecht, telephone interview, Sept. 27, 1994.
42. Michael Lamm, telephone interview, Sept. 24, 1994.
43. Hecht interview; ‘‘Dr. H. Lamm,’’ obituary, Texas Medicine, Mar. 1975,
p. 120.
Chapter 5
1. Date from Lewis Hyde (interview, Feb. 15, 1993), who says van Heel was
in Rochester Oct. 18–28, 1951.
2. O’Brien’s son, an optical engineer who had a security clearance and some-
times worked with his father, was also present. Brian O’Brien, Jr., telephone in-
terview, Sept. 12, 1994.
3. Willem Brouwer, interview, Jan. 12, 1994.
4. Lewis Hyde, telephone interview, Feb. 28, 1994.
5. Walter P. Siegmund and F. Dow Smith, ‘‘Brian O’Brien—pioneer in optics,’’
Optics & Photonics News, Mar. 1993, pp. 48–51.
6. Brian O’Brien, Jr., interview, Feb. 4, 1994.
7. I calculated the number assuming light entering at a 5 degree angle to the
axis of a 50-micrometer glass ﬁber with refractive index of 1.5.
8. O’Brien, Jr., interview, Feb. 4, 1994, telephone interview, Apr. 5, 1994.
9. The smaller the refractive-index difference, the steeper the critical angle for
total internal reﬂection. However, even a one percent difference leaves a critical
angle of eight degrees in glass, and that was enough for practical purposes.
10. W. S. Stiles and B. H. Crawford, ‘‘The luminous efﬁciency of rays entering
the eye pupil at different points,’’ Proceedings Royal Society of London B112,
pp. 428–450 (1933).
11. Ernst W. von Bru¨cke, ‘‘Die physiologische Bedeutung des stabfo¨rmigen
Ko¨rper und der Zwillingszapfen in den Augen der Wirbelthiere’’ (‘‘The physiolog-
ical meaning of rods and cones in the eyes of vertebrates’’), Mu¨ller’s Archiv fur
Anatomie und Physiologie 11, pp. 444–451 (1844), translated by Susanna Lam-
mert. Von Bru¨cke was trying to explain why some animal eyes look bright. He
did not cite Colladon’s light guiding demonstration, but the timing suggests it
could have inﬂuenced him.
12. Brian O’Brien, ‘‘Vision and resolution in the central retina,’’ Journal of the
Optical Society of America 41, No. 12, pp. 882–894 (Dec. 1951).
13. ‘‘Brian O’Brien, Frederic Ives Medalist for 1951,’’ Journal of the Optical
Society of America 41, No. 12, pp. 879–881 (Dec. 1951).
14. O’Brien, Jr., interview, Feb. 4, 1994; an engineer, he was visiting his father
at the time and had a clearance because he had worked with him on several
military programs.
15. H. Møller Hansen, Danish patent application 1094/51, ‘‘Flexible picture
transport cable,’’ Apr. 11, 1951 (in Danish, translated by Jonathan D. Beard).

NOTES TO PAGES 50–54
287
16. Olav Hergel, ‘‘Geni-og taber’’ (‘‘A genius and a loser’’), Berlingske Tidende,
Jul. 23, 1989 Section 5, p. 1 translated by Jonathan D. Beard.
17. H. Møller Hansen, private communication, Feb. 10, 1995.
18. H. Møller Hansen, telephone interview, Apr. 3, 1995.
19. Møller Hansen thought the cladding material should have a refractive
index much lower than that of glass, and close to the index of air. Solid coatings
like the instrument lacquer O’Brien used have an index only slightly lower than
glass, so Møller Hansen experimented with oils, which have lower indexes. H.
Møller Hansen, letter to author, received July 1996.
20. Møller Hansen, ‘‘Flexible picture transport cable.’’
21. Reuters, ‘‘Danish engineer invents ‘eye’ that can see around corners,’’ Los
Angeles Times, June 11, 1951. The article clearly demonstrates that Møller Hansen
was using optical ﬁbers for imaging, although the terminology is antiquated. It is
not clear where else the Reuters article appeared. The wire service was not widely
distributed in America at the time, and a search of the New York Times failed to
ﬁnd any mention of the invention.
22. Thore Sandell, ‘‘Han ser sig Sja¨lv I o¨rat,’’ Teknikens Varld 14/51, 1951,
p. 12.
23. Møller Hansen telephone interview.
24. Møller Hansen telephone interview.
25. Adriaan Walther, ‘‘A. C. S. van Heel,’’ obituary, Journal of the Optical So-
ciety of America 56, pp. 1411–1412 (Oct. 1966).
26. Daniel Boorstin, The Discoverers (Vintage, New York, 1985, p. 314).
27. Brouwer interview.
28. Walther, ‘‘A. C. S. van Heel.’’
29. The computer is now in the Delft Museum; Brouwer interview.
30. G. J. Beernink, ‘‘The Delft cradle of glass ﬁber optics’’ (in Dutch), Nederlands
Tijdschrift voor Fotonica, Dec. 1981, pp. 7–10, translated by Adriaan Walther.
31. Brouwer interview.
32. Beernink, ‘‘The Delft cradle.’’
33. W. L. Hyde and C. M. Caldwell, ‘‘The National Defense Research Council
and the Defense Research Physical Laboratory of the Netherlands,’’ Ofﬁce of Naval
Research, London, Technical Report ONRL-99-52, Sept. 22, 1952, p. 3 (originally
secret, declassiﬁed Jan. 10, 1984).
34. The students were G. J. Beernink and H. de Vries.
35. Zernicke is identiﬁed in H. H. Hopkins, letter to Martin C. Carey, Feb. 8,
1989.
36. Beernink, ‘‘The Delft cradle.’’
37. Walter Siegmund, telephone interview, Mar. 1, 1994.
38. Siegmund and Smith, ‘‘Brian O’Brien.’’
39. Brian O’Brien, letter to Martin Carey, May 2, 1990.
40. F. Dow Smith, telephone interview, Apr. 4, 1994.
41. Walter Siegmund, interview June 29, 1983.
42. Milton Silverman, ‘‘The man with the invisible light,’’ Saturday Evening
Post, Sept. 14, 1946, p. 22.
43. O’Brien, Jr., interview, Feb. 4, 1994.
44. For his description, see O’Brien, ‘‘Vision and resolution.’’
45. Walter Siegmund, telephone interview, Jan. 4, 1994.
46. Robert E. Hopkins, telephone interview, May 29, 1996.

288
NOTES TO PAGES 54–59
47. Lee DuBridge, who went on to become president of Caltech and President
Nixon’s science adviser, is quoted in Silverman, ‘‘The man with the invisible
light.’’
48. For more details on the Todd-AO affair, see Jeff Hecht, ‘‘The amazing op-
tical adventures of Todd-AO,’’ Optics & Photonics News, Oct. 1996.
49. Walter Siegmund, telephone interview, Apr. 7, 1994.
50. ‘‘Todd, Mike,’’ Current Biography 1955 (H. W. Wilson New York) pp. 608–
610), quoting John Chapman, Colliers, May 12, 1945.
51. Michael Todd, Jr., and Susan McCarthy Todd, A Valuable Property: The Life
Story of Michael Todd (Arbor House, New York, 1983, p. 244).
52. David A. Cook, A History of Narrative Film (Norton, New York, 1981,
p. 415).
53. Todd, Jr., and McCarthy Todd, A Valuable Property (p. 245).
54. O’Brien, Jr., interview, Feb. 4, 1994.
55. Ibid.
56. Walter Siegmund telephone interview, Jan. 5, 1994. W. Lewis Hyde also
recalls seeing a letter from van Heel to O’Brien, but O’Brien’s son doubts his father
received one.
57. Fluent in English, van Heel probably wrote the English abstract so
the words are his. A. C. S. van Heel, ‘‘Optische afbeelding zonder lenzen of Abfeel-
dingsspielgels,’’ De Ingenieur No. 24, June 12, 1953; other information based
on English translation by Bill Ornstein for American Optical, dated Feb. 23,
1954.
58. A plastic ﬁber with refractive index of 1.52 was coated with another plastic
having an index of 1.47 and painted with black lacquer to block light leakage
between ﬁbers.
59. Van Heel lists Willem Brouwer, G. J. Beernink, and H. de Vries as the
people who performed the experiments.
60. A. C. S. van Heel, ‘‘A new method of transporting optical images without
aberrations,’’ Nature 173, p. 39 (Jan. 2, 1954).
61. Brouwer interview.
62. H. H. Hopkins, telephone interview, Mar. 1, 1994.
63. Kelvin Hopkins, interview, Dec. 3, 1994.
64. Hopkins credits Hugh Gainsborough of St. George’s Hospital in London
with asking the question; H. H. Hopkins, letter to the editor of Photonics Spectra,
Aug. 26, 1982 [unedited version given to me by L. Hyde; edited version appeared
in November 1982 Photonics Spectra].
65. A search of the major London papers failed to ﬁnd any mention of Møller
Hansen in May or June 1951. Nikki Smith, letter to author, Oct. 14, 1995.
66. H. H. Hopkins, transcript of interview by Dr. Martin Gordon, New York
City, May 19, 1981, p. 1.
67. H. H. Hopkins, letter to Photonics Spectra.
68. Narinder S. Kapany, telephone interview, Feb. 13, 1996.
69. H. H. Hopkins telephone interview.
70. H. H. Hopkins and N. S. Kapany, ‘‘A ﬂexible ﬁbrescope, using static scan-
ning,’’ Nature 173, pp. 39–41 (Jan. 2, 1954).
71. Willem Brouwer, note to author, Feb. 24, 1995.
72. Nature, letter to author, Apr. 1995.
73. H. H. Hopkins telephone interview.
74. van Heel, ‘‘Optische afbeelding.’’

NOTES TO PAGES 59–65
289
75. Brian O’Brien, US Patent 2,825,260, ‘‘Optical image forming devices,’’
ﬁled Nov. 19, 1954, issued Mar. 4, 1958.
76. H. H. Hopkins interview. In fact, Hansell’s patent would have been a more
serious obstacle than Baird’s.
77. H. H. Hopkins and N. S. Kapany, ‘‘Transparent ﬁbres for the transmission
of optical images,’’ Optica Acta 1, No. 4, pp. 164–170, Feb. 1955.
78. H. H. Hopkins telephone interview.
79. See, e.g., ‘‘Narinder Kapany: photonics polymath,’’ Photonics Spectra, Aug.
1982, p. 59.
80. H. H. Hopkins, ‘‘Fiber optic origins,’’ and reply from N. S. Kapany, Photon-
ics Spectra, letters column, Nov. 1982. In his reply, Kapany wrote, ‘‘I lay no
paternity claim to the ﬁeld of ﬁber optics.’’ The published version of Hopkins’s
letter was edited to moderate its tone.
81. N. S. Kapany, curriculum vitae, p. 1.
82. H. H. Hopkins, telephone interview.
83. Kapany, telephone interview.
Chapter 6
1. Basil I. Hirschowitz, ‘‘A personal history of the ﬁberscope,’’ Gastroenterology
76, pp. 864–869 (1979) p. 864.
2. H. H. Hopkins and N. S. Kapany, ‘‘A ﬂexible ﬁberscope, using static scan-
ning,’’ Nature 173, pp. 39–41 (Jan. 2, 1954).
3. H. H. Hopkins, telephone interview, Mar. 1, 1994. His feud with Kapany
also may have discouraged him.
4. Henk J. Raterink says it stopped by 1956 or 1957 (letter to author, Feb.
14, 1994); Beernink says it stopped in 1954 (G. J. Beernink, ‘‘The Delft cradle of
glass ﬁber optics’’ (in Dutch), Nederlands Tijdschrift voor Fotonica, Dec. 1981, pp. 7–
10, (translated by Adriaan Walther).
5. Beernink, ‘‘The Delft cradle.’’
6. He was alerted to these papers by his mentor at Central Middlesex Hospital
in London, Sir Francis Avery Jones. Avery Jones, letter to Martin Carey, July 21,
1989.
7. Strictly speaking, endoscopes can inspect any part of the body, while gas-
troscopes are intended only to inspect the stomach. However, gastroscopes are
often called endoscopes.
8. Hirschowitz, ‘‘A personal history.’’
9. Lawrence E. Curtiss, telephone interview, Feb. 7, 1994.
10. Curtiss, telephone interview, Feb. 7, 1994.
11. Hirschowitz, ‘‘A personal history.’’
12. Lawrence E. Curtiss, letter to author, Dec. 9, 1994.
13. Mary Jo Peters, telephone interview, Jan. 26, 1996.
14. Credit for the invention of the glass-clad ﬁber eventually became the sub-
ject of a long and bitter court ﬁght, which Curtiss won. Board of Patent Interfer-
ences, U.S. Patent Ofﬁce, Patent Interference No. 93,002, Norton v. Curtiss: Fiber
Optical Components Final Hearing Jun. 1, 1967, paper No. 101.
15. A. C. S. van Heel, ‘‘A new method of transporting optical images without
aberrations,’’ Nature 173, p. 39 (Jan. 2, 1954)
16. Will Hicks interview, Feb. 4, 1994.
17. Ibid.

290
NOTES TO PAGES 65–70
18. Court papers indicate Hicks continued some plastic-cladding experiments
into 1957. (Board of Patent Interferences, Norton v. Curtiss).
19. Hicks interview. Although Hicks didn’t realize it at the time, a German
named Armand Lamesch had patented the idea a decade earlier as a way of
strengthening glass ﬁbers. See Armand Lamesch, US Patent 2,313,296; ‘‘Fiber or
ﬁlament of glass,’’ ﬁled Sept. 23, 1937 (in Germany Sept. 30, 1936), issued Mar.
9, 1943.
20. Curtiss telephone interview. Feb. 7, 1994.
21. Lawrence E. Curtiss, interview, Jan. 20, 1995.
22. Curtiss letter; Hirschowitz, ‘‘A personal history.’’
23. Basil I. Hirschowitz, US Patent 3,010,357, ‘‘Flexible light transmitting
tube,’’ ﬁled Dec. 28, 1956; issued Nov. 28, 1961.
24. Lawrence E. Curtiss, US Patent 3,589,793, ‘‘Glass ﬁber optical devices,’’
ﬁled May 6, 1957, issued June 29, 1971. Norton and American Optical bitterly
fought this patent in court, delaying it for well over a decade and setting a record
for most voluminous patent litigation!
25. Hirschowitz, ‘‘A personal history.’’
26. Curtiss telephone interview, Feb. 7, 1994.
27. Avery Jones letter.
28. Hirschowitz had to settle for a post at the less prestigious University of
Alabama at Huntsville. Martin Carey, telephone interview, May 7, 1996.
29. That instrument is now at the Smithsonian Institution. Basil I. Hirschow-
itz, ‘‘Demonstration of a new gastroscope, the ‘ﬁberscope,’ ’’ Gastroenterology 35,
pp. 50–53 (July 1958).
30. Hirschowitz, ‘‘A personal history.’’ p. 867.
31. Hirschowitz, ‘‘Demonstration.’’
32. The exact timing was the subject of lengthy patent litigation when Amer-
ican Optical tried unsuccessfully to block Curtiss’s patent. Although Norton
claimed to have made his suggestion in October 1956, the court ruled he could
not document invention before early 1957. See Board of Patent Interferences,
Norton v. Curtiss.
33. Hicks interview.
34. Ibid.
35. Bill Wetherell, conversation, January or February 1994.
36. Robert Greenler, telephone interview, Sept. 18, 1995.
37. The series started with Narinder S. Kapany, ‘‘Fiber optics. Part I, Optical
properties of certain dielectric cylinders,’’ Journal of the Optical Society of America
47, pp. 413–422 (May 1957), and eventually reached part XI in 1965.
38. A bibliography published when he won the Ives award lists 51 papers, but
some were abstracts or co-authored and many were published in the 1930s.
‘‘Brian O’Brien, Frederic Ives Medalist for 1951,’’ Journal of the Optical Society of
America 41, No. 12, pp. 879–881 (Dec. 1951). People who knew him later recall
he never got around to publishing much.
39. Walter Siegmund, interview, June 29, 1993.
40. Lawrence E. Curtiss, telephone interview, Aug. 6, 1997.
41. Figures derived by author from Robert J. Potter and Cecelia E. Beasor, ‘‘The
history and evolution of ﬁber optics,’’ paper presented at the SPIE Fiber Optics
Seminar in Depth, Apr. 29, 1968, Baltimore.
42. Narinder S. Kapany, ‘‘Fiber optics,’’ Scientiﬁc American 203, No. 5, pp. 72–
81 (Nov. 1960).

NOTES TO PAGES 71–73
291
43. Narinder S. Kapany, Fiber Optics: Principles and Applications (Academic
Press, New York, 1967).
44. N. S. Kapany, curriculum vitae, p. 1.
45. Numbers compiled from 2500 Fiber Optics Patent Abstracts 1881–1979
(Patent Data Publications, Wheaton, Ill., 1980).
46. Narinder S. Kapany telephone interview, Feb. 13, 1996.
47. Walter Siegmund, telephone interview, Aug. 1, 1996.
48. Curtiss telephone interview, Feb. 7, 1994.
49. Hirschowitz, ‘‘A personal history,’’ p. 867.
50. He spent 22 years at American Cystoscope, leaving only in 1982, a year
after American Hospital Supply bought the company.
51. Basil I. Hirschowitz, ‘‘Development and application of endoscopy,’’ Gastro-
enterology 104, pp. 337–342 (1993).
52. Hicks interview.
53. William Gardner, telephone interview, Jan. 19, 1996.
54. Jeofry S. Courtney-Pratt, a British specialist in high-speed photography,
came up with the same idea independently, while trying to get enough light to
photograph the early stages of nitroglycerine explosions. He promptly ﬁled for
British and American patents, which he later licensed to American Optical. Jeofry
S. Courtney-Pratt, interview, Jan. 14, 1994, and letter to author, Jeofry S. Court-
ney-Pratt, British Patent 841,200 Dec. 3, 1994; ‘‘Improvements in or relating to
electronic image forming tubes,’’ ﬁled Sept. 17, 1956; issued July 13, 1960 (US
Patent 3,321,658 issued May 1967).
55. Hicks interview.
56. The friends from American Optical were Paul Kiritsy and Chet Thompson.
A third coworker, Bart Frey, left with Hicks but stayed less than a year at Mosaic
Fabrications. Hicks interview.
57. Ibid.
58. Siegmund telephone interview, Aug. 1, 1996.
59. O’Brien was chairman of NRC’s division of physical sciences from 1953
to 1961, chaired the National Academy of Sciences’ Air Force Study board from
1962 to 1974, and headed the NASA panel that recommended building the Space
Shuttle.
60. The company survived by specializing in sound production, and remains
in business.
61. Brian O’Brien, US Patent 2,825,260, ‘‘Optical image forming devices,’’
ﬁled Nov. 19, 1954, issued Mar. 4, 1958.
62. Van Heel, ‘‘Optische afbeelding zonder lenzen of Abfeeldingsspielgels,’’ re-
print from ‘‘De Ingenieur No. 24, 1953.’’ The issue is dated June 12, 1953, but
the only date on the copies sent to AO was ‘‘12/6/53’’; English translation by Bill
Ornstein for American Optical, dated Feb. 23, 1954.
63. Walter Siegmund telephone interview, Jan. 4, 1994.
64. Curtiss interview, Jan. 20, 1995. Inventors sometimes can beneﬁt from a
long delay in issuing a patent if their invention comes into wide use. Sales of ﬁber-
optic endoscopes had grown by 1971, so Curtiss, Peters, and Hirschowitz earned
much more during the patent’s 17-year lifetime than they would have if it had
been issued promptly a decade earlier. They would have earned even more if their
lawyers had not worded the patent so narrowly that it did not cover the ﬁbers
used for communications.
65. Walt Siegmund (personal communication) showed me a photo of Garro-

292
NOTES TO PAGES 74–80
way taken from the side of the studio. It’s eerie to realize how many people saw
this window into future technology through morning-bleary eyes and immediately
forgot about it.
66. Working under Robert Hopkins, O’Brien’s successor at Rochester, Potter
analyzed ﬁber properties in detail and explained some previously puzzling features
of ﬁber transmission. Robert Joseph Potter, A Theoretical and Experimental Study of
Optical Fibers (University of Rochester, 1960).
67. Siegmund telephone interview, Aug. 1, 1996.
68. Hicks interview.
Chapter 7
1. Alec Harley Reeves, ‘‘Future prospects for optical communication,’’ John
Logie Baird Memorial Lecture, University of Strathclyde, May 30, 1969.
2. Many years were needed to perfect practical switches after Strowger applied
for a patent in 1889, but the simple and durable equipment remained in use for
decades. Peter Young, Power of Speech (George Allen & Unwin, London, 1983).
3. Irwin Lebow, Information Highways & Byways (IEEE Press, New York, 1995).
4. While testing his scheme, Bell heard audio tones that the current had car-
ried through the wires. As a teacher of the deaf, he realized that the wires which
could carry tones also could carry speech. Arthur C. Clarke, How the World Was
One: Beyond the Global Village (Bantam, New York, 1992, p. 112).
5. The modern telephone system carries only frequencies of 300 to 3000 hertz,
much smaller than the nominal range of human hearing from 20 to 20,000 hertz
but adequate for most people to understand conversations. The limit has been
retained from the early days of telephone electronics.
6. They also can be seen as particles, clumps of energy called ‘‘photons.’’
Sometimes they behave like waves, other times like particles.
7. The story of the optical telegraph is a fascinating example of the rise and
fall of a nineteenth-century technology, and reminds us how fast once-vital sys-
tems can be forgotten. For a fascinating account, see Gerard J. Holzmann and
Bjo¨rn Pehrson, The Early History of Data Networks (IEEE Computer Society Press,
Los Alamitos, Calif., 1995).
8. Robert V. Bruce, Alexander Graham Bell and the Conquest of Solitude (Little
Brown and Co., Boston, 1973, p. 336).
9. He sketched an optical telephone in one of his copious notebooks but never
worked out the details of how one might operate. Neil Baldwin, ‘‘The laboratory
notebooks of Thomas Edison,’’ Scientiﬁc American, Oct. 1995, pp. 160–160C.
10. Bruce, Alexander Graham Bell (p. 337).
11. Alexander Graham Bell, ‘‘The photophone,’’ Scientiﬁc American, Supplement
246, Sept. 18, 1880, pp. 3921–3923.
12. Forgotten, that is, except by a few curious souls who thought the ‘‘pho-
tophone’’ Bell had sealed in the Smithsonian archives might be an early television.
They were disappointed when the box was opened after Bell’s death.
13. America and Britain tested systems during both world wars; Germany used
an infrared system during World War II. See N. C. Beese, ‘‘Light sources for optical
communication’’ (Infrared Physics 1, pp. 5–6 (1961)) for technical details.
14. Earlier transmitters had worked only sporadically or transmitted only tele-
graph signals. H. D. Arnold and Lloyd Espenschied, ‘‘Transatlantic radio teleph-
ony,’’ Journal American Institute of Electrical Engineers, Aug. 1923, pp. 815–826.

NOTES TO PAGES 80–88
293
15. Reﬂection dropped during daytime, so transmission was possible only at
night.
16. Orrin E. Dunlap, Jr., Radio’s 100 Men of Science (Harper & Brothers Pub-
lishers, New York, 1944, pp. 269–272 on Hansell).
17. Clarence W. Hansell, ‘‘Radio-relay systems development by the Radio Cor-
poration of America,’’ Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers, Mar. 1945,
pp. 156–168.
18. Richard J. O’Rorke, Jr., 1990 World’s Submarine Telephone Cable Systems
(US Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, D.C., 1991; see pp. 112–113,
123).
19. Murray Ramsay, telephone interview, Sept. 12, 1994.
20. Kenneth W. Cattermole, ‘‘A. H. Reeves: the man behind the engineer,’’
IEE Review, Nov. 1990, pp. 383–386.
21. Ibid.
22. Richard Epworth, interview, Dec. 2, 1994.
23. His notebooks on the paranormal were so thoroughly mingled with his
other work that the management of BNR-Europe inadvertently put one on display
in a case at Harlow. This wasn’t discovered until I visited in late 1994, when
Richard Epworth went to check the notebook and examined its contents. Epworth
interview.
24. R. V. Jones, The Wizard War: British Scientiﬁc Intelligence 1939–1945 (Cow-
ard, McCann & Geohegan, New York, 1978, p. 276).
25. Reeves experimented with ‘‘two-terminal’’ devices called diodes, where two
wires make contact with different parts of a semiconductor chip. Transistors have
three terminals, a design that lets a voltage applied to one terminal modulate the
current ﬂowing between the other two. Cattermole, ‘‘A. H. Reeves.’’
26. A. G. Fox and W. D. Warters, ‘‘Waveguide research,’’ in S. Millman, ed.,
A History of Engineering and Science in the Bell System: Vol. 5. Communications
Science 1925–1980 (AT&T Bell Laboratories, Indianapolis, 1984, p. 264).
27. Richard Dyott, telephone interview, June 23, 1994.
28. E. F. O’Neill, ed., A History of Engineering and Science in the Bell System: Vol.
7. Transmission Technology 1925–1975, (AT&T Bell Laboratories, New York, 1985,
pp. 624–627).
29. Clarke actually proposed adding a transmitter to a manned space station,
not launching a satellite dedicated only to automatic communications (Arthur C.
Clarke, ‘‘Extra-terrestrial relays,’’ Wireless World, Oct. 1945, pp. 305–308). Four
decades later, Clarke remembered that he had mentioned an early version of the
idea in a brief letter to the magazine in February of that year, and in a letter that
he circulated to friends in May. See Arthur C. Clarke, Ascent to Orbit (Wiley-
Interscience, New York, 1984). He cites a paper by C. W. Hansell on ground-
based radio relays.
30. Pierce published ﬁction as J. J. Coupling; he remains a member of the
Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America.
31. Ramsay telephone interview.
32. Antoni E. Karbowiak telephone interview, Feb. 5, 1995.
33. Reeves tested hollow-cathode discharge lamps. W. A. Atherton, ‘‘Pioneers
16: Charles Kuen Kao, father of optical communications,’’ Electronics & Wireless
World, Apr. 1988, pp. 406–407.
34. The others were John Lytollis, Ian Turner, Bernard Fairchild, and Ron
Lomax. Murray Ramsay, letter to author, Jan. 12, 1997.

294
NOTES TO PAGES 88–91
35. Antoni E. Karbowiak, vita and telephone interview, Feb. 5, 1995.
36. George Hockham, interview, Dec. 6, 1994.
37. Norman R. French, US Patent 1,981,999, ‘‘Optical telephone system,’’
ﬁled Aug. 20, 1932, issued Nov. 27, 1934.
38. Ray D. Kell and George C. Sziklai, US Patent 2,506,672, ‘‘Signal trans-
mission system,’’ ﬁled Oct. 31, 1945, issued May 9, 1950. They envisioned ap-
plications in television transmission.
39. Neither Bell Labs nor the David Sarnoff Research Center—the former RCA
Laboratories—has any records indicating anything was ever built. The technical
difﬁculties would have been formidable, and signals would not have gone far.
40. This appeared only in an internal memo, cited in R. Kompfner, ‘‘Optics at
Bell Laboratories—optical communications,’’ Applied Optics 11, pp. 2412–2425
(Nov. 1972).
41. C. C. Eaglesﬁeld, ‘‘Optical pipeline: a tentative assessment,’’ Proceedings of
the IEE 109B, pp. 26–32 (Jan. 1962).
42. I could not ﬁnd any of Wheeler’s calculations, and believe none survive.
I estimated theoretical transmission of light pipes using his design from standard
optical formulas, assuming ideal straight pipes and perfect optical surfaces. The-
oretical transmission is better for the metal-coated pipes Eaglesﬁeld proposed than
for Wheeler’s glass pipes because glancing-angle reﬂectivity is lower from a glass
surface than from an ideal metal reﬂector.
43. R. W. Lomax, B. D. Fairchild, and G. I. Turner, ‘‘Attenuation measurement
of an optical pipeline,’’ Standard Telecommunications Laboratories, report 1001/
162/0051, undated but probably 1962.
44. The Czechs measured loss of 57 decibels per kilometer (about 90 decibels
per mile) in 100 meters of aluminum-coated glass pipe hung from the ceiling in
halls of a reinforced concrete building, but even they concluded the idea was
impractical. M. Prochazka, J. Pachman, and J. Muzik, ‘‘Experimental investigation
of a pipeline for optical communications,’’ Electronics Letters 3, pp. 73–74 (Feb.
1967).
45. Murray Ramsay, interview, Dec. 2, 1994.
46. C. H. Chandler, ‘‘An investigation of dielectric rod as wave guide,’’ Journal
of Applied Physics 20, pp. 1188–1192 (Dec. 1949).
47. Elias Snitzer interview, Mar. 4, 1994. The ﬁring led to a legal battle be-
tween the American Association of University Professors and Lowell, now the
University of Massachusetts at Lowell.
48. Snitzer described the results at a Rochester optics conference in mid-1960,
then published two detailed studies: Elias Snitzer, ‘‘Cylindrical dielectric waveguide
modes,’’ Journal of the Optical Society of America 51, No. 5, pp. 491–498 (May
1961); Elias Snitzer and Harold Osterberg, ‘‘Observed dielectric waveguide modes
in the visible spectrum,’’ Journal of the Optical Society of America 51, No. 5,
pp. 499–505 (May 1961).
49. John W. Hicks, Jr., Elias Snitzer, and Harold Osterberg, US Patent 3,
157,726, ‘‘Optical energy transmitting devices and method of making same,’’ ﬁled
Mar. 1, 1960, issued Nov. 17, 1964.
50. Narinder S. Kapany, ‘‘Fiber optics,’’ Scientiﬁc American 203, No. 5, pp. 72–
81 (Nov. 1960).
51. Will Hicks, interview, Feb. 4, 1994.

NOTES TO PAGES 92–95
295
Chapter 8
1. ‘‘Light ampliﬁer extends spectrum,’’ Electronics, July 22, 1960, p. 43.
2. Strictly speaking, some other sources generate light that is coherent over
very short distances, and some lasers are not very coherent. However, lasers re-
main the most practical sources of coherent light.
3. Internal memo by W. A. Tyrell, quoted in Rudolf Kompfner, ‘‘Optics at Bell
Laboratories—optical communications,’’ Applied Optics 11, No. 11, pp. 2412–
2425 (Nov. 1972).
4. For more details, see Jeff Hecht, Laser Pioneers (Academic Press, Boston,
1991).
5. Townes grew up in Greenville, South Carolina, the home town of Will Hicks,
and like Hicks attended Furman University before leaving for graduate school. At
Furman, Hicks was a classmate of Townes’s younger sister, Aurelia, who later
married Schawlow. While they share sharp minds, fertile technical imaginations,
and the same small-city southern background, the two have contrasting styles.
Townes is a gentleman of the old school, scholarly and digniﬁed; Hicks is casual
and folksy, with an unmistakably southern tone to his voice. Townes has spent
his life in academia, publishing widely in scholarly journals and serving on many
government science-policy panels. Hicks has spent most of his life as an entrepre-
neur and inventor, collecting over a hundred patents and starting a series of
companies.
6. Arthur L. Schawlow and Charles H. Townes, ‘‘Infrared and optical masers,’’
Physical Review 112, p. 1940 (1958).
7. The story of laser development is a rich tale in itself. For highlights, see
Hecht, Laser Pioneers, and Joan Bromberg, The Laser in America (MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, 1991).
8. The journal’s eminent and opinionated founding editor, Samuel Goudsmit,
was annoyed by a series of papers reporting minor advances, and Maiman had
published a related paper in the journal just weeks before. Hecht, Laser Pioneers;
Bromberg, The Laser in America’’ (p. 92).
9. Theodore H. Maiman, ‘‘Stimulated optical radiation in ruby,’’ Nature 187,
p. 493 (Aug. 6, 1960).
10. ‘‘Light ampliﬁer.’’
11. ‘‘Scientists demonstrate optical maser,’’ Electronics, Oct. 21, 1960, p. 38.
(Bell Labs stubbornly continued to call the laser an ‘‘optical maser’’ although
others quickly adopted the name laser.)
12. R. N. Schwartz and Charles H. Townes, ‘‘Interstellar and interplane-
tary communication by optical masers,’’ Nature 190, pp. 205–208 (Apr. 15,
1961).
13. Hecht, Laser Pioneers (interview with Ali Javan).
14. Richard Smith, telephone interview, June 11, 1997.
15. Ivan Kaminow, interview, July 19, 1995.
16. James P. Gordon, telephone interview, July 5, 1994.
17. S. E. Miller and L. C. Tillotson, ‘‘Optical transmission research,’’ Applied
Optics 5, pp. 1538–1549 (Oct. 1966).
18. Strictly speaking, by over 60 decibels (decibels are explained on pages
115–116). Miller and Tillotson, ‘‘Optical transmission research.’’
19. R. Meredith, Royal Radar and Signals Establishment, ‘‘Unguided optical
propagation in the atmosphere and under-sea,’’ paper presented at the Conference

296
NOTES TO PAGES 95–99
on Lasers and Their Applications, Sept. 1964, Institution of Electrical Engineers,
London.
20. Kaminow interview.
21. Jena was in the Russian-occupied sector that became East Germany. Felix
Schwering, telephone interview, May 15, 1996.
22. Georg Goubau, Felix Schwering, J. Robert Christian, and James W. Mink,
‘‘Comments on: optics at Bell Laboratories—optical communications,’’ Applied Op-
tics 12, No. 5, pp. 936–937 (May 1973). This responds to a long paper by Rudolf
Kompfner that implied Bell Labs was ﬁrst; in a reply to Goubau’s letter, Kompfner
denies he claimed priority.
23. G. Goubau and J. R. Christian, ‘‘Investigations on a beam waveguide for
optical frequencies,’’ paper presented at the Army Science Conference, June 1962,
copy supplied by R. Epworth.
24. Ibid.
25. Georg Goubau and J. R. Christian, ‘‘Loss measurements with a beam wave-
guide for long distance transmission at optical frequencies,’’ Proceedings of the
IEEE, Dec. 1964, p. 1739.
26. Georg Goubau, ‘‘Lenses guide optical frequencies to low-loss transmis-
sion,’’ Electronics, May 16, 1966, pp. 83–89.
27. Paul Lazay, interview, Nov. 12, 1996.
28. Kompfner ‘‘was a seed of many many thoughts that people thought were
their own but in reality had grown out of their interactions with this extraordinary
man.’’ Enrique (Henry) Marcatili, telephone interview, July 19, 1994.
29. E. F. O’Neill, ed., A History of Engineering and Science in the Bell System: Vol.
7. Transmission Technology 1925–1975 (AT&T Bell Labs, 1985, New York,
pp. 623–647).
30. Detlef Gloge, telephone interview, June 27, 1994.
31. Kompfner, ‘‘Optics.’’ It isn’t clear exactly what those assumptions were
because the numbers Kompfner published on p. 2414 are wrong. His paper gives
loss of two percent or ‘‘1/13 decibel’’ for each of a series of lenses spaced 100
meters apart, and assumes a repeater is needed to amplify the signal after total
loss reaches 50 decibels. However, those numbers would yield a repeater spacing
of 65 kilometers, not 650 kilometers. Reaching Kompfner’s goal of 650 kilometer
transmission between repeaters would have required loss a factor of ten lower, or
0.2 percent (about 0.0087 decibel) per lens.
32. The loss estimate comes from Takanori Okoshi, Optical Fibers (Academic
Press, New York, 1982, pp. 5–6), citing D. Gloge and W. H. Steier, ‘‘Pulse shut-
tling in a half-mile optical lens guide,’’ Bell System Technical Journal 47, pp. 767–
782 (1968). Gloge and Steier did not directly measure or indicate loss in their
paper.
33. D. Gloge and D. Weiner, ‘‘The capacity of multiple beam waveguides and
optical delay lines,’’ Bell System Technical Journal 47, pp. 2095–2109 (1968).
34. Okoshi, Optical Fibers (pp. 6–7).
35. The manager was Andy Hutson. Dwight W. Berreman, telephone inter-
view, Dec. 8, 1995.
36. Dwight W. Berreman, ‘‘A lens or light guide using convectively distorted
thermal gradients in gases,’’ Bell System Technical Journal 43, pp. 1469–1475.
(1964)
37. Berreman telephone interview.
38. Both papers appeared in the same journal issue: Dwight W. Berreman,

NOTES TO PAGES 99–102
297
‘‘Growth of oscillations around the irregular wavy axis of a light guide,’’ Bell
System Technical Journal 44, pp. 2117–2132 (Nov. 1965); Dietrich Marcuse,
‘‘Properties of periodic gas lenses,’’ Bell System Technical Journal 44 pp. 2083–
2116, (Nov. 1965).
39. Peter Kaiser, telephone interview, May 17, 1995.
40. Irwin Dorros, ‘‘The Picturephone system: the network,’’ Bell System Tech-
nical Journal 50, No. 2, pp. 221–233 (Feb. 1971); this entire thick issue of Bell’s
ofﬁcial technical journal is devoted to plans for the Picturephone, which managers
thought would shape the phone system.
41. Marcatili telephone interview; also A. G. Fox and Ivan P. Kaminow ‘‘Light-
wave communications,’’ in S. Millman ed., A History of Engineering and Science in
the Bell System: Vol. 5 Communications Sciences (AT&T, Bell Laboratories, Indian-
apolis, 1984, pp. 282–283).
42. Stewart E. Miller, ‘‘Communication by laser,’’ Scientiﬁc American 214, No.
1, pp. 19–27 (Jan. 1966).
43. Kompfner, ‘‘Optics.’’
44. Probably Narinder S. Kapany and James Burke, ‘‘Fiber optics. Part IX,
waveguide effects,’’ Journal of the Optical Society of America 51, No. 10, pp. 1067–
1078 (Oct. 1961). This appeared ﬁve months after Elias Snitzer published a paper
on waveguide effects in the same journal.
45. Jeofry S. Courtney-Pratt, telephone interview, Jan. 5, 1995.
46. Kaminow interview. Kaminow says he suggested optical ﬁbers to Kompf-
ner; other people must have done the same.
47. Rudolf Kompfner, ‘‘Optical communications,’’ Science 150, pp. 149–155
(Oct. 8, 1965).
48. Miller and Tillotson, ‘‘Optical transmission research.’’
49. Stewart E. Miller, ‘‘Possible broadband systems of the future,’’ Signal, Aug.
1966, pp. 52–56.
50. Will Hicks interview, Feb. 4, 1994.
51. Ibid.
52. Lawrence Curtiss, interview, Jan. 20, 1995.
53. Heinrich Lamm, letter to Norbone B. Powell, Aug. 26, 1965, copy supplied
by Michael Lamm. Although Rudolf Schindler knew about ﬁber-optic endoscopes
eight years earlier, and knew where Lamm was working, there is no evidence
Schindler told Lamm about the development.
54. Per telephone interviews with the Hansell family, who were surprised to
hear about his ﬁber-optics patent.
55. ‘‘Clarence W. Hansell, 69, dead; electrical engineer for RCA,’’ New York
Times, Oct. 24, 1967.
56. Richard Cunningham, ‘‘Applications pioneer interview: Narinder Ka-
pany,’’ Lasers & Applications, July 1986, pp. 65–68.
57. ‘‘2 ex-giants stop making lasers,’’ Laser Focus, Mar. 1973, pp. 30–32.
58. Kapany was forced out as chief executive as the company drifted toward
bankruptcy. By 1974, Optics Technology had vanished, one of several early laser
companies hit hard by the slumping economy (‘‘2 ex-giants’’). The company never
did venture into ﬁbers for communications, which Kapany did not mention in a
1969, interview. ‘‘Fiber optics, growth ﬁeld of the 1970s: an interview with Na-
rinder S. Kapany,’’ Laser Focus, July 1969, pp. 30–31.

298
NOTES TO PAGES 103–110
Chapter 9
1. A. E. Karbowiak, ‘‘Guided propagation at optical frequencies,’’ paper 33 in
Conference on Lasers and Their Applications (Institution of Electrical Engineers, Lon-
don, 1964).
2. ‘‘There could, however, be some future in large-capacity systems using laser
communication between balloons suspended above the weather-affected layer of
the troposphere. The service reliability of such systems could be very good indeed.’’
A. E. Karbowiak, ‘‘Communication systems in the visible and infrared spectra:
present and future,’’ paper 30 in Conference on Lasers and Their Applications. (p. 30–
5).
3. R. W. Lomax, B. D. Fairchild, and G. I. Turner, ‘‘Attenuation measurement
of an optical pipeline,’’ Standard Telecommunication Laboratories Ltd., report
1001/162/00F1, updated (probably 1962).
4. Charles K. Kao, interview, Apr. 9, 1995.
5. Karbowiak, ‘‘Guided propagation.’’
6. Antoni E. Karbowiak, telephone interview, Feb. 5, 1995.
7. K. C. Kao, ‘‘The theory and practice of quasi-optical waveguide compo-
nents,’’ Symposium Proceedings on Quasi-Optics (Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn,
1964, pp. 497–514).
8. The company’s French name translates roughly as General Company for
Telegraphy Without Wires; like RCA, it specialized in radio transmission.
9. Eric Spitz, telephone interview, Feb. 14, 1996; Alain Werts, telephone in-
terview, Feb. 13, 1996.
10. J. C. Simon and E. Spitz, ‘‘Propagation guidee de lumiere coherente’’ (The
guided propagation of coherent light), Communications a la Societe Francaise de
Physique 24, No. 2, pp. 149–149 (1963), translation by Jean Louis Trudel; Kar-
bowiak, ‘‘Guided propagation.’’
11. C. H. Chandler, ‘‘An investigation of dielectric rod as wave guide,’’ Journal
of Applied Physics 20, pp. 1188–1192 (Dec. 1949).
12. George Hockham, interview, Dec. 6, 1994.
13. In microwave terms, this means the outer material had to have a smaller
dielectric constant.
14. Karbowiak, ‘‘Guided propagation.’’
15. Werts telephone interview; Spitz telephone interview. Spitz says the project
started in 1963; Werts remembered 1964.
16. Simon and Spitz, ‘‘Propagation guide.’’
17. A. E. Karbowiak, ‘‘New type of waveguide for light and infrared waves,’’
Electronics Letters 1, No. 2, pp. 47–48 (Apr. 1965).
18. This is often called the near to mid-infrared range. Visible light has wave-
lengths of 0.4 to 0.7 micrometer. Antoni E. Karbowiak, ‘‘Optical waveguides,’’ in
Leo Young, ed., Advances in Microwaves (Vol. 1; Academic Press, New York, 1966,
pp. 75–113).
19. Karbowiak telephone interview.
20. Antoni E. Karbowiak, Trunk Waveguide Communication (Chapman and Hall,
London, 1965).
21. Karbowiak telephone interview; Hockham telephone interview.
22. Family names are written ﬁrst in Chinese; his family name is Kao.
23. Kao interview.
24. Hockham interview.

NOTES TO PAGES 110–119
299
25. Karbowiak ‘‘Optical waveguides’’ (see note p. 103).
26. Charles K. Kao, ‘‘Historical notes on optical ﬁber communications,’’ un-
published manuscript, p. 13.
27. Kao interview.
28. Hockham interview.
29. He attributed the estimate to a Mme. A. Winter, evidently a glass specialist.
Kao, ‘‘Historical notes’’ (p. 11).
30. Robert D. Maurer, ‘‘Light scattering by glasses,’’ Journal of Chemical Physics
25, p. 1206 (1956).
31. Kao, ‘‘Historical notes’’ (p. 13).
32. Ibid. (p. 16).
33. Murray Ramsay, interview, Dec. 2, 1994; Ramsay, letter to author, Jan.
12, 1997.
34. Kao, ‘‘Historical notes’’ (p. 16).
35. K. C. Kao and G. A. Hockham, ‘‘Dielectric-ﬁbre surface waveguides for op-
tical frequencies,’’ Proceedings IEE 113 pp. 1151–1158, July 1966.
36. Standard Telecommunication Laboratories, ‘‘STL develops techniques
aimed at communication by guided light,’’ press release dated Jan. 27, 1966.
37. ‘‘Optical waveguides: single-mode propagation in optical ﬁbers and ﬁlms,’’
Wireless World 72, p. 194 (Apr. 1966).
38. ITT Communications also put out a press release, and the editor evidently
did not know ITT owned STL, so he thought that two companies had developed
the same, technology separately. ‘‘Two British ﬁrms build tiny optical wavegui-
des,’’ Laser Focus 1, Apr. 1966, pp. 3–4.
39. Searches by author.
40. Stewart E. Miller, ‘‘Communication by laser,’’ Scientiﬁc American 214, No.
1, pp. 19–27 (Jan. 1966).
41. Alain Werts, ‘‘Propagation de la lumiere coherente dans les ﬁbres op-
tiques,’’ L’Onde Electronique 46, pp. 967–980 (Sept. 1966), cites a paper by Kao,
‘‘Dielectric ﬁber surface waveguides for optical frequencies,’’ evidently an internal
STL paper or a preprint. Kao used the same title for both his Delft paper and the
paper in Proceedings of the IEE.
42. Werts telephone interview.
43. Werts, ‘‘Propagation de la lumiere.’’ The Journal does not indicate a sub-
mission date, but it probably was much later than the Kao and Hockham paper.
One reason the paper has been largely forgotten was its publication in French.
44. Spitz telephone interview.
Chapter 10
1. Charles K. Kao, interview, Apr. 9, 1995.
2. The light source he spoke of was the semiconductor laser. Charles K. Kao,
telephone interview, July 14, 1994.
3. Richard B. Dyott, telephone interview, Jan. 11, 1994.
4. Richard B. Dyott, ‘‘Some memories of the early years with optical ﬁbers at
the British Post Ofﬁce: a personal account,’’ IEE Proceedings 133 J, No. 3, pp. 199–
201 (June 1986); also telephone interview, June 23, 1994.
5. Jack Tillman, telephone interview, Feb. 9, 1995.
6. John Bray, telephone interview, June 22, 1994.
7. Prestel was the archetypal videotex system, which used electronic adapters

300
NOTES TO PAGES 119–123
that provided an interface between phone lines (hooked to remote computers) and
home television screens. Videotex arrived at the same time as the personal com-
puter, which rendered it obsolete. Ironically, some features of the graphically ori-
ented World Wide Web clearly derive from videotex.
8. ‘‘It failed to take off so decisively,’’ recalls Roger Heckingbottom, interview,
Dec. 1, 1994.
9. Charles Kao, ‘‘Historical notes on optical ﬁber communications,’’ unpubli-
shed manuscript, with notes.
10. Full name provided by Institution of Electrical Engineers, Archives
dept.
11. Don Williams (telephone interview, Sept. 9, 1994) said he ‘‘looked after
all sorts of odd topics.’’
12. Clive Day, interview, Dec. 1, 1994. The project was a novel scheme for
storing data at the sites of atomic dislocations in crystals.
13. Dyott, telephone interview, Jan. 23, 1995; Clive Day, interview, Dec. 1,
1994.
14. The Post Ofﬁce lab took pride in beating the better-funded Bell Labs. The
property is called Faraday rotation, in which applying a magnetic ﬁeld to a ma-
terial called a ferrite rotates the plane of polarization of the microwaves (infor-
mation provided by IEE Archives dept.).
15. Heckingbottom, interview.
16. Charles Sandbank telephone interview, Sept. 7, 1994.
17. Robert Maurer, interview, Mar. 7, 1995.
18. Williams telephone interview.
19. W. A. Gambling, ‘‘Optical ﬁbres: the Southampton scene,’’ IEE Proceedings
133J No. 3, pp. 205–210 (June 1986).
20. Kao, ‘‘Historical notes’’ (p. 20).
21. Martin Chown, interview, Dec. 2, 1994, and telephone interview Nov. 15,
1994.
22. Eric Spitz, telephone interview, Feb. 14, 1996. Spitz thinks the visit came
in 1964 or 1965, but the involvement of Roberts indicates it could not have been
before 1966.
23. Shojiro Kawakami, ‘‘The early days of optical ﬁber communication re-
search,’’ Optoelectronics—Devices and Technologies 1, No. 2, pp. 125–136 (Dec.
1986).
24. Miller’s idea was a theoretical extension of work on millimeter and con-
focal waveguides, which also applied to ﬁbers. From a theoretical standpoint, a
graded-index waveguide is merely the limiting case of inﬁnitely thin lenses spaced
inﬁnitesimally close together. Stewart E. Miller, US Patent 3,434,774, ‘‘Waveguide
for millimeter and optical waves,’’ ﬁled Feb. 2, 1965, as division of application
ﬁled Feb. 25, 1964; issued Mar. 25, 1969.
25. Kao, ‘‘Historical notes’’ (pp. 20–21).
26. Richard B. Dyott, ‘‘Some memories.’’
27. Heckingbottom, interview, Dec. 1, 1994.
28. Richard B. Dyott, ‘‘Some memories.’’
29. Ibid.
30. Dyott telephone interview, Jan. 23, 1995.
31. Chown interview; Laszlo Solymar, personal communication. The precise
chain of command at STL varied over the years when ﬁbers were being developed,
and Reeves functioned more as a technical consultant than a line manager, es-

NOTES TO PAGES 123–129
301
pecially as he neared retirement. Managers not responsible for the ﬁber program
tended to be the most skeptical.
32. Charles Sandbank, interview, Dec. 6, 1994; this probably was the 1967
budget, but he was not certain.
33. Murray Ramsay, letter to author, Jan. 12, 1997.
34. He used the ﬁber work in his doctoral thesis. Hockham ran the antenna
group until he left STL at the end of 1974. George Hockham, interview, Dec. 6,
1994.
35. Richard Epworth, interview, Dec. 2, 1994.
36. K. C. Kao and Turner W. Davies, ‘‘Spectrophotometric studies of ultra low
loss optical glasses 1: single-beam method,’’ Journal of Scientiﬁc Instruments 1 (Jour-
nal of Physics E), pp. 1063–1068 (Nov. 1968).
37. Kao, ‘‘Historical notes.’’
38. M. W. Jones and K. C. Kao, ‘‘Spectrophotometric studies of ultra low loss
optical glasses 2: double-beam method,’’ Journal of Scientiﬁc Instruments 2 (Journal
of Physics E), pp. 331–335 (Apr. 1969).
39. Murray Ramsay, interview, Dec. 2, 1994.
40. David Pearson, telephone interview, Feb. 16, 1996.
41. Robert C. Weast, ed. CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics 62nd ed.,
(CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla., 1981) other sources say higher temperatures, up
to 2000C.
42. Ramsay interview.
43. Klaus Loewenstein, technical director of Deeglass Fibres Ltd. in Camberley,
a small town west of London, suggested the idea to Dyott when he visited the
plant on Aug. 30, 1968.
44. Armand Lamesch, US Patent 2,313,296, ‘‘Fiber or ﬁlament of glass,’’ ﬁled
Sept. 23, 1937, issued Mar. 9, 1943 (German patent ﬁled Sept. 30, 1936).
45. Will Hicks, interview, Feb. 4, 1994.
46. Dyott telephone interviews, Jan. 23, 1995, and Feb. 2, 1996. He is not
sure if Roberts ever knew Newns used sugar.
47. Clive Day, interview, Dec. 1, 1994.
48. Pearson added William French and Eric Rawson from Murray Hill, and
Art Tynes and D. L. Bisbee from Crawford Hill.
49. Pearson telephone interview.
50. They made the measurements in different units, converted by author. A. R.
Tynes, A. David Pearson, and D. L. Bisbee, ‘‘Loss mechanisms and measurements
in clad glass ﬁbers and bulk glass,’’ Journal of the Optical Society of America 61,
pp. 143–153 (Feb. 1971).
51. John Noble Wilford, ‘‘Soviet scientist reports successful trials in using laser
light beams for telephoning,’’ New York Times, Mar. 29, 1970, p. 53.
52. Kawakami, ‘‘The early days.’’
53. Teiji Uchida et al. ‘‘Optical characteristics of a light-focusing ﬁber guide
and its applications,’’ IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics QE-6, pp. 606–612 (Oct.
1970).
54. Ramsay letter. It was later upgraded and operated at 100 million bits per
second. Chown interview, Dec. 2, 1994.
55. Ramsay and Chown interviews, Dec. 2, 1994.
56. Ibid.
57. Kao, ‘‘Historical notes.’’
58. Sandbank interview, Dec. 6, 1994.

302
NOTES TO PAGES 129–140
59. See Detlef Gloge, ‘‘Optical waveguide transmission,’’ Proceedings of the IEEE
58, pp. 1513–1522 (Oct. 1970). He cites D. Marcuse and R. M. Derosier, ‘‘Mode
conversion caused by diameter changes of a round dielectric waveguide,’’ Bell
System Technical Journal 48, pp. 2103–2132 (Sept. 1969).
60. Stewart E. Miller, ‘‘Optical communications research progress,’’ Science
170, pp. 685–695 (Nov. 13, 1970).
Chapter 11
1. Robert Maurer, interview, Mar. 7, 1995.
2. Ibid.
3. David E. Fisher and Marshall Jon Fisher, Tube: The Invention of Television
(Counterpoint, Washington, D.C., 1996).
4. Peter Schultz, interview, May 17, 1995.
5. Robert Kammer Cassetti, Corning Inc., ‘‘Pure silica glass: vitreous silica,’’
memo dated Oct. 2, 1996, based on interviews with Hyde and others.
6. David Pearson, telephone interview, Feb. 16, 1996.
7. Schultz interview; Cassetti, ‘‘Pure silica glass.’’
8. ‘‘Fiber Optics: Corning enters intriguing ﬁeld,’’ Corning Gaffer, June 1965,
pp. 1–2.
9. Charles J. Lucy, telephone interview, Dec. 3, 1996.
10. Maurer interview.
11. Ibid.
12. Robert Maurer, telephone interview, Jan. 19, 2000.
13. Clifton Fonstad, telephone interview, June 5, 1996.
14. Kriedl was an unusual character, an Austrian who had run a family glass
factory in Czechoslovakia and married a princess, only to barely escape with a
suitcase (and his wife) from the invading Nazis in 1938. He joined Bausch and
Lomb, one of the old giants of traditional American optics, in time to head optical
glass development during World War II. Full of energy when he retired from the
company at 60, he was hired by Rutgers as the ﬁrst glass specialist in the uni-
versity’s ceramics program (Schultz, interview).
15. Schultz, interview.
16. Donald Keck, interview, Mar. 7, 1995.
17. Felix Kapron, interview, June 12, 1995.
18. Keck, interview.
19. Lucy, telephone interview. Corning had a philosophy of forming industrial
partnerships with companies with expertise in areas that complemented Corning’s
glass technology. Fiber-optic communication systems would require cabled ﬁber,
so cable companies were logical partners.
20. Keck interview.
21. Further heating crystallized the whole ﬁber, and crystalline quartz is nei-
ther as clear nor as ﬂexible as disordered glass. Keck interview. Maurer, Jan. 19,
2000, telephone interview.
22. Ibid.
23. Keck, e-mail to author, June 20, 2002.
24. Maurer interview.
25. Keck interview.
26. Jack Cook, telephone interview, Jul. 9, 1997.
27. The published abstract does not mention the low-loss ﬁber. The sentence

NOTES TO PAGES 140–146
303
reporting the record low loss is at the end of the second paragraph in the published
paper. F. P. Kapron, D. B. Keck, and R. D. Maurer, ‘‘Radiation losses in glass op-
tical waveguides,’’ Applied Physics Letters 17 pp. 423–425, Nov. 15, 1970, p. 423.
28. Keck interview.
29. F. P. Kapron, D. B. Keck, and R. D. Maurer, ‘‘Radiation losses in glass op-
tical waveguides,’’ Conference on Trunk Telecommunications by Guided Waves (Insti-
tution of Electrical Engineers, London, 1970, pp. 148–153).
30. Kapron, et al ‘‘Radiation losses in glass optical waveguides.’’
31. Harold E. M. Barlow, ‘‘Introductory address,’’ Conference on Trunk Telecom-
munications (pp. xi–xiv).
32. Maurer interview.
33. Cook telephone interview.
34. Richard Dyott, telephone interview, Jan. 11, 1994.
35. Lucy telephone interview.
36. Maurer interview. Although Hopkins and Kapany did important pioneer-
ing work in England, the country never developed its own medical-ﬁber industry.
37. Richard B. Dyott, ‘‘Some memories of the early years with optical ﬁbres
at the British Post Ofﬁce: a personal account,’’ IEE Proceedings 133 J, No. 3,
pp. 199–201 (June 1986).
38. Dyott telephone interview.
39. Ibid.
40. Murray Ramsay, interview, Dec. 2, 1994.
41. Corning’s low-loss ﬁber was a singularly unreported breakthrough. The
only contemporary account I could ﬁnd was in New Scientist (‘‘Clearer future for
ﬁbre optic communications,’’ New Scientist, 8 Oct. 1970, p. 77). The magazine
three months earlier had published a feature on ﬁber communications written by
an STL engineer (Martin Chown, ‘‘Light: the long-distance answer,’’ New Scientist,
16 July 1970, pp. 14–19 in supplement ‘‘Telecommunications: the expanding
Spectrum’’). Even major trade magazines such as Electronics and Industrial Re-
search ignored the breakthrough for months, although they reported lesser devel-
opments in late 1970 and early 1971. (‘‘Glass laser ﬁbers help transmit and am-
plify beams,’’ Electronics Sep. 28, 1970, pp. 129–130; ‘‘Transmission system uses
coated glass for laser beam,’’ Electronics Nov. 9, 1970, ‘‘International Newsletter’’
page; ‘‘British use R&D on ﬁber telecom link,’’ Industrial Research, Jan. 1971,
p. 33). An important reason for the oversight probably was that Corning did not
issue a press release.
42. Schultz, interview.
43. Pearson, telephone interview.
44. The idea that glass ﬂows very slowly at normal temperatures is an urban
myth of science. Although glass panes in some medieval cathedral windows may
be thicker at the bottom than at the top, that is an artifact of old glass-making
techniques which did not yield ﬂat sheets. Much older glass artifacts show no
evidence of ﬂow, and measurements at higher temperatures indicate glass should
be stable at room temperature for the life of the universe. (Edgar D. Zanotto, ‘‘Do
cathedral glasses ﬂow?’’ American Journal of Physics 66, No. 5, pp. 392–395, May
1998).
45. Keck interview.
46. Schultz interview.
47. Ibid.
48. D. B. Keck, R. D. Maurer, and P. C. Schultz, ‘‘On the ultimate lower limit

304
NOTES TO PAGES 147–151
of attenuation in glass optical waveguides,’’ Applied Physics Letters 22, No. 7,
pp. 307–309 (Apr. 1, 1973).
Chapter 12
1. David Newman, interview, Dec. 1, 1994.
2. The name diode comes from a two-terminal vacuum tube, which like a
semiconductor diode conducts current in only one direction.
3. Applying the voltage in the direction that makes the current ﬂow is called
forward-biasing the diode; applying it in the opposite direction is called reverse-
biasing. A high enough reverse-bias voltage will tear valance electrons free from
atoms, making current ﬂow in a process called ‘‘breakdown,’’ but we won’t worry
about that.
4. Robert N. Hall, quoted in Jeff Hecht, Laser Pioneers, (Academic Press, Boston,
1991, p. 181).
5. Strictly speaking, the second law holds that in a closed system, any irre-
versible process must inevitably increase the entropy, a measure of disorder. Real
processes are irreversible, so entropy invariably increases. The quote is from Rob-
ert Rediker, telephone interview, Dec. 11, 1996. Many details also are in Robert
H. Rediker, ‘‘Research at Lincoln Laboratory leading up to the development of the
injection laser in 1962,’’ IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics QE-23, No. 6,
pp. 692–695, June 1987.
6. Hall, quoted in Hecht, Laser Pioneers.
7. Keyes gave his paper in early July 1962; the journal received Hall’s paper
77 days later, on Sept. 24. R. N. Hall, Gunther E. Fenner, J. D. Kingsley, T. J.
Soltys, and R. O. Carlson, ‘‘Coherent light emission from GaAs junctions,’’ Physical
Review Letters 9, pp. 366–368 (Nov. 1, 1962).
8. Marshall I. Nathan, ‘‘Invention of the injection laser at IBM,’’ IEEE Journal
of Quantum Electronics QE-23, No. 6, pp. 679–683 (June 1987); Marshall I. Na-
than, W. P. Dumke, G. Burns, F. H. Dill, Jr., and G. Lasher, ‘‘Stimulated emission
of radiation from GaAs p-n junctions,’’ Applied Physics Letters 1, pp. 62–64 (Nov.
1, 1962).
9. Nick Holonyak, Jr., ‘‘Semiconductor alloy lasers—1962,’’ IEEE Journal of
Quantum Electronics QE-23, No. 6, pp. 684–691 (June 1987); Nick Holonyak, Jr.,
and S. F. Bevacqua, ‘‘Coherent (visible) light emission from Ga(As1x Px) junc-
tions,’’ Applied Physics Letters 1, pp. 82–83 (Dec. 1962).
10. T. M. Quist, R. H. Rediker, R. J. Keyes, W. E. Krag, B. Lax, A. L. Mc-
Whorter, and H. J. Zeiger, ‘‘Semiconductor maser of GaAs,’’ Applied Physics Letters
1, pp. 91–92 (Dec. 1962).
11. G. F. Dalrymple, B. S. Goldstein, and T. M. Quist, ‘‘A solid-state room-
temperature operated GaAs laser transmitter,’’ Proceedings of the IEEE 52, No. 12,
pp. 1742–1743 (Dec. 1964). To be fair, diode lasers ran at much lower voltage
and thus lower power, but that was a tremendous current to put through a crystal
as big as a grain of sand.
12. H. Kroemer, ‘‘A proposed class of heterojunction injection lasers,’’ Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE 51, pp. 1782–1783 (Dec. 1963).
13. Nick Holonyak, Jr., telephone interview, July 24, 1996.
14. Zhores Alferov, ‘‘The history and future of the semiconductor heterostruc-
tures from the point of view of a Russian scientist,’’ Physica Scripta T68, pp. 32–

NOTES TO PAGES 152–155
305
45 (1996) (Proceedings of the Nobel Symposium ‘‘Heterostructures in Semiconduc-
tors), forthcoming.
15. Alferov, ‘‘The history and future.’’
16. Herb Nelson, ‘‘Epitaxial growth from the liquid state and its application to
the fabrication of tunnel and laser diodes,’’ RCA Review 24 pp. 603–615 (Dec.
1963).
17. Alferov, ‘‘The history and future’’; he refers to Z. I. Alferov et al., ‘‘High-
voltage p-n junctions in GaxAl1xAs crystals,’’ Fizika i Tekhnika Poluprovodnikov 1,
p. 1579 (1967) (submitted May 18, 1967); published in English in Soviet Phys-
ics—Semiconductors 1, p. 1313 (1968).
18. A team at the IBM T. J. Watson Research Center made gallium aluminum
arsenide heterostructures on gallium arsenide substrates. H. Rupprecht, J. M.
Woodall, and G. D. Pettit, ‘‘Efﬁcient visible electroluminescence at 300K from
Ga1xA1xAs p-n junctions grown by liquid-phase epitaxy,’’ Applied Physics Letters
11, pp. 81–83 (Aug. 1, 1967).
19. H. Kressel and H. Nelson, ‘‘Close conﬁnement gallium arsenide pn junction
lasers with reduced optical loss at room temperature,’’ RCA Review 30, pp. 106–
113 (Mar. 1969).
20. ‘‘What is in a name? Plenty—when it refers to new diodes,’’ Laser Focus
5, pp. 20–21 (Aug. 1969).
21. Izuo Hayashi, ‘‘Heterostructure lasers,’’ IEEE Transactions on Electron De-
vices ED-31, pp. 1630–1642 (Nov. 1984).
22. Morton Panish, interview, July 19, 1995.
23. Hayashi, ‘‘Heterostructure lasers.’’
24. Morton Panish, telephone interview, June 30, 1995.
25. Hayashi, ‘‘Heterostructure lasers.’’
26. I. Hayashi, M. Panish, and P. W. Foy, ‘‘A low-threshold room-temperature
injection laser,’’ IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics QE-5, pp. 211–213 (Apr.
1969).
27. Kressel and Nelson, ‘‘Close-conﬁnement.’’
28. See ﬁg. 4 in Z. I. Alferov et al., ‘‘AlAs-GaAs Heterojunction injection lasers
with a low room-temperature threshold,’’ Fizika i Tekhnika Poluprovodnikov 3, No.
9, pp. 1328–1332 (Sept. 1969); published in English in Soviet Physics—Semicon-
ductors 3, No. 9, pp. 1107–1110 (Mar. 1970).
29. Zhores I. Alferov, letter to author, June 14, 1996.
30. Hayashi, ‘‘Heterostructure lasers.’’
31. Ibid. Memorial Day was celebrated on May 30, which was a Saturday in
1970. Bell employees had the following Monday off.
32. The executive was Bill Boyle. Panish telephone interview, June 30, 1995.
33. I. Hayashi, M. B. Panish, P. W. Foy, and S. Sumski, ‘‘Junction lasers which
operate continuously at room temperature,’’ Applied Physics Letters 17, No. 3,
pp. 109–111 (Aug. 1, 1970).
34. Alferov, ‘‘The history and future.’’
35. Jack C. Dyment, telephone interview, Dec. 18, 1996; J. C. Dyment,
‘‘Hermite-Gaussian mode patterns in GaAs junction lasers,’’ Applied Physics Letters
10, No. 3, pp. 84–86 (Feb. 1, 1967).
36. Peter Selway, telephone interview, Jan. 31, 1995.
37. Zhores I. Alferov et al., ‘‘Effect of the heterostructure parameters on the
laser threshold current and the realization of continuous generation at room tem-
perature,’’ Fizika i Tekhnika Poluprovodnikov 4, p. 1826 (1970) (submitted May 6,

306
NOTES TO PAGES 155–159
1970); published in English in Soviet Physics—Semiconductors 4, p. 1573 (1971),
cited in Alferov, ‘‘The history and future.’’
38. Holonyak telephone interview.
39. Alferov letter.
40. Holonyak telephone interview.
41. Alferov letter.
42. Jane E. Brody, ‘‘Bell developing a pocket laser,’’ New York Times, Sept. 1,
1970, p. 18. The Times article stresses the importance of the new laser for laser
technology in general, as well as for communications. It does not mention how
laser beams would be transmitted for communications; at that time Bell Labs was
still heavily involved with hollow light pipes, and legitimate doubts remained
about the feasibility of ﬁber-optic communications. The contrast between the Bell
Labs press conference and Corning’s press silence reﬂects the striking contrast in
the two corporate cultures in 1970.
43. A major concern was manufacturing lasers that would meet industrial
reliability requirements. ‘‘Second thoughts on applications for Bell’s c-w room-
temperature diode,’’ Laser Focus Oct. 1970, pp. 24–26; Panish, interview, July 19,
1995.
44. Selway telephone interview.
45. Isamu Sakuma et al., ‘‘Continuous operation of junction lasers at room
temperature,’’ Japan Journal of Applied Physics 10, pp. 282–283 (1971).
46. Panish telephone interview, June 30, 1995.
47. Panish interview, July 19, 1995.
48. Robert L. Hartman, telephone interview, Dec. 19, 1996.
49. Henry Kressel, ‘‘The small, economy-size laser,’’ Laser Focus 6, pp. 45–49
(Nov. 1970).
50. Bernard C. DeLoach, Jr., telephone interview, Dec. 18, 1996. Another Bell
Labs scientist spotted dark lines in a dead laser at about the same time. B. C.
DeLoach, Jr., B. W. Hakki, R. L. Hartman, and L. A. D’Asaro, ‘‘Degradation of CW
GaAs double-heterojunction lasers at 300 K,’’ Proceedings of the IEEE 61, No. 7,
pp. 1042–1044 (July 1973).
51. David Newman and Simon Ritchie, ‘‘Sources and detectors for optical ﬁbre
communications applications: the ﬁrst 20 years,’’ IEE Proceedings 133 J, pp. 213–
229 (June 1986).
52. DeLoach telephone interview; follow-up call, Dec. 23, 1996.
53. DeLoach telephone interview and follow-up call.
54. Number from Hartman telephone interview.
55. Henry Kressel and J. K. Butler, Semiconductor Lasers and Heterojunction
LEDs (Academic Press, New York, 1977; see p. 3).
56. R. L. Hartman, J. C. Dyment, C. J. Hwang, and M. Kuhn, ‘‘Continuous
operation of GaAs-GaAlAs double-heterostructure lasers with 30C half-lives ex-
ceeding 1000 h,’’ Applied Physics Letters 23, No. 4, pp. 181–183 (Aug. 15,
1973).
57. Alan Steventon, interview, Dec. 1, 1994, p. 4.
58. Many historic moments have zipped by me, but this is one that I recall; it
became the lead item in the Laser Focus product section. ‘‘Commercial diodes emit
cw at room temperature,’’ Laser Focus 11, No. 8, p. 44 (Aug. 1975).
59. W. B. Joyce, R. W. Dixon, and R. L. Hartman, ‘‘Statistical characterization
of the lifetimes of continuously operate (Al,Ga)As double-heterostructure lasers,’’
Applied Physics Letters 28, No. 11, pp. 684–686 (June 1, 1976).

NOTES TO PAGES 159–163
307
60. Essentially the same paper appeared as R. L. Hartman, N. E. Schumaker,
and R. W. Dixon, ‘‘Continuously operated (Al,Ga)As double-heterostructure lasers
with 70C lifetimes as long as two years,’’ Applied Physics Letters 31, No. 11,
pp. 756–759 (Dec. 1, 1977).
61. Bell Labs, ‘‘Million hour lifetimes for lasers projected by Bell Labs,’’ press
release dated for release June 29, 1977.
62. See, e.g., ‘‘Postdeadline reports,’’ Laser Focus 13, p. 4 (Aug. 1977).
Chapter 13
1. M. Chown, ‘‘Light; the long-distance answer,’’ New Scientist, supplement,
July 16, 1970, pp. 14–19.
2. D. Gloge, ‘‘Optical waveguide transmission,’’ Proceedings of the IEEE 58, No.
10, pp. 1513–1522 (Oct. 1970). This paper was submitted in May.
3. J. R. Pierce, ‘‘How communications change man’s world,’’ in IEE Centenary
Lectures 1871–1971: Electrical Science and Engineering in the Service of Man, (Lon-
don, Institution of Electrical Engineers, 1971), pp. 77–91.
4. ‘‘Avalanche, Gunn diodes are coming on strongly in the quest for better
microwave power sources,’’ Electronics, Jan. 5, 1970, p. 128.
5. Chown, ‘‘Light.’’
6. It was founded as the Society of Telegraph Engineers and Electricians, May
17, 1871.
7. There were 65 exhibits. The others included a table-cleaning robot and a
tracked hovercraft. J. A. C. King, ‘‘The Centenary of the IEE,’’ unpublished man-
uscript supplied by IEE Archives; Murray Ramsay, interview, Dec. 2, 1994.
8. Murray Ramsay, telephone interview, Dec. 17, 1996.
9. Ramsay interview, Dec. 2, 1994; Martin Chown, interview, Dec. 2, 1994.
10. Martin Chown, telephone interview, Jan. 23, 1997.
11. Chown interview, Jan. 23, 1997.
12. Ramsay telephone interview, Dec. 17, 1996.
13. Murray Ramsay, letter to author, May 27, 1997.
14. Staff report, ‘‘Report from Southampton,’’ Laser Focus, May 1969, pp. 51–
55.
15. Like Queen Elizabeth II, Mountbatten was a descendant of Queen Victoria,
but he was far down the line of heirs to the throne.
16. Britain made Reeves a member of the Order of the British Empire in 1945
for his wartime radar work. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
and the Franklin Institute honored him in the 1960s for pulse-code modulation
(‘‘Alec Reeves dies; inventor was 69,’’ New York Times. Oct. 14, 1971). In 1969,
the British Post Ofﬁce issued a stamp showing a pulse-code modulation waveform,
to celebrate the post ofﬁce’s technological developments. Executives at Standard
Telecommunication Labs evidently got some of the stamps and distributed them
on specially printed envelopes which identiﬁed the subject as pulse-code modu-
lation, and called it a tribute to Reeves. However, ofﬁcial Post Ofﬁce ﬁrst-day
covers do not identify Reeves or pulse-code modulation (Laszlo Solymar, e-mail to
author, April 6, 1998).
17. Reeves wrote little for publication; the invited talks in Scotland and South
Africa are among the few exceptions and are invaluable in understanding his
ideas. They reveal some strikingly prophetic views of general trends, notably the
growth of mobile phones, which he viewed as a better use of radio spectrum than

308
NOTES TO PAGES 163–166
broadcast television. However, many details are off, such as his prediction of sub-
marine cables made with graded-index ﬁber and two-kilometer repeater spacing.
Alec Reeves, ‘‘The future of telecommunications: Bernard Price Memorial Lecture
1969,’’ Transactions of the South African Institute of Electrical Engineers (Sept. 1970,
pp. 445–465. This is the transcript of a lecture given Sept. 29–Oct. 1, 1969 in
South Africa. See also Alec Reeves, ‘‘Future prospects in optical communications,’’
John Logie Baird Memorial Lecture, University of Strathclyde, May 30, 1969.
18. ‘‘Alec Reeves dies.’’
19. John Midwinter, interview, Dec. 5, 1994.
20. Electronic circuits long ago replaced electro-mechanical relays in telephone
switching systems. You can think of telephone switches as special-purpose com-
puters. Vacuum-tube electronics were used in some early general-purpose com-
puters, but complex general-purpose computers were not possible until the advent
of transistors and integrated circuits. The same was true for the special-purpose
computers used in telephone switching. Digital telephone transmission also re-
quires fast, inexpensive circuits to convert signals back and forth between digital
and analog formats, and those also require transistors and integrated circuits to
be practical.
21. William A. Gambling, ‘‘Fibres, lasers, and communications,’’ The Radio and
Electronic Engineer 43, No. 11, pp. 653–654 (Nov. 1973).
22. Martin Chown et al., ‘‘Direct modulation of double-heterostructure lasers
at rates up to 1 Gbit/s,’’ Electronics Letters 9, No. 2, pp. 34–36 (Jan. 25, 1973).
23. Ira Jacobs, ‘‘Lightwave system development: looking back and ahead,’’
Optics & Photonics News, Feb. 1995, pp. 19–23, 39.
24. Laurence Altman, ‘‘Bell’s money is riding on millimeter waves for future
communications,’’ Electronics, Apr. 13, 1970, pp. 96–105; the bit rates are not
exact multiples because each level of multiplexing adds overhead bits.
25. Jack A. Baird, ‘‘The Picturephone system: forward,’’ Bell System Technical
Journal 50, No. 2, pp. 219–220 (Feb. 1971), says the ﬁrst public demonstration
of ‘‘two-way video telephony’’ was by Bell Labs in New York on Apr. 9, 1930.
While Jenkins and others were trying to broadcast television, Herbert Ives at Bell
Labs was thinking of two-way video communication. There was a similar haziness
of purpose among early radio developers, many of whom envisioned using radio
for two-way conversations.
26. Irwin Dorros, ‘‘The Picturephone system: the network,’’ Bell System Tech-
nical Journal 50, No. 2, pp. 221–233 (Feb. 71).
27. Donald Janson, ‘‘Picture-Telephone service is started in Pittsburgh,’’ New
York Times, July 1, 1970, p. 1.
28. Boyce Rensenberger, ‘‘Growth of Picturephones disappoints Bell System,’’
New York Times, July 3, 1970, p. 26. This article said that the number of Pic-
turephones had increased from an initial 25 to 33 a year later. The discrepancy
with the report a year earlier was unnoticed.
29. Altman, ‘‘Bell’s money.’’
30. Gloge, ‘‘Optical waveguide transmission.’’
31. Stewart E. Miller, ‘‘Optical communications research progress,’’ Science
170, pp. 685–695 (Nov. 13, 1970).
32. I searched both indexes and also those of specialist magazines such as
Electronics and Laser Focus. Industrial Research wrote about research at STL and
the British Post Ofﬁce in January 1971 issue, mentioning the diode laser as a
milestone but overlooking Corning’s ﬁber and Bell’s interest in communications.

NOTES TO PAGES 166–168
309
‘‘British push R&D on ﬁber telecom link’’ Industrial Research, Jan. 1971, pp. 33–
34.
33. John N. Kessler, interview Dec. 17, 1996; John N. Kessler, ‘‘Fiber optics
sharpens focus on laser communications,’’ Electronics, July 5, 1971, pp. 46–52.
34. Kessler, ‘‘Fiber optics sharpens focus.’’
35. David Pearson, telephone interview, Feb. 16, 1995.
36. Fiber drawing research was put under Alan G. Chynoweth, director of
materials research at Murray Hill. Tingye Li, telephone interview, Jan. 8, 1997;
also Paul Lazay, interview, Nov. 12, 1996.
37. Julian Stone, telephone interview, June 28, 1996; his published report
plots attenuation on a curve but does not cite the number. See Julian Stone,
‘‘Optical transmission in liquid-core quartz ﬁbers,’’ Applied Physics Letters 20,
pp. 239–240 (Apr. 1, 1972). (The liquid-core ﬁber had higher loss than the Corn-
ing ﬁber at the 633-nanometer wavelength of a helium-neon laser; the minimum
was at longer wavelengths where the Corning ﬁber suffered from impurity ab-
sorption.)
38. Graeme Ogilvie, a metallurgist at the Commonwealth Scientiﬁc & Indus-
trial Research Organization (CSIRO), had been working on very transparent or-
ganic compounds when he heard of Kao’s proposal. Rod Esdaile telephone inter-
view, June 6, 1996. G. J. Ogilvie, R. J. Esdaile, and G. P. Kidd, ‘‘Transmission loss
of tetrachloroethylene-ﬁlled liquid-core-ﬁber light guide,’’ Electronics Letters 8, No.
22, pp. 533–534 (Nov. 2, 1972).
39. D. N. Payne and W. A. Gambling, ‘‘The preparation of multimode glass-
and liquid-core optical ﬁbres,’’ Opto-electronics 5, pp. 297–307 (1973); in a June
9, 1995, telephone interview William Alec Gambling said they eventually reached
4 decibels per kilometer, but this evidently was not published.
40. The practical problems included the many hours needed to ﬁll a long,
extremely thin tube with liquid, and the large difference in thermal expansion
between glass and liquid. As the temperature changed, the liquid expanded or
contracted like mercury in a thermometer, pushing out or pulling away from the
ends of the tube [Esdaile, telephone interview; Gambling, interview; W. A. Gam-
bling, ‘‘Optical ﬁbres: the Southampton scene,’’ IEE Proceedings 133 J, pp. 205–
210 (June 1986)].
41. Peter Kaiser, E. A. J. Marcatili, and S. E. Miller, ‘‘A new optical ﬁber,’’ Bell
System Technical Journal 52 pp. 265–269 (Feb. 1973).
42. Ray Jaeger, lecture notes from 1994 talk, personal communication.
43. Peter Kaiser et al., ‘‘Spectral losses of unclad vitreous silica and soda-lime
silicate ﬁbers,’’ Journal of the Optical Society of America 63, pp. 1141–1148 (Sept.
1973).
44. Lazay interview.
45. Henry Marcatili, telephone interview, Jan. 3, 1997.
46. Peter Kaiser, telephone interview, May 17, 1995.
47. Miller, ‘‘Optical communications.’’
48. Charles A. Burrus and B. I. Miller, ‘‘Small-area double-heterostructure
aluminum-gallium-arsenide electroluminescent diode sources for optical-ﬁber
transmission lines,’’ Optics Communications 4, pp. 307–309 (Dec. 1971).
49. Reeves, ‘‘The future of telecommunications.’’
50. Stewart E. Miller, Enrique A. J. Marcatili, and Tingye Li, ‘‘Research toward
optical ﬁber transmission systems’’ (2 parts), Proceedings of the IEEE, Dec. 1973,
pp. 1703–1751.

310
NOTES TO PAGES 168–171
51. Reeves, ‘‘The future of telecommunications.’’
52. A. G. Fox and Ivan Kaminow, ‘‘Lightwave communication,’’ in S. Millman,
ed., A History of Engineering and Science in the Bell System: Vol. 5. Communication
Sciences (AT&T Bell Laboratories, Indianapolis, 1984, pp. 273–312).
53. Strictly speaking, pulse dispersion is the product of laser spectral width
and material dispersion. Narrow-line semiconductor lasers can reduce the prob-
lem, but they were not available in the early 1970s. Estimates based on Corning
data cited in Jeff Hecht, Understanding Fiber Optics (2nd ed.; Sams Publishing,
Indianapolis, 1993).
54. Midwinter interview.
55. Ramsay and Chown interviews, Dec. 2, 1994.
56. Charles Lucy, telephone interview, Dec. 3, 1996.
57. Antoni Karbowiak, telephone interview, Feb. 5, 1995.
58. Robert A. Maurer, ‘‘Glass ﬁbers for optical communications,’’ Proceedings
of the IEEE 61, pp. 452–462 (Apr. 1973).
59. Signetics never made money for Corning, and the company sold it in 1975.
Chuck Lucy thought it was so much of a ﬁasco that the culprits from Corning
should remain discretely unidentiﬁed (Lucy, interview). Timing from Joseph G.
Morone, Winning in High-Tech Markets (Harvard Business School Press, Boston,
1993); see also Michael McGeary, ‘‘Optical ﬁber for communications,’’ pp. 24–82
in David Roessner, Robert Carr, Irwin Feller, Michael McGeary, and Nils Newman,
The Role of NSF’s Support of Engineering in Enabling Technological Innovation, Phase
II (SRI International, Arlington, Va., 1998).
60. Lazay interview.
61. D. B. Keck, R. D. Maurer, and P. C. Schultz, ‘‘On the ultimate lower limit
of attenuation in glass optical waveguides,’’ Applied Physics Letters 22, No. 7,
pp. 307–309, (Apr. 1, 1973).
62. Donald Keck, interview, Mar. 7, 1995.
63. Jaeger lecture notes.
64. Olshansky replaced Felix Kapron, who left at the end of 1972. Felix Ka-
pron, interview, June 12, 1995.
65. Robert Olshansky, telephone interview, Feb. 21, 1997.
66. Ibid.; Robert Olshansky and Donald B. Keck, ‘‘Pulse broadening in graded-
index optical ﬁbers,’’ Applied Optics 15, No. 2, pp. 483–491 (Feb. 1976).
67. Tingye Li and Enrique A. J. Marcatili, ‘‘Research on optical ﬁber transmis-
sion,’’ Bell Laboratories Record, Dec. 1971, pp. 331–337.
68. Lazay interview.
69. Tingye Li, telephone interview, Jan. 8, 1997.
70. Memories differ as to who was involved. The membership may have
changed over time, or different people may have represented some groups at dif-
ferent times. In addition to the Crawford Hill and Holmdel managers, members
included Barney DeLoach of Murray Hill, Mauro DiDominico from Murray Hill
whose detector group paralleled DeLoach’s, Mel Cohen from the Western Electric
engineering research center in Princeton, Mort Schwartz from cable manufactur-
ing in Norcross, Georgia, and R. E. Mosher of AT&T. Names from Tingye Li tele-
phone interview; Jack Cook, telephone interview, Jan. 2, 1997; Jacobs, ‘‘Lightwave
system development.’’
71. Rudolph Kompfner, ‘‘Optics at Bell Laboratories—optical communica-
tions,’’ Applied Optics 11, No. 11, pp. 2412–2425 (Nov. 1972). This paper is an

NOTES TO PAGES 171–174
311
invaluable check on fallible memories because it summarizes the Bell Labs pro-
gram when it was written in August, 1972.
72. Although he had already suffered one heart attack, Kompfner took on two
professorships, dividing his time between Oxford and Stanford Universities.
73. In Europe, patent applications are published a year after they are ﬁled. In
the United States, they are not published until the application is granted, typically
a few years after ﬁling.
74. John MacChesney, interview, May 1995.
75. John MacChesney, telephone interview, July 17, 1996.
76. Jaeger lecture notes mention a paper that is probably the MacChesney one
listed in n. 77.
77. J. B. MacChesney et al, ‘‘Low-loss silica core-borosilicate clad optical ﬁber
waveguide,’’ Applied Physics Letters 23 pp. 340–341 (Sep. 15, 1973).
78. J. B. MacChesney et al., ‘‘Preparation of low loss optical ﬁbers using si-
multaneous vapor phase deposition and fusion,’’ Proceedings of the International
Congress on Glass (Vol. 6; American Ceramic Society, Cincinatti 1974, pp. 40–
45).
79. Lazay interview.
80. David Hanna, interview, May 22, 1995.
81. D. A. Payne and W. A. Gambling, ‘‘New silica-based low-loss optical ﬁber,’’
Electronics Letters 10, pp. 289–290 (July 25, 1974).
82. They made ﬁbers with loss under 5 decibels per kilometer by 1974 and
eventually reached 2.5 decibels in the late 1970s, but the process was not adapt-
able to making graded-index ﬁbers with high transmission capacity. J. R. Tillman,
‘‘Research,’’ Post Ofﬁce Electrical Engineer’s Journal 74, pp. 282–297 (Oct. 1981);
Jim Ainslie and Clive Day, interviews, Dec. 1, 1994.
83. Lucy telephone interview.
84. D. L. Bisbee, ‘‘Optical ﬁber joining technique,’’ Bell System Technical Journal
50, pp. 3153–3158 (Dec. 1971).
85. R. B. Dyott, J. R. Stern, and J. H. Stewart, ‘‘Fusion junctions for glass-ﬁber
waveguides,’’ Electronics Letters 8, No. 11, pp. 290–292 (June 1, 1972).
86. Y. Kohranzadeh, ‘‘Hot splices of optical waveguide ﬁbers,’’ Applied Optics
15, No. 3, pp. 793–795 (Mar. 1976); D. L. Bisbee, ‘‘Splicing silica ﬁbers with an
electric arc,’’ Applied Optics 15, No. 3, pp. 796–799 (Mar. 1976).
87. Jack S. Cook, ‘‘Communication by optical ﬁber,’’ Scientiﬁc American 229,
No. 5, pp. 28–35 (Nov. 1973).
88. Tingye Li, ‘‘Advances in optical ﬁber transmission research,’’ Proceedings
of the Symposium on Optical and Acoustical Micro-electronics (Polytechnic Institute
of New York, 1974, pp. 97–108).
89. Richard Smith, interview, June 11, 1997; Ira Jacobs, ‘‘Lightwave system
development.’’
90. Ira Jacobs, interview, Nov. 19, 1996.
91. Ira Jacobs, ‘‘Lightwave system development.’’
92. Jacobs interview.
93. E. F. O’Neill, ed., A History of Engineering and Science in the Bell System: Vol.
7. Transmission Technology 1925–1975 (AT&T Bell Labs, New York, 1985; see
pp. 665–668).
94. Victor K. McElheny, ‘‘Bell testing a high-density phone system’’ New York
Times, May 15, 1975, p. 86; in 1970 the target date was 1973.

312
NOTES TO PAGES 174–178
95. A. G. Fox and W. D. Warters, ‘‘Waveguide research,’’ chap. 6 in Millman,
ed., A History of Engineering and Science (pp. 247–272).
96. William D. Smith, ‘‘AT&T forecasts record spending,’’ New York Times, Oct.
14, 1971, business section.
97. The Japanese—among the last to abandon millimeter waveguides—sup-
plied the rest of the waveguide needed to ﬁnish the array. O’Neill, ed., A History
of Science and Technology (pp. 623–647 on millimeter waveguide).
98. Roger Heckingbottom, interview, Dec. 1, 1994.
99. D. Merlo, ‘‘The millimetric waveguide system: the current situation,’’ Post
Ofﬁce Electrical Engineer’s Journal 69, pt 1, pp. 34–37 (April 1976).
100. British Telecom Labs interview transcript, Dec. 1, 1994.
101. Richard Dyott, telephone interview, Jan. 11, 1994.
102. O’Neill, ed., A History of Science and Technology (p. 647 on millimeter
waveguide).
103. Harold Barlow, ‘‘Introductory address,’’ Conference on Trunk Telecommu-
nications by Guided Waves (Institution of Electrical Engineers, London, 1970,
pp. xi–xiv).
Chapter 14
1. Victor K. McElheny, ‘‘Threads of glass carry messages in new process,’’ New
York Times, Nov. 30, 1975, p. 62.
2. F. F. Roberts, ‘‘Optical communication today and tomorrow,’’ in Proceedings
Third European Conference on Optical Communications (VDE-Verlag, Berlin, 1977)
pp. 2–7, 1977). This is from the text of an invited opening paper that Roberts
prepared before his death.
3. Dorset Police, ‘‘Optical ﬁber communications,’’ press notice, undated, sup-
plied by Nortel.
4. Don Williams, telephone interview, Jan. 15, 1997; also Michael Moncaster,
telephone interview, Jan. 15, 1997.
5. Account from Murray Ramsay and Martin Chown interviews, Dec. 2, 1994;
Murray Ramsay, telephone interview, Jan. 22, 1997.
6. Martin Chown, telephone interview, Jan. 23, 1997.
7. ‘‘Optical ﬁber link for police computer,’’ Electronics Weekly, Sept. 24, 1975,
p. 3.
8. D. B. Keck, R. D. Maurer, and P. C. Schultz, ‘‘On the ultimate lower limit of
attenuation in glass optical waveguides,’’ Applied Physics Letters 22, No. 7,
pp. 307–309 (Apr. 1, 1973).
9. This intermediate speed was not used in America. The International Tele-
communication Union standard speeds used in Europe were 8.4, 34, and 140
million bits per second. The American standard leaped from 45 to 274 million
bits per second with no intermediate steps. R. W. Berry and R. C. Hooper, ‘‘Prac-
tical design requirements for optical ﬁber transmission systems,’’ Optical Fiber Com-
munications (Institution of Electrical Engineers, London, 1975, conference pro-
ceedings
132;
proceedings
of
ﬁrst
European
Conference
on
Optical
Communications, held Sept. 16–18, 1975, London).
10. K. Kurokawa et al., ‘‘A 400 Mb/s experimental transmission system using
a graded-index ﬁber,’’ in Optical Fiber Communications.
11. Dick Dyott, telephone interview, Mar. 13, 1997.

NOTES TO PAGES 178–183
313
12. A series of papers giving formal results appeared two years later in Bell
System Technical Journal 57 (July–Aug. 1978).
13. Rich Cerny, interview, Jan. 9, 1997.
14. ‘‘James Godbey dies at 43, a founder of Valtec Corp,’’ Laser Focus, Jan.
1979, p. 74.
15. Eric Randall, telephone interview, Feb. 18, 1997.
16. Paul Dobson, telephone interview, Feb. 21, 1997.
17. Ibid.
18. Cerny interview.
19. James Barron, ‘‘Irving B. Kahn, 76, a founder of TelePrompTer and cable
TV’’ obituary, New York Times, Jan. 25, 1994, p. B8.
20. Account based on industry sources and personal observations.
21. ‘‘Insilco plans venture in ﬁber optics ﬁeld, will own 51% of ﬁrm,’’ Wall
Street Journal, Dec. 3, 1976, p. 25.
22. Kahn made a killing when he sold his interest back to Insilco in late 1979.
The deal was so embarrassing to company ofﬁcials that Insilco carefully avoided
disclosing either the price or the identities of the selling stockholders. (‘‘Insilco
buys remainder of ﬁrm,’’ Wall Street Journal, Sept. 24, 1979, p. 38). However, that
was Irving Kahn’s last hurrah in ﬁber optics. He had also started a company to
make semiconductor lasers but was never able to take it public—according to
industry insiders, because the Securities and Exchange Commission frowned on
having a convicted felon as the chairman of a public company. None of his other
ﬁber ventures panned out, and he returned to cable television. His obituary does
not mention ﬁber optics; Barron, ‘‘Irving B. Kahn.’’
23. Ira Jacobs, interview, Nov. 19, 1996.
24. M. I. Schwartz et al., ‘‘Bell’s Chicago ﬁber optic test,’’ Laser Focus 14, No.
1, pp. 58–64 (Jan. 1978); M. I. Schwartz et al., ‘‘The Chicago Lightwave Com-
munications Project,’’ Bell System Technical Journal 57, No. 6, pp. 1881–1888
(July–Aug. 1978). Four ﬁbers were broken during cabling, not installation.
25. John Fulenwider, telephone interview, Feb. 7, 1997.
26. ‘‘PS-noted in passing: communication applications,’’ Laser Focus 13, No.
7, p. 70 (July 1977).
27. John Midwinter, interview, Dec. 5, 1994.
28. Ronald W. Berry, David J. Brace, and Ivon A. Ravenscroft, ‘‘Optical ﬁber
system trials at 8 Mbits/s and 140 Mbit/s,’’ IEEE Transactions on Communications
COM-26, pp. 1020–1027 (July 1978).
29. Midwinter interview.
30. ‘‘Europe looks to ﬁber optics for telephone expansion,’’ Laser Focus 14, No.
2, pp. 68–76 (Feb. 1978).
31. Charles Sandbank, ed., Optical Fiber Communication Systems (Wiley, Chi-
cester, 1980; see especially chap. 11 by D. H. Hill).
32. R. Bouillie, ‘‘Application of optical ﬁbers to existing communication sys-
tems,’’ paper presented at the third European Conference on Optical Communi-
cations, Sept. 14–16, 1977, Munich. (VDE-Verlag, Berlin, 1977) pp. 231–236.
33. ‘‘Europe looks to ﬁber optics.’’
34. Midwinter interview.
35. Dyott telephone interview.
36. Strictly speaking, it depends on the inverse fourth power of wavelength,
1/(wavelength)4.

314
NOTES TO PAGES 183–186
37. Keck et al., ‘‘On the ultimate lower limit.’’
38. W. G. French, J. B. MacChesney, P. B. O’Connor, and G. W. Tasker, ‘‘Op-
tical waveguides with very low losses,’’ Bell System Technical Journal 53, pp. 951–
954 (1974).
39. D. N. Payne and W. A. Gambling, ‘‘A borosilicate-cladded phosphosilicate-
core optical ﬁber,’’ Optics Communications 13, pp. 422–425 (1975).
40. See, e.g., Optical Fiber Communications.
41. Strictly speaking, material dispersion is the sum of two factors. One is
the change in refractive index of the material as a function of wavelength,
thesame effect which spreads colors out into a spectrum after the pass through
aprism. The other is the change in the ﬁber’s waveguide properties as a function
of wavelength. Both numbers vary with wavelength, and they can have differ-
ent signs, so their sum can equal zero at a ‘‘zero-dispersion’’ wavelength.
This zero point depends both on the glass composition and the ﬁber structure.
Dyott’s initial estimate of 1.23 micrometers was a bit off the now-accepted value
of 1.31 micrometers for single-mode ﬁber [Dyott, telephone interview; R. B. Dyott,
‘‘Group delay in glass ﬁber waveguides,’’ in Proceedings, Trunk Telecommunica-
tions by Guided Waves (Institution of Electrical Engineers, London, 1970, pp. 176–
181)].
42. Felix Kapron, interview, June 12, 1995; F. P. Kapron and D. B. Keck,
‘‘Pulse transmission through a dielectric optical waveguide,’’ Applied Optics 10,
No. 7, pp. 1519–1532 (July 1971).
43. D. N. Payne and W. A. Gambling, ‘‘Zero material dispersion in optical ﬁ-
bers,’’ Electronics Letters 11, pp. 176–178 (1975).
44. M. Horiguchi, ‘‘This week’s citation classic,’’ in Arnold Thackray, Contem-
porary Classics in Engineering and Applied Science (ISI Press, Philadelphia, 1986,
p. 165).
45. M. Horiguchi and H. Osanai, ‘‘Spectral losses of low-OH-content optical
ﬁbers,’’ Electronics Letters 12, pp. 310–312 (June 10, 1976).
46. Forgotten for nearly 20 years, gallium nitride has recently become impor-
tant for blue diode lasers.
47. In Hsieh’s quaternary compounds, the total number of indium and gallium
atoms had to equal the number of phosphorus and arsenic atoms. When he started
with indium phosphide, that meant that gallium replaced some indium and ar-
senic replaced some phosphorus. J. Jim Hsieh, interview, Jan. 30, 1996.
48. Ibid.
49. J. J. Hsieh, J. A. Rossi, and J. P. Donnelly, ‘‘Room temperature cw operation
of GaInAsP/InP double-heterostructure lasers emitting at 1.1 µm,’’ Applied Physics
Letters 28, No. 12, pp. 709–711 (June 15, 1976).
50. Hsieh, interview; J. J. Hsieh and C. C. Shen, ‘‘Room-temperature cw op-
eration of buried-stripe double-heterostructure GaInAsP/InP diode lasers,’’ Applied
Physics Letters 30, No. 8, p. 429–431 (Apr. 15, 1977).
51. H. Osanai et al., ‘‘Effects of dopants on transmission loss of low-OH content
optical ﬁbers,’’ Electronics Letters 12, pp. 549–550 (Oct. 14, 1976).
52. Tatsuya Kimura and Kazuhiro Daikoku, ‘‘A proposal on optical ﬁber,
transmission systems in a low-loss 1.0–1.4 µm wavelength region,’’ Optical and
Quantum Electronics 9, pp. 33–42 (1977).
53. Hsieh interview.
54. M. I. Schwartz, W. A Reenstra, and J. H. Mullins, ‘‘Bell’s Chicago ﬁber optic
test,’’ Laser Focus 14 pp. 58–64 (Jan. 1978).

NOTES TO PAGES 186–191
315
55. Ira Jacobs, ‘‘Fiber optics technology and application in the Bell System,’’
Proceedings Fiber Optics and Communications (FOC ’78) (Information Gatekeepers
Inc., Brookline, Mass., 1978, pp. 12–13).
56. John Midwinter, ‘‘Optical ﬁber communications systems development in
the UK,’’ IEEE Communications Magazine, Jan. 1982, pp. 6–11. The contracts were
signed in Mar. 1979.
57. Richard Epworth, interview, Dec. 2, 1994; Richard Epworth, ‘‘25 years of
optical communications,’’ unpublished manuscript.
58. Richard Epworth, ‘‘The phenomenon of modal noise in analog and digital
optical ﬁber systems,’’ in Charles K. Kao ed., Optical Fiber Technology II (IEEE Press,
New York, 1981, pp. 260–269). Originally presented at Fourth European Confer-
ence on Optical Communications, Genoa, Italy, September 1978.
59. Richard Epworth, paper ThD1 (revised summary, in postdeadline section),
Technical Digest, Topical Meeting on Optical Fiber Communications, Mar 6–8, 1979,
Washington (Optical Society of America, Washington); Clemens Baack et al., ‘‘Mo-
dal noise and optical feedback in high-speed optical systems at 0.85 µm,’’ Elec-
tronics Letters 16 592–593 (1980).
60. Double-crucible ﬁbers never quite caught up with other processes, and the
technology worked poorly for both single-mode ﬁbers and long-wavelength ﬁbers.
Clive Day, British Telecom Labs interview, Dec. 1, 1994.
61. Robert Olshansky, telephone interview, Feb. 21, 1997.
62. ‘‘Japan shows its strength in optical communications,’’ Laser Focus Decem-
ber 1977, pp. 48–52
63. T. Miya, Y. Terunuma, T. Hosaka, and T. Miyashita, ‘‘Ultimate low-loss
single-mode ﬁber at 1.55 µm,’’ Electronics Letters 15 106–108, 15 February 1979.
64. The reference is to George Orwell’s novel 1984. Bill Plummer, telephone
interview, Mar. 21, 1997; Will Hicks, interview, Feb. 4, 1994.
65. Clive Foxall and Sidney O’Hara made the decision to change materials;
O’Hara also pushed single-mode ﬁber. Alan Steventon, interview, Dec. 1, 1994.
66. ‘‘An optical link is installed in Las Vegas for independent telephone meet-
ing,’’ Laser Focus January 1978, pp. 64–66.
67. Dobson telephone interview.
68. Figures from Kessler Marketing Intelligence circa 1978, presented at the
Newport Conference on Fiberoptic Markets. While I no longer have the original
source, I vividly remember the story.
69. Wall Street Journal February 24, 1978, p. 14; March 31, 1978, p. 29.
70. ‘‘Wire maker to acquire 13% of Valtec, specialist in optical communica-
tions,’’ Laser Focus April 1977, p. 36; Rich Cerny, interview, January 9, 1997;
‘‘Two new entries in ﬁber optic market: Siemens-Corning and Canada Wire,’’ Laser
Focus February 1978, pp. 76–78.
71. ‘‘Valtec seeks entry to cable-TV market with acquisition of metal-cable
maker,’’ Laser Focus December 1977, pp. 43–44.
72. ‘‘James Godbey dies at 43, a founder of Valtec Corp.;’’ Laser Focus January
1979, p. 74.
73. Eric Randall telephone interview, February 18, 1997.
74. Postdeadline reports,’’ Laser Focus World, February 1980, page 4; also Wall
Street Journal January 8, 1980, p. 18.
75. ‘‘M/A Com’s purchase of Valtec expands resources for development,’’ Laser
Focus August 1980, pp. 52–54; Wall Street Journal June 18, 1980, p. 14; Septem-
ber 24, 1980, p. 39.

316
NOTES TO PAGES 192–197
76. Interviews with Ken Nill, Jim Hsieh, Jan. 30, 1996.
77. ‘‘A permanent ﬁber trunk in Fort Wayne is expected to save GTE $1.5
million,’’ Laser Focus 15, p. 48 (Jan. 1979).
78. Allen Kasiewicz, interview, Jan. 9, 1997.
79. Jacobs interview.
80. ‘‘Nippon Telephone transmits at 1.27 µm through 53 km of ﬁber without
repeater,’’ Laser Focus 14, pp. 52–54 (Nov. 1978).
81. Jeff Hecht, ‘‘Preview of OSA’s ﬁber meeting,’’ Laser Focus 15, pp. 34–40
(Mar. 1979).
82. M. G. Blankenship et al., ‘‘High phosphorous containing P2O5-GeO2-SiO2
optical waveguide,’’ postdeadline paper PD-3 in Technical Digest Optical Fiber Com-
munication (Optical Society of America, Washington, D.C., 1979).
83. Detlef Gloge and Tingye Li, ‘‘Multimode ﬁber technology for digital trans-
mission,’’ Proceedings of the IEEE 68, No. 10, pp. 1269–1275 (Oct. 1980).
84. Marshall C. Hudson and Lewis C. Kenyon, ‘‘Installation and measurement
of an 18.7-and 23.5-km unrepeatered ﬁber-optic interofﬁce trunk,’’ paper TuDD1
in Technical Digest: OFC ’82, Topical Meeting on Optical Fiber Communication (Optical
Society of America, Washington, D.C., 1982).
85. The company had the cable-television franchise for the whole province.
‘‘3400-km ﬁber trunk network planned to provide cable TV on Canadian plains,’’
Laser Focus, Sept. 1979, pp. 64–66; Graham C. Bradley, ‘‘Wobbly DC to mega-
blinking light in 3.8 billion seconds,’’ Saskatchewan Telecommunications June
1995, unpublished; Graham Bradley, telephone interview, Feb. 6, 1997.
86. John Midwinter, ‘‘The year of optical ﬁbers,’’ National Electronics Review
1980/81 (National Electronics Council, London, 1981, pp. 8–13).
87. Midwinter interview.
88. Ibid.
89. D. R. Smith, ‘‘Advances in optical ﬁber communications,’’ Physics Bulletin
33, pp. 401–403 (1982).
90. Paul Lazay, interview, Nov. 12, 1996.
91. Midwinter interview.
92. Ira Jacobs, ‘‘Lightwave system development: looking back and ahead,’’
Optics & Photonics News, Feb. 1995, pp. 19–23, 39; ‘‘Bell System plans $79M ﬁber
trunk to serve Northeast Corridor by 1984,’’ Laser Focus, Mar. 1980, pp. 60–62.
93. Will Hicks, interview, Feb. 4, 1994.
94. C. David Chaffee, The Rewiring of America: The Fiber Optics Revolution (Ac-
ademic Press, Boston, 1988, p. 35).
95. Jacobs, ‘‘Lightwave system development.’’
96. The lower loss at 1.3 micrometers would offset the lower power from the
LED, so all three channels would have repeaters every seven kilometers, at the
same points as the old coaxial cable. Jacobs interview.
97. Jacobs, ‘‘Lightwave system development’’; Kasiewicz interview.
98. Jacobs, ‘‘Lightwave system development.’’
99. See papers in Technical Digest: OFC ’82, Topical Meeting,’’ including post-
deadline papers; the AT&T quote is from D. P. Jablonowski, ‘‘Present and future
ﬁber manufacturing outlook,’’ paper TuGG3.
100. The American telephone industry and its suppliers were accustomed to
following the lead set by AT&T, which was ﬁrmly in the graded-index camp. So
did industry analysts and reporters.
101. After graduating from the Harvard Business School, McGowan spent

NOTES TO PAGES 197–202
317
three years selling the Todd-AO wide-screen movie system to theaters, an unusual
start at a time when most Harvard graduates went directly to large companies.
Larry Kahaner, On the Line: The Men of MCI—Who Took on AT&T, Risked Every-
thing, and Won (Warner Books, New York, 1986, pp. 47–48).
102. Ira Magaziner and Mark Patinkin, The Silent War: Inside the Global Busi-
ness Battles Shaping America’s Future (Vintage Books, New York, 1989; see chap. 9
on Corning).
103. Chaffee, The Rewiring of America. Chaffee covered the ﬁber industry during
its growth heyday in the 1980s, as editor of Fiber Optics News, and his account
tells the business side of the story.
104. The actual distances were 1400 kilometers for AT&T vs. 6800 kilometers
for MCI. Jeff Hecht, ‘‘Singlemode ﬁbers go to market,’’ Lasers & Applications 2,
pp. 53–57 (May 1983).
105. Bradley, ‘‘Wobbly DC.’’
106. The cross-licenses also gave Corning access to Bell Labs technology.
While Corning held the dominant patents, it beneﬁted from not having to battle
AT&T patents.
107. Phil Black, telephone interview, Jan. 28, 1997.
108. Magaziner and Patinkin, The Silent War (see chap. 9 on Corning).
109. The decree was dated July 27, 1981; ‘‘Corning wins patent suit against
ITT,’’ Laser Focus, Sept. 1981, pp. 104–106.
110. Black telephone interview; Randall telephone interview.
111. New York Times, July 24, 1982, p. 36; citation from New York Times Index
1982.
112. ‘‘M/A COM sells stake in Valtec to partner,’’ Wall Street Journal, Mar. 1,
1983, p. 8.
113. Dobson telephone interview.
114. Lazay interview.
115. For a more detailed account of the business side of ﬁber development,
especially in the 1980s, see Chaffee, The Rewiring of America.
116. Ken Nill, interview, Jan. 30, 1996.
117. Hsieh interview; Nill interview.
118. Cerny interview quoted $6 million. Others have mentioned the same
ﬁgure.
119. Hicks interview.
120. Bill Plummer, telephone interview, Mar. 21, 1997.
121. Graded-index ﬁber did not fade away entirely because it can carry a
billion bits per second over limited distances, a kilometer or less. It remains in use
for short systems within buildings or between buildings on a university or indus-
trial campus.
Chapter 15
1. Alec H. Reeves, ‘‘The future of telecommunications: Bernard Price Memorial
Lecture 1969,’’ Transactions of the South African Institute of Electrical Engineers,
Sept. 1970, p. 445–465.
2. The SE-ME-WE 3 cable, to be ﬁnished the end of 1998, spans 38,000 kil-
ometers (23,600 miles) and cost $1.3 billion. Adele Hars, ‘‘Suppliers selected for
world’s longest submarine cable,’’ Lightwave, May 1997, pp. 7, 9.

318
NOTES TO PAGES 202–208
3. Arthur C. Clarke, How the World Was One: Beyond the Global Village (Ban-
tam, New York, 1992).
4. ‘‘Sailing ship to satellite: The transatlantic connection,’’ exhibit brochure,
Institution of Electrical Engineers, London (1994). The long wave band allowed
one channel; short waves allowed 15. C. W. Hansell was instrumental in devel-
oping this generation of technology.
5. Richard J. O’Rorke, Jr., 1990 World’s Submarine Telephone Cable Systems (US
Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, D.C., 1991).
6. E. F. O’Neill, ed., A History of Engineering and Science in the Bell System: Vol.
7. Transmission Technology 1925–1975 (AT&T Bell Laboratories, New York, 1985,
pp. 337–371).
7. Early germanium transistors were short-lived and much more sensitive to
temperature than modern silicon transistors, so there was some reason for the
delay. R. D. Ehrbar, ‘‘Undersea cables for telephony,’’ in Peter K. Runge and Pat-
rick R. Trischitta, eds., Undersea Lightwave Communications (IEEE Press, New York,
1986 pp. 3–22).
8. O’Rorke, 1990 World’s Submarine.’’
9. I use only statute (land) miles here; repeater spacing is often given in nau-
tical miles, which are slightly longer. The spacing for TAT-6 was 2.5 nautical
miles. Ehrbar, ‘‘Undersea cables.’’
10. Peter Runge, ‘‘A high-capacity optical-ﬁber undersea cable system’’ paper
presented at Conference on Laser and Electro-Optic Systems, Feb. 1980, San Diego.
11. A few newer systems, notably Motorola’s Iridium system and the Teledisic
system, use many satellites in lower orbit to provide continuous coverage of points
on the ground, so they suffer negligible delay.
12. Alec H. Reeves, ‘‘The future of telecommunications.’’
13. Peter Runge, interview, July 19, 1995.
14. Runge, ‘‘A high-capacity.’’
15. O’Neill, ed., A History of Engineering (pp. 337–371).
16. Phil Black, telephone interview, Jan. 28, 1997.
17. ‘‘Britain and an ITT subsidiary begin tests of undersea ﬁber optic cable,’’
Laser Focus, May 1980, pp. 66–68, quotes paper presented by P. Worthington,
‘‘Application of optical ﬁber system in undersea service,’’ at the International Con-
ference on Submarine Telecommunication Systems conducted Feb. 1980 at the Insti-
tution of Electrical Engineers, London.
18. A third pair of single-mode ﬁbers were included in the cable as spares, in
case of ﬁber failure. That caution was reﬂected in the design of the entire TAT-8
system. ‘‘Bell plans a single mode ﬁber system for transatlantic installation by
1990,’’ Laser Focus, May 1980, pp. 68–70.
19. Paul Lazay, interview, Nov. 12, 1996; other leaders of single-mode ﬁber
development were Dave Pearson and Bill French.
20. Peter K. Runge, ‘‘Deep-sea trial of an undersea lightwave system,’’ paper
MD2 presented at the Topical Meeting on Optical Fiber Communications, Feb. 28–
Mar. 2, 1983, New Orleans.
21. Runge interview.
22. Naoya Uchida and Naoshi Uesuge, ‘‘Infrared optical loss increase in silica
ﬁbers due to hydrogen,’’ Journal of Lightwave Technology LT-4, pp. 1132–1137
(Aug. 1986).
23. Don Keck, interview, Mar. 7, 1995.
24. John Midwinter, interview, Dec. 5, 1994.

NOTES TO PAGES 208–213
319
25. Murray Ramsay, interview, Dec. 2, 1994.
26. Uchida and Uesuge, ‘‘Infrared optical loss.’’
27. Kiyofumi Mochizui et al., ‘‘Inﬂuence of hydrogen on optical ﬁber loss in
submarine cables,’’ in Runge and Trischitta, eds., Undersea Lightwave Communi-
cations (pp. 177–188).
28. Keck interview.
29. Murray Ramsay and Martin Chown, interviews, Dec. 2, 1994.
30. Keck interview.
31. Mochizui et al., ‘‘Inﬂuence of hydrogen.’’
32. The number quoted varies; an initial (May 16, 1983) AT&T press release
says 29 companies are involved; 1990 directory of submarine cables (O’Rorke,
1990 World’s Submarine) lists 23.
33. Martin Chown, interview, Dec. 2, 1994.
34. AT&T Press release, Nov. 16, 1983.
35. ‘‘World submarine telecommunication systems,’’ map (STC Submarine Ca-
bles Ltd., London, Sept. 1984).
36. O’Rorke, 1990 World’s Submarine.
37. Press release, STC Submarine Cables, dated Oct. 30, 1986.
38. George A. Heath and Martin Chown, ‘‘The UK-Belgium no. 5 optical ﬁber
submarine system,’’ in Runge and Trischetta, eds., Undersea Lightwave Communi-
cations (pp. 129–141).
39. Press release, STC Submarine Cables.
40. Hiroshi Fukinuki et al., ‘‘The FS-400M submarine system,’’ Runge and
Trischetta, eds., Undersea Lightwave Communications (pp. 69–82).
41. Gordon Reinholds was the engineer, Runge, interview.
42. Runge, interview.
43. Lazay interview.
44. Runge, ‘‘A high-capacity.’’
45. Fridolin Bosch, G. M. Palmer, Charles D. Sallada, and C. Burke Swan,
‘‘Compact 1.3µm laser transmitter for the SL undersea lightwave system,’’ in
Runge and Trischetta, eds., Undersea Lightwave Communications (pp. 445–458).
46. O’Rorke, 1990 World’s Submarine.’’
47. See, e.g., Michael Kinsley, ‘‘Is AT&T hamstringing Comsat?’’ New York
Times, June 13, 1976, p. 14, section III.
48. R. A. Williamson, project director, International Cooperation and Competition
in Civilian Space Activities (Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment, Washington, D.C., July
1985; OTA-ISA-239).
49. The technology for dispersion-shifted ﬁbers was reﬁned gradually by ﬁne-
tuning the structure of the ﬁber. V. A. Bhagavatula. M. S. Spotz, W. F. Love, and
Donald B. Keck, ‘‘Segmented-core single-mode ﬁbers with low loss and low dis-
persion,’’ Electronics Letters 19, No. 9, pp. 317–318 (Apr. 25, 1983); B. J. Ainslie
et al., ‘‘Monomode ﬁbre with ultra low loss and minimum dispersion at 1.55
microns,’’ Electronics Letters 18, pp. 842–844 (1982).
50. Runge interview.
51. Leonard Heymann, ‘‘Intelsat mounts defensive campaign against cables,’’
Communications Week, Sept. 22, 1986, p. 51.
52. ‘‘TAT-8 schedule slips two months,’’ Lasers & Optronics, August 1988,
p. 29.
53. Kathleen Killett, ‘‘Fiber optic cable approaches transatlantic service cut-
over,’’ Communications Week, Dec. 5, 1988, p. 32.

320
NOTES TO PAGES 213–220
54. David Zielenziger, ‘‘Trans-Atlantic link goes on call,’’ Electronic Engineering
Times, Dec. 26, 1988, p. 16.
55. Notes in author’s ﬁles Apr. 6, 1989.
56. Charles J. Koester and Elias Snitzer, ‘‘Ampliﬁcation in a ﬁber laser,’’ Applied
Optics 3, No. 10, pp. 1182–1186 (Oct. 1964).
57. Charles P. Sandbank, ed., Optical Fiber Communication Systems (Wiley,
Chichester, 1980, p. 19).
58. John W. Hicks, Jr., US Patent 4,616,898, ‘‘Optical communications using
Raman repeaters and components therefor,’’ ﬁled Sept. 28, 1983, issued Oct. 14,
1986.
59. R. J. Mears et al., ‘‘Low-noise erbium-doped ﬁber ampliﬁer operating at
1.54 µm,’’ Electronics Letters 23, p. 1026 (1987); also interview with David
Hanna, May 22, 1995. Emmanuel Desurvire and others also did important work
on erbium-doped ﬁber ampliﬁers as covered in the Epilogue. The doped ﬁbers are
excited by diode lasers emitting at 980 or 1480 nanometers.
60. W. Christopher Barnett, ‘‘The TPC-5 cable network,’’ IEEE Communications
Magazine 34, pp. 36–40 (Feb. 1996).
61. Runge interview.
62. Ibid.
Chapter 16
1. Isaac Asimov, science column, Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, Aug.
1962.
2. David E. Fisher and Marshall Jon Fisher, Tube: The Invention of Television
(Counterpoint, Washington, D.C., 1996, p. 339).
3. William H. Dutton, Jay G. Blumler, and Kenneth L. Kraemer, eds., Wired
Cities: Shaping the Future of Communications (G. K. Hall and Co., Boston, 1987),
summarizes the history of the program.
4. William H. Dutton, telephone interview, Feb. 13, 1997.
5. Lee B. Becker, ‘‘A decade of research on interactive cable,’’ Dutton et al.,
(pp. 102–123).
6. John Fulenwider, telephone interview, Feb. 7, 1997.
7. Standard cable television sends all video signals to every subscriber but
scrambles premium channels so that they require decoding by a special set-top
box.
8. John Fulenwider, ‘‘Study of an all-optical communications system for trunk-
ing, switching, and distribution of wideband signals,’’ paper presented at 21st
International Wire and Cable Symposium Atlantic City, Dec. 1972 (pp. 35–46).
9. Fulenwider interview.
10. Carol Davidge, ‘‘America’s talk-back television experiment, QUBE,’’ in Dut-
ton et al. Wired Cities.
11. A Summary Version of the Comprehensive Report on Hi-OVIS Project July ’78–
Mar ’86 (New Media Development Association, Tokyo, 1988).
12. The ﬁbers had a 150-micrometer core clad with plastic, a type called
plastic-clad silica. At the time the system was designed in 1976, they were in-
expensive and attractive for short communication systems, but they suffered much
larger pulse spreading than graded-index ﬁbers. (This sort of pulse spreading was
why graded-index ﬁbers were invented.) A Summary Version.
13. Hi-OVIS Project: Interim Report, Hardware/Software Experiments: July ’78–

NOTES TO PAGES 220–223
321
March 79 (Visual Information System Development Association, MITI, Tokyo,
1979); see also other sources, such as Masahiro Kawahata, ‘‘Hi-OVIS,’’ Dutton et
al., Wired Cities (pp. 179–200).
14. ‘‘The ﬁbered city as social laboratory: a progress report on Japan’s Hi-
OVIS,’’ Laser Focus, Jan. 1980, pp. 58–60.
15. Jeff Hecht, talk delivered at the 1980 Newport Conference on Fiber-Optic
Markets, Kessler Marketing Intelligence, Newport, R. I.; Jeff Hecht, ‘‘Marketing
broad band services,’’ Laser Focus, Dec. 1980, p. 6.
16. Masahiro Kawahata, e-mail to author, Apr. 10, 1997.
17. ‘‘The ﬁbered city.’’
18. Masahiro Kawakata, e-mail to author, Apr. 10, 1997
19. Quote from Tetsuhiko Ikegama, senior vice president, NTT, talk delivered
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Apr. 14, 1994. Like most NTT ac-
counts of ﬁber-optic development in Japan, Ikegama’s talk did not mention Hi-
OVIS by name, although he did praise MITI’s early work. I have seen other NTT
reports in which the omission of Hi-OVIS was much more striking.
20. Letter from Akiko Kato, NTT PR Dept., Dec. 5, 1997. Stringing ﬁber to
distribution nodes near homes by the earlier date is much less expensive than
stringing ﬁber directly to all homes and businesses. NTT evidently plans to run
ﬁber links to individual homes as requested or needed.
21. Canada earlier laid ﬁbers to 40 homes in the exclusive Yorkville district of
Toronto, but the local cable-television system blocked tests of video services. The
Manitoba Telephone System had rights to offer cable television in Elie and Ste.
Eustache, so video tests could proceed there P. H. Chouinard, M. Larose,
F. M. Banks, and J. R. Berry, ‘‘Description and performance review of the Yorkville
integrated services ﬁber optic trial,’’ paper 28.3 in International Conference on
Communications, 1979, Boston, Mass (IEEE Conference Digest, Piscataway, N.J.,
1979).
22. Figures are in US dollars; the budget was $9.5 million Canadian. Brian B.
McCallum, ‘‘Fiber optic subscriber loops: a look at the Elie system,’’ Laser Focus,
Nov. 1980, pp. 64–67.
23. Jeff Hecht, ‘‘Fiberopolis,’’ Omni, Dec. 1982, pp. 120–128.
24. Rod Kachulak, telephone interview, Mar. 3, 1997.
25. Joel Stratte-McClure, ‘‘French telecommunications,’’ advertising supple-
ment to Scientiﬁc American, Sept. 1980.
26. Michel Triboullet, telephone interview, Feb. 13, 1997.
27. ‘‘Biarritz optical ﬁber system,’’ paper circa 1980, from France, not specif-
ically attributed.
28. ‘‘Postdeadline reports,’’ Laser Focus, Dec. 1980, p. 4.
29. ‘‘Postdeadline reports.’’
30. William H. Dutton, ‘‘Driving into the future of communications? Check
the rear-view mirror,’’ paper presented at ‘‘POTS to PANS, social issues in the
multimedia evolution from plain old telephony services to Picture and Network
Services,’’ Mar. 28–30, 1994, Hintlesham, Suffolk, UK (paper available via World
Wide Web).
31. Thierry Vedel, ‘‘Local policies for wiring France,’’ in Dutton et al., Wired
Cities (pp. 255–278).
32. E.g., at the September 1979 European Conference on Optical Communi-
cations in Amsterdam, there were 36 Japanese papers, 17 each from Britain and
the United States, 12 from Germany, and a mere 6 from France. See Charles

322
NOTES TO PAGES 223–229
Sandbank, ‘‘Opening address,’’ Sixth European Conference on Optical Communication
(Institution of Electrical Engineers, London, 1980 Conference Publication 190,
pp. 1–3).
33. Subscribers received black-and-white cameras because color was too ex-
pensive, although the screens were color. (The ofﬁcial reason was ‘‘because light-
ing in private homes and apartments tends to be inadequate for good color ﬁlm-
ing.’’) Francois Gerin, ‘‘Video communications: images, sounds and data in
freedom!’’ manuscript dated Oct. 1985, circulated by Direction Generale des Tele-
communications, Ministry of Post, Telephone and Telephone.
34. Triboullet telephone interview.
35. Marc P. Duchesne, e-mail to author Feb. 12, 1997.
36. Roland Goarin, ‘‘Component reliability results from the Biarritz ﬁeld trial
and from ‘‘plan cable’’ volume deployment,’’ paper 17.1, in Technical Digest, IEEE
Globecom 1991, (IEEE, Piscataway, N.J., 1991)
37. Triboullet telephone interview.
38. Kachulak telephone interview.
39. Paul Shumate, telephone interview, Mar. 29, 1997.
40. GTE press release, Apr. 13, 1988.
41. The Cerritos Project: 1992 Annual Report (GTE Telephone Operations,
1992).
42. Robert Olshansky, telephone interview, Feb. 21, 1997.
43. Paul Shumate, ‘‘What’s happening with ﬁber to the home,’’ Optics & Pho-
tonics News, Feb. 1996, pp. 16–21, 75.
44. Shumate, telephone interview.
45. ‘‘NTT opticalizes access network,’’ information supplied by Akiko Kato,
NTT Public Relations Department, Mar. 29, 1996.
46. Will Hicks, ‘‘Where ﬁber optics should go,’’ paper presented at Fiberoptics
Futures conference, Waltham, Mass., sponsored by New England Fiberoptics
Council, May 26, 1993.
Chapter 17
1. Alec Reeves, ‘‘Future prospects in optical communication,’’ John Logie Baird
Memorial Lecture, University of Strathclyde, May 30, 1969.
2. John Midwinter, interview, Dec. 5, 1994.
3. Donald Keck, interview, Mar. 7, 1995.
4. Charles H. Burrus, Herweg Kogelnik, and Tingye Li, ‘‘Obituaries: Stewart E.
Miller,’’ Physics Today, Nov. 1990, pp. 102–103.
5. Jack Cook, telephone interview, July 9, 1997.
6. For a history of the industrial growth, see C. David Chaffee, The Rewiring of
America: The Fiber Optics Revolution (Academic Press, Boston, 1988).
7. Jeff Hecht, Understanding Fiber Optics (Sams Publishing, Indianapolis, 1987).
8. Ira Jacobs, interview, Nov. 19, 1996.
9. Sharks got all the press, but the only cable they damaged was the one in
the Canary Islands. Gophers are serious hazards to buried cables. Like other ro-
dents, their front teeth grow continually, so they instinctively gnaw anything they
can get their teeth around. Fiber cables are particularly vulnerable because they
are small, so cables buried in areas where gophers live are armored with heavy
metal wires. To test their protection, telephone and electric power industries de-
veloped a standard gopher test, which involved running cable through a simulated

NOTES TO PAGES 229–236
323
gopher burrow and watching what live gophers did to the cable (Donna Cun-
ningham, AT&T PR Dept., fax to author Apr. 27, 1995).
10. John Fulenwider, telephone interview, Nov. 7, 1988, for article in South
magazine.
11. Peter Wranik, telephone interview, Oct. 31, 1988, for article in South
magazine.
12. Stewart E. Miller and Ivan P. Kaminow, eds., Optical Fiber Telecommuni-
cations II (Academic Press, Boston, 1988).
13. Linn F. Mollenauer, interview, July 19, 1995; Linn F. Mollenauer and K.
Smith, ‘‘Demonstration of soliton transmission over more than 4000 km in ﬁber
with loss periodically compensated by Raman gain,’’ Optics Letters 13, No. 8,
pp. 675–677 (Aug. 1988).
14. Raman ampliﬁcation transfers energy from a strong laser beam at one
wavelength to a weaker beam at a second.
15. L. F. Mollenauer, R. H. Stolen, and M. N. Islam, ‘‘Experimental demonstra-
tion of soliton propagation in long ﬁbers: loss compensated by Raman gain,’’ Optics
Letters 10, No. 5, pp. 229–231 (May 1985).
16. M. Nakazawa et al., ‘‘Experimental demonstration of soliton data trans-
mission over unlimited distances with soliton control in time and frequency do-
mains,’’ postdeadline paper PD7 in Postdeadline Papers, Conference on Optical Fiber
Communications, February 21–26, 1993 (Optical Society of America, Washington,
D.C., 1993).
17. L. F. Mollenauer et al., ‘‘Demonstration, using sliding-frequency guiding
ﬁlters, of error-free soliton transmission over more than 20,000 km at 10 Gbit/s,
single-channel, and over more than 13,000 km at 20 Gbit/s in a two-channel
WDM,’’ postdeadline paper PD8, Postdeadline Papers.
18. Mollenauer interview.
19. Andrew Chraplyvy, interview, July 19, 1995.
20. A. R. Chraplyvy et al., ‘‘One-third terabit/s transmission through 150 km
of dispersion-shifted ﬁber,’’ IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 7, p. 98 (1995).
21. Chraplyvy interview.
22. A. H. Gnauck et al., ‘‘One terabit/s transmission experiment,’’ Postdeadline
paper 20 in Conference on Optical Fiber Communications OFC ’96 Technical Digest
(Optical Society of America, Washington, D.C., 1996).
23. H. Onaka et al., ‘‘1.1 Tb/s WDM transmission over a 150 km, 1.3 µm
zero-dispersion single-mode ﬁber,’’ postdeadline paper 19 in Conference on Optical
Fiber Communications.’’
24. T. Morioka et al., ‘‘100 Gbit/s  10 channel OTDM/WDM transmission
using a single supercontinuum WDM source,’’ postdeadline paper 21 in Conference
on Optical Fiber Communications.’’
25. Information posted on Project Oxygen web site, http://www.oxygen.org
in November 1998; also Robert Poe, Project Oxygen, private communication. The
web site is now defunct and not archived.
26. Ben Harrison, ‘‘Quad-WDM technology hikes MCI’s network capacity,’’
Lightwave, July 1996, pp. 6–8.
27. Paul Palumbo, ‘‘MCI hits 40 Gbit in OC-192 trial,’’ Lightwave, Mar. 1997,
pp. 1, 17.
28. Lucent Technologies press release. No company has yet installed any sys-
tem that uses all the available wavelength channels, so actual operating speeds
are less.

324
NOTES TO PAGES 236–242
29. Tom Geyer, conversation at FiberFest 97, Framingham, Mass., Mar. 31,
1997.
30. Peter Runge telephone interview, April 11, 1997
31. Paul Mortensen, ‘‘NTT projects lower-cost ﬁber to the home in 1997,’’
Lightwave, Dec. 1996, pp. 1, 26.
32. Paul Shumate, telephone interview, Mar. 28, 1997.
33. Jason Stark, telephone interview, Feb. 24, 1997.
Chapter 18
1. Alec Reeves, ‘‘Future prospects in optical communication,’’ John Logie Baird
Memorial Lecture, University of Strathclyde, Scotland, 30 May 1969, p. 13.
2. Talk at OSA Executive Forum, Anaheim, California, March 18, 2002.
3. Elias Snitzer, W. W. Morey, and W. H. Glenn, ‘‘Fiber optic rare earth tem-
perature sensors,’’ in Optical Fibre Sensors Conference Publication 221 (Institution
of Electrical Engineers, London, 1983, pp. 79–81).
4. S. B. Poole, D. N. Payne, and M. E. Fermann, ‘‘Fabrication of low-loss optical
ﬁbres containing rare-earth ions,’’ Electronics Letters 21, pp. 737–738 (Aug. 15,
1985).
5. R. J. Mears et al., ‘‘Neodymium-doped silica single-mode ﬁbre lasers,’’ Elec-
tronics Letters 21, pp. 738–740 (Aug 15, 1985).
6. David Payne, interview with author, March 2001.
7. Simon P. Poole et al., ‘‘Fabrication and characterization of low-loss optical
ﬁbers containing rare-earth ions,’’ Journal of Lightwave Technology 4, pp. 870–876
(July 1986).
8. Laurence Reekie et al, ‘‘Tunable single-mode ﬁber lasers,’’ Journal of Light-
wave Technology 4, pp. 956–960 (July 1986).
9. David Payne, Interview with author, March 2001. The technical issue is
that erbium is a three-level laser in which unexcited erbium atoms can absorb
the same wavelength that excited erbium atoms emit. It is overcome by exciting
more than half of the erbium atoms.
10. R. J. Mears et al., ‘‘High-gain rare-earth doped ﬁber ampliﬁer at 1.54 µm,’’
paper WI2 in Technical Digest, Optical Fiber Communication Conference, 19–22 Jan-
uary 1987, Reno, Nevada (Optical Society of America).
11. R. J. Mears et al., ‘‘Low-noise erbium-doped ﬁber ampliﬁer operating at
1.54 µm,’’ Electronics Letters 23, pp. 1026–1028 (Sept. 10, 1987).
12. E. Desurvire, J. R. Simpson and P. C. Becker, ‘‘High-grain erbium-doped
traveling-wave ﬁber ampliﬁer,’’ Optics Letter 12, pp. 888–890, (Nov. 1987).
13. R. James Ainslie, Susan P. Craig, and Steven T. Davey, ‘‘The absorption
and ﬂuorescence spectra of rare earth ions in silica-based monomode ﬁber,’’ Jour-
nal of Lightwave Technology 6, pp. 287–293 (Feb. 1988).
14. R. I. Laming, S. B. Poole, and E. J. Tarbox, ‘‘Pump excited-state absorption
in erbium-doped ﬁbers,’’ Optics Letters 13, pp. 1084–1086 (Dec. 1988).
15. E. Snitzer et al., ‘‘Erbium ﬁber laser ampliﬁer at 1.55 µm with pump at
1.49 µm and Yb sensitized Er oscillator,’’ postdeadline paper PD2 in Optical Fiber
Communications Conference Technical Digest 1988.
16. E. Desurvire et al., ‘‘Efﬁcient erbium-doped ﬁber ampliﬁers at a 1,53-µm
wavelength with a high output saturation power,’’ Optics Letters 14, pp. 1266–
1268 (Nov. 15, 1989).
17. Emmanuel Desurvire, e-mail to author August 10, 2001.

NOTES TO PAGES 243–246
325
18. Yasuo Kimura, Kazunori Suzuki, and Masataka Nakazawa, ‘‘Efﬁcient Er3
doped optical ﬁber ampliﬁer pumped by a 1.48 µm high-power laser diode,’’ Paper
TuG6, Technical Digest Optical Fiber Communication Conference 6–9 February, 1989,
Houston; also appears as M. Nakazawa, Y. Kimura, and K. Suzuki, ‘‘Efﬁcient Er3
doped optical ampliﬁer pumped by a 1.48 µm InGaAsP laser diode,’’ Applied Phys-
ics Letters 54, pp. 295–297 (1989).
19. Y. Kimura, K. Suzuki, and M. Nakazawa, ‘‘46.5 dB gain in Er3 doped
ﬁber ampliﬁer pumped by 1.48 µm GaInAsP laser diodes,’’ Electronics Letters 25,
pp. 1656–1657 (Nov. 23, 1989).
20. R. S. Vodhanel et al., ‘‘Highly efﬁcient 978-nm diode-pumped erbium-
doped ﬁbre ampliﬁer with 24-dB gain,’’ Electronics Letters 25, pp. 1386–1388
(Sept. 28, 1989).
21. E. Desurvire, C. R Giles, and J. R. Simpson, ‘‘Saturation-induced crosstalk
in high-speed erbium-doped ﬁber ampliﬁers at λ1.53 µm,’’ paper TuG7 in Tech-
nical Digest: Optical Fiber Communication Conference 1989; Emmanuel Desurvire, C.
Randy Giles, and Jay R. Simpson, ‘‘Gain saturation effects in high-speed multi-
channel erbium-doped ﬁber ampliﬁers at λ1.53 µm,’’ Journal of Lightwave Tech-
nology 7, pp. 2095–2104 (Dec. 1989).
22. R. E. Wagner et al., ‘‘16-channel coherent broadcast network at 155
Mb/s,’’ postdeadline Paper PD12, Optical Fiber Communication Conference 1989.
23. H. Taga et al., ‘‘459 km, 2.4 Gbit/s 4 wavelength multiplexing optical
ﬁber transmission experiment using 6 Er-doped ﬁber ampliﬁers,’’ postdeadline pa-
per 9 Optical Fiber Communication Conference 1990.
24. See pp. 232–233 for background.
25. V. A. Bhagavatula, M. S. Spotz, W. F. Love, and Donald B. Keck, ‘‘Seg-
mented core single-mode ﬁbers with low loss and low dispersion,’’ Electronics Let-
ters 19, no. 9, pp. 317–318 (Apr. 25, 1983), and B. J. Ainslie et al, ‘‘Monomode
ﬁber with ultra low loss and minimum dispersion at 1.55 microns,’’ Electronics
Letters 18, pp. 842–844 (1982).
26. Neal S. Bergano et al., ‘‘A 9000 km 5 Gbit/s and 21,000 km 2.5 Gbit/s
feasibility demonstration of transoceanic EDFA systems using a circulating loop,’’
postdeadline paper PD13, Optical Fiber Communication Conference, Feb. 18–22,
1991, San Diego (Optical Society of America).
27. N.A. Olsson et al., ‘‘Two-channel soliton pulse propagation over 9000 km
with 10–9 bit error rate,’’ postdeadline paper PD1, Optical Fiber Communication
Conference, Feb. 18–22, 1991, San Diego (Optical Society of America).
28. Linn F. Mollenauer et al., ‘‘Demonstration of error-free soliton trans-
mission over more than 15,000 km at 5 Gbit/s single-channel and over 11,000
km at 10 Gbit/s in a two-channel WDM,’’ postdeadline paper PD10, Optical
Fiber Communication Conference, Feb 2–7, 1992, San Jose (Optical Society of
America).
29. L. F. Mollenauer et al., ‘‘Demonstration, using sliding-frequency guiding
ﬁlters, of error-free soliton transmission over more than 20,000 km at 10 Gbit/s,
single-channel, and over more than 13,000 km at 20 Gbit/s, in a two-channel
WDM,’’ postdeadline paper PD-8, Optical Fiber Communication Conference, Feb 21–
26, 1993, San Jose, California (Optical Society of America).
30. J. M. Dugan et al., ‘‘All optical ﬁber-based 1550 nm dispersion compen-
sation in a 10 Gbit/s 150-km transmission experiment over 1310 nm optimized
ﬁber,’’ postdeadline paper PD-14, Optical Fiber Communication Conference, Feb 2–
7, 1992, San Jose, California (Optical Society of America).

326
NOTES TO PAGES 246–253
31. Kazuhiro Oda et al., ‘‘16-channel  10-Gbit/s optical FDM transmission
over
a
1000
km
conventional
single-mode
ﬁber
employing
dispersion-
compensating ﬁber and gain equalization,’’ postdeadline paper PD22, Optical Fiber
Communication Conference, Feb 26–Mar 3, 1995, San Diego (Optical Society of
America).
32. http://public.web.cern.ch/Public/ACHIEVEMENTS/WEB/history.html as of
August 3, 2002.
33. K. G. Coffman and A. M. Odlyzko, ‘‘Internet growth: Is there a ‘‘Moore’s
Law’’ for data trafﬁc?’’ in J. Abello, P. M. Pardalos, and M. G. C. Resende, eds.,
Handbook of Massive Data Sets, (Kluwer, 2002, pp. 47–93), also available at http://
www.dtc.umn.edu/odlyzko/doc/networks.html.
34. C. David Chaffee, Building the Global Fiber Optics Superhighway (Kluwer
Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, 2001, p. 46).
35. http://www.globalcrossing.com/ as of August 3, 2002.
36. A. K. Srivastava et al., ‘‘1 Tbit/s transmission of 100 WDM 10 Gbit/s
channels over 400 km of TrueWave ﬁber,’’ postdeadline paper PD 10, and S.
Aisawa et al., ‘‘Ultra-wide band, long distance WDM transmission demonstration:
1 Tbit/s (50  20 Gbit/s) 600 km transmission using 1550 and 1580 nm wave-
length bands,’’ postdeadline paper PD11, both Optical Fiber Communication Confer-
ence, Feb. 1998, San Jose, California (Optical Society of America).
37. Jeff Hecht, ‘‘Planned super-Internet banks on wavelength-division multi-
plexing,’’ Laser Focus World 35, 5, pp. 103–105 (May 1998).
38. S. Kawanishi et al., ‘‘3-Tbit/s (160 Gbit/s  19 ch) OTDM-WDM trans-
mission experiment,’’ postdeadline paper PD1, Optical Fiber Communications Con-
ference, San Diego, Feb. 22–26, 1999.
39. Joanne Glasner, ‘‘Enron: A bandwidth bloodbath,’’ Wired News, Nov. 30,
2001; http://www.wired.com/news/
40. Figures from Optical Society of America meetings department, see ‘‘38,000
ﬂock to OFC 2001’’ in Optics and Photonics News (Verses 12, No. 5 (May 2001).
p. 49.
41. Reported
in
November
2001
Photonics
Spectra,
see
http://www.
photonics.com/Spectra/Business/nov01/busForbes.asp.
42. Kiyoshi Fukuchi et al., ‘‘10.92 Tbit/s (273  40-Gbit/s) triple-band/ultra-
dense WDM optical repeatered transmission experiment,’’ postdeadline paper PD-
24; and Sebastien Bigo et al., ‘‘10.2 Tbit/s (256  42.7 Gbit/s, PDM/WDM trans-
mission over 100 km TeraLight ﬁber with 1.28 bit/s/Hz spectral efﬁciency,’’
postdeadline paper PD-25, Optical Fiber Communication Conference, Mar. 22, 2001,
Anaheim, California (Optical Society of America). The spectral efﬁciency of 1.28
bit/s/Hertz was also a record.
43. B. Bakhshi et al., ‘‘1 Tbit/s (100  10 Gbit/s) transmission over trans-
paciﬁc distance using 28 nm C-band EDFAs,’’ postdeadline paper PD21; G. Vareille
et al., ‘‘3 Tbit/s (300  11.6 Gbit/s) transmission over 7380 km using C  L
band with 25 GHz channel spacing and NRZ format,’’ both Optical Fiber Com-
munication Conference, Mar 22, 2001, Anaheim, California (Optical Society of
America). The numbers in the Alcatel experiment don’t multiply to exactly 3 Tbit/s
because they include extra bits added for error correction.
44. Optical Society of America, Photonics and Telecommunications Executive
Forum ‘‘Feeding the Beast,’’ March 17–19, 2001, notes by author.
45. The exact numbers depend on the price of the beer in your area, and it
only works for relatively cheap beer.

NOTES TO PAGES 253–255
327
46. Jeff Hecht, ‘‘Optical Networking: What’s really out there?’’ Laser Focus
World, February 2003, pp. 85–88.
47. Talk at OSA Executive Forum, Anaheim, California, March 18, 2002.
48. Toby Weber, ‘‘Corning cuts to the core in ﬁber production halt,’’ Telephony,
p. 26 (Oct. 16, 2001).
49. Interview with Kevin Kelly, Wired, September/October 1993, http://
www.wired.com/wired/archive/1.04/gilder_pr.html.
50. http://www.ftthcouncil.org.

This page intentionally left blank 

329
Index
1984 Inc. 189, 200
ABC Television 192
Absorption, light 44, 112–113, 134, 183
Africa One 237
Air Force 95, 184
Air, compressed 13
Alcatel 252
Alferov, Zhores 151–156, 159, 231, 239
Alignment, core 167–168
All-optical network 189
American Cystoscope Makers 70, 73, 101
American Gastroscopic Society 67
American Optical 54–56, 59, 64–65, 68–69,
71–74, 90–91, 102, 120, 178
Ampliﬁers, electronic 83–84, 128, 203. See
also repeaters
Ampliﬁers, optical 128, 189, 213–214, 233–
235, 240–245
Amplitude modulation 79–80
Ancient glass 28–29
Angle, critical 24–26
Antarctica 237
Antenna theory 110–111
Apollo program 74, 129
Applied Physics Letters 140
Arago, Franc¸ois 14–15
Arc lamp 16–22
Armat, Thomas 284n12
Armistead, Bill 119, 134, 139, 146
Armor, cable 212
Army Electronics Command 96
Arrays, selenium cell 35
Asimov, Isaac 216–217
AT&T 37, 40, 83, 97, 129, 163–166, 195–
196, 228–229. See also Bell Labs
breakup (1984) 196, 200, 228
business strategy 158, 163–166
cable ships 208, 213
cross-licensing 140, 169
ﬁeld trials 173, 178, 180–181, 186, 192–
193
submarine cables 203–204, 209–213
second breakup (1996) 232, 235
AT&T Research Labs 235
Atlanta ﬁeld trial 6, 173, 178
Atmospheric transmission 88, 93–96
Atom bomb tests 53
Attenuation 111–116, 160, 183
measurements 124, 138–139, 142–144
Avery Jones, Sir Francis 289n6
Babinet, Jacques 14–15
Backbone networks 85, 229. See also long-
distance networks
Baird, John Logie 37–39, 227
Ballard, Robert 237
Band gap 148–149
Bandwidth 7–8, 79–80, 226, 232–238, 245–
249
Bare ﬁbers 47

330
INDEX
Barlow, Harold 86, 110, 140–141
Barr & Stroud 122
Bausch & Lomb 61, 67, 120
Beam waveguides 96
Bechmann, G. 17–18
Beernink, G. J. 288 n59
Bell Labs 86–87, 93–100, 120–121, 126–
127, 144, 152–159, 165–174, 192,
195, 228, 231–235, 238, 242, 248. See
also AT&T
submarine cables 206–208
Bell System see AT&T
Bell, Alexander Graham 35, 79, 81
Bellcore 228
Bendix 101
Bergano, Neal 232, 245
Berlin Wall 215
Berreman, Dwight 98–99
Biarritz system 222–223
BICC 137, 172
Black, Phil 198
Bolton, Sir Francis 16–17
Boyle, Bill 305n32
Boys, Charles Vernon 28–32, 283n10
Bradley, Graham 194
Bray, John 119, 122, 174
Breaking scrambler code 69
British Broadcasting Corp. 37, 162
British Ministry of Defense 120
British Post Ofﬁce 86, 110–111, 141–144,
163, 187–188. See also British Telecom
Research Laboratory (Martlesham
Heath) 176
Research Station (Dollis Hill) 118–119,
122–123, 125–126, 178
British Telecom 6, 194–195, 210, 232. See
also British Post Ofﬁce
Research Laboratory (Martlesham
Heath) 182, 197, 225, 227–228, 232
British Titan Products 122, 143
Brouwer, Willem 52–53, 56, 288n59
Bubble, telecommunication 247–255
Budgets, research 122, 128–129
Bulbs. See lamps
Bundles, imaging 34–45, 60–74, 133, 236
Cable ships 208, 213
Cable television 8–9, 179, 217–219, 223
Cables
breakage 214, 229
coaxial 216–218
manufacture 172, 178
submarine 4, 201–215, 248
Cairo 3
Canada 221–222
Canada Wire and Cable 190
Canadian Department of
Communications 221–222
Canary Islands (cable) 211–212
Capacity, ﬁber transmission 8–9, 78–80, 232–
238, 245–249, 251, 253
Card readers 74, 102
Carrier signals 79, 80, 92
Catapults 32
Cayven, Georgia 31
Central Electricity Generating Board 208
Central Intelligence Agency 61, 64, 68–69,
71
Central ofﬁce, telephone 77–80
Central Telephone 189
Cerny, Rich 178, 190, 193, 237
Cerritos, California system 224–225
Chemical vapor deposition 171
Chicago ﬁeld trial 180–181, 186
Chicago World’s Fair (1894) 18
Chinese Ministry of Post and
Telecommunications 191
Chinese University of Hong Kong 141
Chown, Martin 123, 128–129, 160–162
Chraplyvy, Andy 234–235
Christmas trees, ﬁber-optic 75
Chynoweth, Alan G. 309 n36
Ciena 247
Cinerama 54
Cities, wired 217–218
City, ﬁbered 218–225
‘‘City of Light’’ 10, 236–237
Cladding 46–59, 62, 73, 107
credit for inventing 56
glass 63–66, 68–69
illustrated 48
plastic 63, 66, 178
Clark, William Smith 18
Clarke, Arthur C. 87
Coated ﬁbers 51, 107
Coaxial cable 8–9, 83–84, 201–204, 216–
218
Codes, digital 4
Cohen, Mel 310n70
Coherence 92, 93, 187
Cold War 47, 57 64, 129, 156, 199, 204,
215
Colladon, Daniel 3, 12–18, 23, 27, 282n42
Color centers 134, 138
Combiners, image 73
Comm/Scope 190–191
Communications 76–91
atmospheric laser 93–95
home ﬁber 216–226
interstellar laser 93
radio 81–84
satellites 87, 204, 212–213, 230
Communist party 57
Communities, futuristic 218–221, 225
Compressed air 13
Comptes Rendus 14–15, 17, 36

INDEX
331
Computers 52, 74, 122, 246
remote access to 118–119. See also
videotex
telephone switching 78
Conduction band 148–149
Confocal waveguides 89, 96–100, 129–130,
170–171
Connecting ﬁbers 172
Consensus view (ﬁber communications) 178–
179, 200
Conservatory of Arts and Sciences, Paris 14
Cook, Jack 170, 172, 228
Cookson, Al 128–129
Cooling, laser 148
Cores, ﬁber 8, 90. See also cladding
alignment 167–168
Cores, ﬁber 90
Corning Glass Works 62, 119, 131–146, 168–
170, 193, 198–199, 229, 231, 254
Corningware 133
Coupling, light into ﬁber 107, 127, 167–168
Courtney-Pratt, Jeofry 100, 291 n54
Crawford Hill Lab 96, 98, 126, 166. See also
Bell Labs
Crezancy, France 36
Critical angle 24–26
Cross-licensing patents 140, 169
Crossbow 30
Crosstalk, between ﬁbers 62–63
Cryptography 50. See also image scramblers
CSF 106
Curtiss, Lawrence E. 61–64, 66–67, 70, 101
Cut-back measurements 142–144
Daglish, Hugh 122, 126
Danielson, Warren 173
Dark line defects 157
Davis, Watson 284n14
De Forest, Lee 38
De Ingenieur 55–56, 59, 73
De Vries, H. 288n59
de Brunfaut, Jules 283n9
de la Rive, Auguste 14, 27, 282n42
de Re´aumur, Re´ne´ 29
deButts, John D. 176
Decibels 88, 114–116
Decorative ﬁber optics 5, 75
Delay, satellite transmission 204
DeLoach, Barney 157–158, 231, 310n70
Demonstrations,
Chicago 180–181
digital repeater 128
ﬁrst ﬁber bundle 42–43
ﬁrst gastroscope 67
Long Beach 181
for Queen Elizabeth II 161–162
television transmission 123, 162
Dental illuminators 21, 45
Deposition, glass 136–137
Deregulation, telephone 199, 228, 249
Design, submarine cable 206
Desuvire, Emmanuel 242–243
Developing countries 229–230
Dexheimer, John 252
Dial, telephone 78
Diamond 24–26
DiDominico, Mauro 310 n70
Dielectric waveguides 89–91, 100, 106–107,
141
Digital codes 4
Digital subscriber line (DSL) 225
Digital transmission 84–85, 163–164
Digitization 8, 225
Diodes 149, 293n25
Disneyland 251–252
Dispersion 104–105, 122, 162, 168, 183–
186, 188, 205, 232, 244–246
Displays, image 36–38
Disputes. See also patents
Hopkins-Kapany 59
O’Brien-van Heel 59
Dobson, Paul 178, 199
Dollis Hill. See British Post Ofﬁce Research
Station
Doping, semiconductor 148–149
Dorset police 177
Double-crucible ﬁbers 65, 125–127, 144
Double-heterojunction lasers 152–158
Drawing ﬁbers 28–32, 62–67, 125–127, 134–
139
Drendel, Frank 190–191
Dual-wavelength ﬁber 193
Duboscq, L. J. 16
Duke, David 197
DuPont 21–23, 45
Dutch optical industry 52
Dyment, Jack 155
Dyott, Richard 122, 141–143, 146, 174–
175, 178, 183
Eaglesﬁeld, Charles C. 88–89, 113, 163
Edison, Thomas 46, 56, 81, 284n12
Egyptian glass 29
Eiffel Tower 17
Electricity 13, 16–18
Electro-Fiberoptics 178
Electromagnetic waves 80
Electronic television 39, 217
Electronics 92, 93, 161, 166
Electronics Letters 189
Electrons 148–149
Elie System 221–222, 224
Elizabeth II, Queen 161–162
Encoding, image 40–41, 47, 54, 64–65, 68–
69

332
INDEX
Endoscopes 41–44, 51, 57–67, 70–71, 101,
289n7
ﬁrst 67
Entrepreneurs 178–180
Epworth, Richard 123, 187
Erbium-doped ﬁber ampliﬁers 214, 233–235,
241–245
Eulalie, Princess of Spain 31
European Conference on Optical
Communications 177, 182, 232,
321n32
Exhibition, Universal (Paris) 12–13
Exhibitions, Victorian 10, 12–13, 16–20
Expense
Biarritz 222–223
Elie 221
ﬁber to the home 217, 220–225
Hi-OVIS 220
high-speed experiments 234–235
Eye, human 49
Fabrics, glass 31–33
Faceplates 71–72, 133
Facsimile 35, 39–40
Fairchild, Bernard 293n34
Faraday, Michael 23, 27, 282nn41, 42
Farm, ﬁber to the 221–222
Faust 16
Federal Communications Commission 196,
217, 218
Fiber ampliﬁers 214, 233–235, 240–245
Fiber bundles 133
assembly 58
Fiber Communications Inc. 179
Fiber glut 251, 253
Fiber gyroscopes 237
Fiber tapers 73
Fiber to the Home Council 255
Fibered city 218–225
FiberFest 236
Fiberglas 32–33
Fibers
1.55-µm 185–186, 188
4-decibel 145–146
20-decibel 138–141
attenuation 110–116, 160, 183
bare 47
clad 46–59
clad, illustrated 48
double-crucible 65, 125–127, 144
drawing 28–32, 62–67, 125–127, 134–
139
drawing equipment 72, 122
dual-wavelength 193
ﬁrst low-loss 138–141, 145–146, 303 n41
fragments 142–144
germanium-doped 145–146
glass 28–33, 39–44, 49–50
graded-index 127–128, 167–168, 177–
178, 194, 229
imaging 39–75, 236
lamps 5
liquid core 166
modes 90–91
plastic 52
plastic-clad silica 178
rod-in-tube 63–64, 66–69, 134
second window 183–184
silver-coated 47
single-mode 166–168, 176–178, 187–189,
194–198, 205–208, 228–230
third window 185–186
titanium-doped 138–141
to the farm 221–222
to the home 216–226, 237–238, 255
transmission capacity 7–8, 79–80, 226,
232–238
transparency 110–116
Fiberscopes. See image transmission
Field trials
Atlanta 6. 173, 178
Chicago 180–181
Long Beach 181
single-mode 194–195
Field trials, British 182
Field trials, ﬁber and waveguide 172–175
Field, Cyrus 202
Fingerprint oil 62
Fire polishing 66, 136
Fires 171
First low-loss ﬁber 138–141, 145–146,
303n41
First room-temperature semiconductor
lasers 153–156
Flame hydrolysis 132–133, 136
Flame polishing 66, 136
Flooding 146
Fog 95
Fonstad, Cliff 134
Fountains, illuminated 10, 13–20, 23, 27,
36
Foxall, Clive 305n65
France Telecom 222–223
French Academy of Sciences 14–15, 36
French National Center for
Telecommunications Research 182
French, Bill 171, 183, 206
Frequencies,
carrier 79–80, 92
optical 87
telephone 7–8
Frey, Bart 291n56
Fujikura Cable Works 183
Fujitsu 178, 235
Fulenwider, John 181, 218–219, 229
Fundamental limits 112–113

INDEX
333
Furnaces 32
high-temperature 134–135, 137
Furukawa Cable 137
Fused silica 124–125, 131–146
Future, predictions 220–221, 226, 230–231
Futuristic communities 218–221, 225
Gainsborough, Hugh 288 n64
Gallium arsenide 149–151, 158
lasers 168, 178
Gallium nitride 184
Galloway, W. and J., and Sons 17
Galt, John K. 152
Gambling, William Alec 120, 183
Gardner, Bill 71
Garroway, Dave 73
Gas lenses 98–100, 129–130, 231
Gastroscopes 41–44, 51, 57–67, 70–71, 101
ﬁrst 67
Geneen, Harold 129, 162
General Cable Corp. 181, 192
General Electric 37, 39
Research Laboratory 149–150
Generations, ﬁber technology
ﬁrst 177–178
second 193–194
third 186, 197–198
Geneva 12–13
Gerlach, Walther 42, 285n38
Germanium doping 145–146, 169–170
Gernsback, Hugo 284n14
Gilder, George 250, 255
Glasgow exhibition (1888) 17
Glass 15, 24–26, 28–33, 133
chemistry 145
clad ﬁbers 63–66, 68–69
deposition 136–137
fabric 31–33
ﬂow 303n44
lasers 102, 133
multicomponent 125–127
purity 5, 113, 124–127, 131–133
rods 15, 21, 36, 40
spun 29, 30
transparency 15, 100, 110–115, 123–124
Global Crossing 248, 254
Global telecommunications 201–202, 227–
238
Gloge, Detlef 97–98, 160, 165, 168
Godbey, Jim 178, 190
Gophers 229, 322n9
Goubau, Georg 96
Goudsmit, Samuel 295n8
Graded-index ﬁbers 127–128, 167–168, 177–
178, 194, 229
Grande Encyclopedie, Le 18
Great Society program 218
GTE 6, 180, 192, 218–219, 224–225
Gutta percha 203
Gyroscopes, ﬁber-optic 237
Hall, Bob 149–150
Hammesfahr, Herman 31
Hansell, Clarence W. 39–41, 44–45, 82–83,
102, 236, 285n36
Hartley, R. V. L. 88
Hartman, Robert 157
Hasegawa, Akira 232
Hayashi, Izuo 152–157, 231
Heat treatment 138, 144
Hero experiments 232–233, 235, 243–245,
248–249, 252, 255
Heterojunctions 151–152
Hi-OVIS 219–221
Hicks, Will 64–65, 68–72, 90, 101, 188–
189, 196, 200, 214, 226, 250, 251,
295n5
Hierarchy, telephone 8
Hirschowitz, Basil 60, 66–67, 70–71
Hitler, Adolf 44
Hockham, George 106–115
Holes, in semiconductor 148–149
Holmdel Lab 100, 207. See also Bell Labs
Holonyak, Nick, Jr. 150, 156
Home ﬁber links 216–226
Hopkins, Robert 61, 292 n66
Hopkins, Harold H. 10, 53, 56–60, 62, 70,
282n43
Horiguchi, Masaharu 183–186
House Un-American Activities Committee 90
Hsieh, J. Jim 184–186, 191–192, 200
Hudson, Marshall 169, 189–190, 199
Hughes Research Laboratories 92, 93
Hurricane Agnes 146
Hutson, Andy 296n35
Hyde, Frank 132–133
Hyde, Lewis 90, 288n56
Hydrogen losses 208–209
Hydrolysis, ﬂame 132–133, 136
IBM 74, 150, 152, 153
Illumination
dental 21, 45
medical 21
theater 16
Image combiners and splitters 73
Image intensiﬁers 71–72
Image scramblers 40–41, 47, 54, 61, 64–65,
68–69
Image transmission 34–64, 66–67, 236
ﬁrst demonstration 42–43
Imperial College of Science and
Technology 57, 58
Impurities 113, 124, 132–133, 143
semiconductor 148–149
Independent Television 162

334
INDEX
Index of refraction 24–26
Indium gallium arsenide phosphide. See
InGaAsP
Indium phosphide 149. See also InGaAsP
Information capacity 8–9, 79–80, 234–238
InGaAsP lasers 184–186, 189, 191–192
Ingenieur, De
55–56, 59, 73
Inhomogeneities 66
Ink-jet printing 41
Insilco 179
Installations, ﬁber system 192–193
Institution of Electrical Engineers 114, 119,
140, 160–162
Intelsat 212
Intensiﬁers, image 71–72
Internal reﬂection 24–26
International Commission for Optics 46
International Health Exhibition (1884) 16–
17
International Telecommunications Union
177
International Telegraph and Telephone. See
ITT
International Trade Commission 199
International Wire and Cable
Symposium 219
Internet 119, 225, 226, 246–247
Investors 245–255
Ioffe Physico-Technical Institute 151–152
Isle of Wight, submarine cable 210
ITT 84–85, 128–129, 163, 178, 198–199.
See also STL
Ives, Herbert 308 n25
Jacobs, Ira 173, 186, 192
Jaeger, Ray 171
Japanese Ocean Cable consortium 210
Japanese ﬁber to the home 219–221
Javan, Ali 94, 100
JDS Uniphase 250–251, 254
Jenkins Television Company 38
Jenkins, C. Francis 34, 37–38, 45, 284 n12
Jets, water 13–20, 23, 27
Jones, Mervin W. 124
Journal of the Optical Society of America 69
Junction network 118
Junction, semiconductor 149
Kachulak, Rod 224
Kahn, Irving 179
Kaiser, Peter 99, 166
Kaminow, Ivan 297n46
Kanely, Jim 199
Kao, Charles K. 105–115, 117–124, 128–
129, 141, 144, 161, 178, 230
Kapany, Narinder S. 10, 58–62, 67, 69–70,
91, 100, 102, 251
Kapron, Felix 135–136, 140, 183
Karbowiak, Antoni E. 88, 103–110, 141
Kasiewicz, Allen 192
Kawahata, Masahiro 220–221
Kawakami, Shojiro 127
Keck, Donald 135–140, 144–146, 228, 231,
238, 252
Kessler, John 166
Kessler Marketing Intelligence 305n68
Keyes, Robert 149
Kiritsy, Paul 291n56
Kiyasu, Zen-ichi 121
Kompfner, Rudolf 93, 96, 99–100, 156, 170–
171
Kreidl, Norbert 120, 135
Kressel, Henry 152, 156
Kroemer, Herbert 151, 239
Kussmaul, Adolf 283n29
L’Onde Electronique 115
La Nature
17, 19, 20, 23
Lake Placid Winter Olympics 192–193
Lamesch, Armand 290n19
Lamm, Heinrich 41–44, 50, 67, 101,
285n38
Lamps
arc 16–22
ﬁber-optic 5
incandescent 16, 21, 35
street 21
Land, Edwin 41
Laser Diode Laboratories 152, 158, 190
Laser Focus 6, 114, 156, 220
Lasers 91–102
continuous 94
ﬁber 241
glass 102, 133
helium-neon 94
InGaAsP 184–186, 189, 191–192
invention of 92–93
lifetimes 148, 156–159, 173, 185–186,
196
long-wavelength 184–186, 189, 191–192
ruby 93–95
semiconductor 5, 94, 147–159, 167, 242
surgery 237
Lasertron 191–192, 199–200, 229
Lattice spacing 184–185
Lazay, Paul 169, 171, 195, 199, 206, 207
Le Grande Encyclopedie
18
Leakage, of light 46
LEDs 149, 167, 193
Lenses,
gas 98–100. 129–130, 231
zoom 57
Letter, van Heel to O’Brien 53, 55, 56
Lewin, Len 88, 104, 119
Li, Tingye 170
Libbey Glass Company 31

INDEX
335
Lifetime, laser 148, 156–159, 173, 185–186,
196
Light-emitting diode. See LED
Light
coherent 92, 93
guiding 13–20, 36
leakage 46
pipes 18, 21–22, 88–89, 100, 104
speed of 24
Lighting, electric 13, 16–18
Lightning strikes 177
Lincoln Laboratory (MIT) 149–150
Lincoln Laboratory. See MIT Lincoln
Laboratory
Liquid-core ﬁbers 166
Liquid-phase epitaxy 152–153
Litigation, patent 73, 198–199, 289n14
Loch Fyne 206–208
Loewenstein, Klaus 301n43
Lomax, Ron 294 n34
London exhibitions 16–17
Long Beach ﬁeld trial 181
Long waves (radio) 82
Long-distance calling 78
Long-distance networks 186, 197–198, 228–
230
Long-wavelength systems 182–189, 191–
195
Los Angeles Times 51
Loss. See attenuation
Losses, hydrogen 208–209
Low-loss ﬁber, ﬁrst 138–141, 145–146, 303
n41
Lowell Institute of Technology 90
Lucent Technologies 232, 235, 236, 247–
248, 254
Lucite 45
Lucy, Chuck 133, 137, 142–143, 166, 168,
172, 189
Luminescence, semiconductor 152–153
Lunar landing 129
Lytollis, John 294 n34
M/A Com 191, 199
MacChesney, John 171, 183, 198
Machines, ﬁber winding 58–59
MacNeille, Steve 65, 72, 90
Magniﬁers, ﬁber 73
Maiman, Theodore 93–94
Manchester exhibition (1887) 17
Manhattan Project 64
Manitoba Telephone 221–222, 224
Marcatili, Henry 140, 168, 170
Marconi Company 44
Margarine 51
Marsh, Jock 123, 161
Martlesham Heath. See British Telecom
Research Labs
Masers 93
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 10
Material dispersion 168, 183–186
Materials science 112
Maurer, Robert 113, 119, 131–135, 137,
139–144, 169–170
McGowan, Bill 197–198
MCI 165, 197–198, 228, 229, 236
Measurements
ﬁber loss 138–139, 142–144, 166, 169,
183–184
glass transparency 123–124
Mechanical polishing 66, 68, 136
Mechanical television 37–39
Medical illumination 21–23
Medical imaging. See endoscopes and
gastroscopes
Mental telepathy 87
Metal coated ﬁbers 47, 51
Metal tubes 100
Meter reading, automated 217
Metromedia Fiber Networks 249
Michigan, University of 61–64
Microbending 145, 206
Microscope slides 21
Microwaves 49, 80, 83, 86–87, 93
relay towers 83, 85, 195
tubes 96
waveguides 89, 104, 106, 111
Midwinter, John 182, 194, 208, 227–
228
Military projects 72, 120
communications 120
imaging 71–72
semiconductor lasers 151–152
Milleﬁori 68, 71
Miller, Stewart 86, 96–101, 120–121, 129–
130, 141, 165–168, 170, 172, 228,
230
Millimeter waveguides 85–87, 96–97, 99–
101, 140–142, 161, 230
abandoned by STL 103
ﬁeld trials of 173–175
problems with 162, 164–165
Million-hour lasers 158–159, 231
Ministry for International Trade and Industry
(Japan) 219, 221
Minow, Newton 217
Mirages 98
MIT Lincoln Laboratory 71, 149–150, 184–
185, 231
Modal noise 187
Modes 104–108
ﬁber 90–91, 167–168. See also single-mode
ﬁbers, multimode ﬁbers
Modulation 79–80
Modulation, pulse code 84–85
Mollenauer, Linn 232–233, 244

336
INDEX
Møller Hansen, Holger 50–51, 57, 286n21
Monopoly, AT&T telephone 140, 164–165
Morse code 79
Mosaic Fabrications 72–73, 101
Mosher, R. E. 310n70
Mother’s Oats 62
Motion pictures 38
projectors 284n12
wide-screen 54–55, 72
Mountbatten, Lord Louis 162
Multicomponent glasses 125–127, 144
Multiﬁbers 68–69, 71
Multimode ﬁbers see graded-index ﬁbers
Multimode transmission 104–108
Multiplexing 83
wavelength-division 188–189, 196, 234–
236
Munich, University of 41–42
Murray Hill Lab
98, 126, 152, 154, 166,
207. See also Bell Labs
Nakazawa, Masataka 233
Narrow-stripe lasers 154–155
NASA 74, 95
NASDAQ index 249–251
National Research Council 72
National Science Foundation 218
Nature 55–58, 60, 93
Nature, La 17
Naval Research Laboratory 172
Nelson, Herb 152
Networks
all-optical 189
global 3–4, 201–202, 227–238
junction 118
telephone 3–8, 77–80, 110–111, 118, 228–
230
trunk 118
New England Fiberoptics Council 236
New Scientist 3–4, 161, 303n41
New towns projects 218–219
New York Times 156, 164
Newman, David 147
Newns, George 119, 122, 126, 143
Nill, Ken 191–192, 200
Nippon Electric Co. 156, 252
Nippon Sheet Glass 128
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone. See NTT
Nishizawa, Jun-ichi 121
Nobel Prize 159, 239
Noise, modal 187
Northeast Corridor System 195–196, 200
Northern Telecom 198, 229, 253, 254
Norton, Frederick H. 68–69, 290n32
Nostalgia 227–228
NTT 121, 183–186, 188, 195, 208, 210–
211, 231–233, 235, 237, 248, 249
ﬁber to the home 221, 225–226
Nuclear effects 120
O’Brien, Brian 46–50, 53–56, 59, 64–65,
70, 72–73, 90
O’Brien, Ethel 55
O’Hara, Sidney 194, 305 n65
Oatmeal cartons 62
Ogilvie, Graeme 309 n38
Oklahoma! 55
Olshansky, Robert 170, 225
Olympics 192–193, 237
Omni 6, 222
Operators, telephone 77–78
Optical ampliﬁers 128, 189, 213–214, 233–
235, 240–245
Optical communications, early 81, 87–91, 93–
102
Optical Corporation of America 236
Optical Fiber Communications Conference
197, 228, 232, 233, 235, 248–254
Optical frequencies 87–89
Optical Society of America 46, 49, 64, 72,
230
Optical switching 188–189, 226, 228
Optical telegraph 80–81
Optical telephone 81–82
Optical waveguide 96–100
Optics research 46, 52
Optics Technology 102, 120, 297n58
Orthoscopic surgery 237
Osanai, Hiroshi 183–185
Oscillators 92
Outside vapor deposition process 170
Owens-Corning Fiberglas 32
Owens-Illinois Glass Company 32
Ozone, measurements 53
Panish, Mort 152–157, 231
Paranormal research 85, 293n23
Paris 10, 12–13
Paris exhibition (1889) 10, 17–20
Paris Opera 16
Party-line phones 221–222
Passive optical networks 225, 237
Patents
Baird 37, 59
Corning 139–140, 198–199
cross-licensing 169
Curtiss 67, 73, 269n14
Hansell 39–41, 44, 51, 73, 285n36,
289n76
Hicks 70, 72, 236
Hirschowitz 67
Hopkins 59
Kapany 70
Møller Hansen 51
O’Brien 54, 59, 73

INDEX
337
Payne, Dave 183, 214, 240–243
Pearson, Dave 124, 126–127, 144, 171
Periscopes 40, 47
Perspex 45
Peters, C. Wilbur ‘‘Pete’’ 61–64, 66–67
Philip, Prince 162
Philips NV 50, 61, 191, 199
Philips, Geoffrey 177
Phosphorous, in ﬁber 209
Photophone 81–82
Physical Review Letters 93
Physical Society (London) 31, 128
Picture telephone (French) 222–223
Picture transmission 34–45
Picturephone 99, 129, 161, 164–165, 217,
230
Pierce, John R. 87, 160, 171
‘‘Pipe dream’’ 141
Pipes, light 18, 21–22, 40, 88–89, 100
Pirelli 137, 172, 182, 247
Plastic cladding 66, 178
Plastic ﬁbers 51, 52, 268n58
Plastic illuminating rods 23, 45, 53
Plateau, Joseph 280n8
Polaroid 41, 200
Polishing
ﬂame 66, 136
mechanical 66, 68, 136
Pollard, Marvin 61, 67
Portable communication systems 120
POTS (Plain old telephone service) 7–8
Potter, Bob 74
Predictions 220–221, 226, 230–231
Preforms 63–67, 134, 136–139, 170, 171
Prestel 118–119
Prince Philip 162
Printer, ink-jet 41
Proceedings of the Institution of Electrical
Engineers 114
Programming center, Hi-OVIS 220
Project Oxygen 236, 248
Public relations 114, 156, 181,
306n42
Publications
Kapany 69–70
van Heel 53, 55–56
Pulse code modulation 84–85, 87, 161, 163,
307n16
Pulse dispersion 105, 122, 167–168, 183–
186, 205, 232
Pulsed lasers 150–151
Punched card readers 74, 102
Purity, glass 5, 113, 125–127, 131–133
Pyrex 132
Quality, satellite circuit 204
Quartz 31, 113
Quaternary semiconductors 184–186, 189,
191–192
QUBE 219
Queen Elizabeth II 161–162
Quist, Tom 149
Radar 83, 85
Radio Corporation of America. See RCA
Radio
communication 39, 77–84
facsimile 40–41
movies 38
telephones 82–83, 203
waves 80
Rainbow 280 n13
Raman ampliﬁcation 233
Ramsay, Murray 87–89, 141, 144, 161–162
Randall, Eric 178, 190, 301n48
Rawson, Harold 113
RCA 37, 39–41, 44
Laboratories (Princeton) 89, 152
Rocky Point Laboratory 39–41, 44
Receivers, television 38
Records
transmission distance 232–233
transmission speed 234–235
Rediker, Robert 149
Reeves, Alec 76–77, 84–85, 87–89, 104,
123, 128, 163, 201, 205, 227
Reeves Telecommunication Laboratories 163
Reﬂection, surface 112
Reﬂection, total internal 13–15, 23–27, 47–
48
Reﬂective light pipes 18, 21–22, 88–89, 100,
104
Reﬂectors 18, 21–22
Refraction 24–26
Refractive index 24–26
Relays, microwave 83, 85, 195
Reliability
laser 156–159, 185–186, 212
submarine cable 202
telephone 238
Remote viewing 35
Repairs, submarine cable 202
Repairs, telephone 237–238
Repeaters 83–84, 128, 173, 186, 195–196,
203–207, 212, 243–244
Research budgets 122, 128–129
Resolution, imaging 35
Retina 49
Reuters 51
Revenue, from ﬁber to the home 224
Rigid ﬁber bundles 68–69
Roberts, F. F. 119–123, 126, 163, 177–178,
182
Robotic vehicles 237
Rochester, University of 46, 53–54, 69, 74

338
INDEX
Rocky Point Laboratory (RCA) 39–41, 44
Rod, high-index 62, 66
Rod-in-tube ﬁbers 63–64, 66–69, 134
Rodenstock Optical Works 42
Rods, glass 21–23, 28, 36, 40
Rods, illuminating 21–23
Rods, transparent 88
Room-temperature lasers 147–159
Royal College of Science 29–30
Royal Institution 23, 27
Royal Jubilee Exhibition (1887) 17
Royal Signals Research and Development
Establishment 120
Royal Society 58
Ruby laser 93–95
Runge, Peter 206–207, 212, 214–215, 231,
237
Rural telephone companies 193
Rutgers University 120, 135
Ryan, John 253
Saint Gobain 108, 115
Saint-Rene´, Henry C. 36
Sandbank, Charles 119, 123, 128–129, 177,
214
Saskatchewan Telecommunications 194,
198
Satellite communications 87, 204, 212–213,
230
low-orbit 318n11
Saturday Evening Post 53
Savart, Felix 27
Scanning, image 37–38, 40
Scattering 112–113, 140, 183
Schawlow, Arthur L. 93
Schawlow, Aurelia Townes 295n5
Schindler, Rudolf 41–42, 67, 285n38
Schott-CML 236
Schultz, Peter 135–140, 144–146, 169, 231
Schwabe, Louis 283n7
Schwartz, Mort 310n70
Science 130
Scientiﬁc American 12, 19, 70, 91, 100, 114,
173
Scramblers, image 40–41, 47, 54, 64–65, 68–
69
SDL Inc. 251
SE-ME-WE 3 cable 317n2
Second window 183–184
Second-generation systems 193–194
Selenium 35, 81
Selfridge Department Store (London) 37
Semiconductor lasers 147–159, 167
Semiconductors 147–149
Sensors, ﬁber optic 237, 240
Services, ﬁber to the home 217–226
Sharks 211–212
Shaver, William 119, 133
Shefﬁeld Institute of Technology 113
Shifts
graded-index to single-mode 187–189, 194–
195, 197–198, 230
single-mode to graded-index 167–168
Short-wave radio 39, 83
Shumate, Paul 224, 225, 237
Siecor 229
Siegmund, Walt 65, 72–73, 90
Siemens 137, 172, 182
Sigel, George 170
Signetics 169
Silica, fused 124–125, 131–146
Silk 30
Silver-coated ﬁbers 47
Simon, Jean-Claude 106, 108, 115
Simplex Wire and Cable 208, 214
Single-heterojunction lasers 153
Single-mode ﬁber 90–91, 135–136, 166–
168, 176–178, 186–189, 194–198, 205–
208, 228–230
Single-mode waveguide 104–108
Smithsonian Institution 81
Snitzer, Elias 90–91, 120, 133, 200, 213–
214, 242
Society of Motion Picture Engineers 38
Solitons 232–233, 244
South Kensington exhibition 16–17
Southampton, University of 120, 163, 171,
183, 214, 240
Space Shuttle 291n59
Special effects 16
Speed of light 24–26
Speed records, ﬁber-optic 234–235
Spider line 30
Spitz, Eric 106, 108, 115
Splicing ﬁbers 172
Splitters, image 73
Sprint 228
Spun glass 29
Standard Telecommunication Laboratories. See
STL
Standard Telephones and Cables 109, 177,
206, 209–210
Standards, telecommunications 177
Stark, Jason 238
Ste. Eustache, Manitoba 221
Steventon, Alan 158, 189
Stewart, Walter 55
STL 84–85, 87–89, 103–115, 123–125, 128–
129, 144, 161–162, 182, 198, 206,
208, 231
Stock market 190–191, 249–253
Strong, Guy 133
Stroud, Jack 133
Strowger, Almon 78
Subdivisions 224–225
Submarcom 210, 213

INDEX
339
Submarine cables 83–84, 201–215, 230,
236, 248
design 206
Submarines 47
Sugar ﬁbers 125–126
Sumitomo 199
Sunglasses 41
Surfaces, ﬁber 48–49
Surgery, laser 237
Switches, telephone 7, 77–78, 308 n20
Switching, optical 188–189, 226, 228
Sword swallowers 41
T1 carrier 163–164
T3 transmission 177–178
Tapers, ﬁber 73
TAT-1 (coaxial cable) 84, 201, 203
TAT-6 (coaxial cable) 203
TAT-7 (coaxial cable) 203, 207
TAT-8 (ﬁber) 6–7, 206, 209–213, 255
TAT-9 (ﬁber) 212–213
TAT-10 (ﬁber) 213
TAT-11 (ﬁber) 213
Technical University of Delft 46
Technology transfer restrictions 199–200
Telecast Fiber Systems 237
Telecommunications bubble 247–255
Telegeography 253
Telegraph cables, transatlantic 202
Telegraph, electrical 81
Telegraph, optical 80–81
Telegraphy, wireless 39
Telephone
bandwidth 7–8
companies 139–140
dial 78
network 3–8, 228–230
optical 81–82
transmission 77–80, 83–84, 110–111
TelePrompTer 179
Television 36–39, 83, 216–218
cable 8–9, 179, 217–219, 223
early 37–39, 292 n12
electronic 39, 217
mechanical 37–39
remote newsgathering 237
Testing, laser lifetime 157–158
Theaters
lighting 16
movie 54–55
Thin-ﬁlm waveguide 108, 110
Third window (1.55 µm) 185–186
Third-generation systems 186, 197–198
This Is Cinerama 54–55
Thompson, Chet 291n56
Tillman, Jack 118, 122, 147
Tillotson, Leroy 96, 100
Times Fiber Communications 179
Titanium doping 133–134, 138, 143, 145
Tkach, Bob 234, 237
Todd, Mike 54–55, 72
Todd-AO 55, 64–65, 68, 72, 316n101
Tohoku University 121, 127, 167
Tongue depressors 45
Torsion balance 31
Total internal reﬂection 13–15, 23–27, 48
Townes, Charles H. 93
Transatlantic cables 83–84, 201–215
Transistors 78, 318n7
Transmission
1.3-µm 182–184, 187–189
1.55-µm 185–186, 188, 212–214
atmospheric 88, 93–96
capacity 79–80
digital 163–164
ﬁber distance records 232–233
ﬁber speed 229, 232. 234–235
ﬁber to home 216–217
frequencies 79–80
long-haul 186, 195–198. See also trunk
transmission
long-wavelength 182–189, 193–195, 212–
214
modes 104–108
satellite delay 204
telephone 77–80, 83–87
trillion-bit ﬁber 234–235
trunk 103, 118, 140–141, 165, 174, 186
waveguide 85–87
Transpaciﬁc cables 210, 214
Transparency
air 88, 93–96
ﬁber 76, 110–124
glass 15, 100, 117–124
material 107–108, 110–115
titanium oxides 138
Traveling-wave tube 96
Trillion bit transmission 234–235
Trunk telecommunications conference 140–
141
Trunk transmission 103, 118, 140–141,
165, 174, 186
Tube, as ﬁber cladding 63–64, 66–69
Tubes, imaging 71–72
Tunneling 13
Turner, Ian 294 n34
Twisted pair (telephone line) 8
Two-way cable television 217–219
TyCom Laboratories 252
Tyndall Award 230
Tyndall, John 23, 27, 282n43
Tynes, Art 301n48
U2 spy plane 52
Uesugi, Naoshi 208
UK-Belgium 5 (cable) 210

340
INDEX
ULE glass 133–134
Ulexite 71, 74
Undersea cables 201–215
Understanding Fiber Optics 229
Universal Exhibition (1889) 12–13, 17–20
University College London 86, 228
University of Alabama 71
University of Michigan 61–64
University of New South Wales 108–109
University of Rochester 46, 53–54, 69, 74
University of Southampton 120, 163, 171,
183, 214
Upton, Lee 68
US Patent Ofﬁce 198
Vacuum tubes 39, 82–83, 203
Valence band 148
Valpey, Ted 178, 190
Valtec 178, 189–191, 193–194, 199
Van Heel, Abraham C. S. 46–49, 51–53, 55–
56, 61, 73, 288n57
Varian Central Research Laboratory 151
Venetian glass 29
Venture capitalists 191, 247–251
Victorian exhibitions 10, 16–20
Video
home transmission 217–226
on demand 220, 224
Video (continued)
systems, portable 237
telephone 222–223. See also Picturephone
transmission 123, 162, 192–193, 217–
226
Videoconferencing 219, 222–223. See also
Picturephone
Videotape 220
Videotex 217, 220–224, 299 n7
Viewing, remote 35
Vision research 49
Visual Information Systems Development
Association 220
Viveash, Jacqueline 122
Von Braun, Werner 6
Von Bru¨cke, Ernst W. 286 n11
Warner Communications 219
Water absorption 183–184
Water jets 13–20, 23, 27
Waveguides 85–87, 89, 111, 133
beam 96
confocal 89, 96–100, 129–130, 170–171
dielectric 89–91, 100, 106–107, 141
ﬁbers as 133
hollow optical. See optical, confocal
metal reﬂective 100. See also light pipes
microwave models of ﬁber
transmission 111
millimeter 85–87, 96–97, 99–101, 140–
142, 161–165, 173–175, 230
optical 95–100, 104, 129–130, 170–171
single-mode 104–108
thin-ﬁlm 108, 110
Wavelength-division multiplexing 188–189,
196, 234–236, 241–245, 247
Waves, electromagnetic 80
Wearing out code 69
Weather 95. See also atmospheric
transmission
Weedon, Kaye 279 n1, 282 n43
Wells, H. G. 30
Werts, Alain 108, 115
Western Electric 7, 196
Western Union 40
Wheeler Reﬂector Company 18, 21–22
Wheeler, William 18, 21–22, 88–89, 261
n34
White, Robert Williamson 118
Wide-screen motion pictures see Todd-AO
Wigs, glass 29
Williams, Don 120, 123
Winding machines 58–59
Winter Olympics (1980) 192–193
Winter, A. 299 n29
Wired cities 217–219
Wireless telegraphy 39
Wireless transmission 81–84
Wireless World 114
Wirephoto transmission 39
Wires, telephone 7–8
World War II 53, 57, 85, 96, 203
World Wide Web 119, 246
World’s Fair (1892), Chicago 31
World’s Fair (1904, St. Louis) 32
World’s Fair 1894 (Chicago) 18
WorldCom 254
Zeitschrift fur Instrumentenkunde 44
Zernicke, Fritz 53
Zimar, Frank 134–140
Zoom lens 57
Zworykin, Vladimir 217

