CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
DANNY CALEGARI
1. A CRASH COURSE IN GROUP THEORY
A group is an algebraic object which formalizes the mathematical notion which ex-
presses the intuitive idea of symmetry. We start with an abstract deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 1.1. A group is a set G and an operation m : G × G →G called multiplication
with the following properties:
(1) m is associative. That is, for any a, b, c ∈G,
m(a, m(b, c)) = m(m(a, b), c)
and the product can be written unambiguously as abc.
(2) There is a unique element e ∈G called the identity with the properties that, for
any a ∈G,
ae = ea = a
(3) For any a ∈G there is a unique element in G denoted a−1 called the inverse of a
such that
aa−1 = a−1a = e
Given an object with some structural qualities, we can study the symmetries of that
object; namely, the set of transformations of the object to itself which preserve the structure
in question. Obviously, symmetries can be composed associatively, since the effect of a
symmetry on the object doesn’t depend on what sequence of symmetries we applied to the
object in the past. Moreover, the transformation which does nothing preserves the structure
of the object. Finally, symmetries are reversible — performing the opposite of a symmetry
is itself a symmetry. Thus, the symmetries of an object (also called the automorphisms of
an object) are an example of a group.
The power of the abstract idea of a group is that the symmetries can be studied by
themselves, without requiring them to be tied to the object they are transforming. So for
instance, the same group can act by symmetries of many different objects, or on the same
object in many different ways.
Example 1.2. The group with only one element e and multiplication e × e = e is called
the trivial group.
Example 1.3. The integers Z with m(a, b) = a + b is a group, with identity 0.
Example 1.4. The positive real numbers R+ with m(a, b) = ab is a group, with identity 1.
Example 1.5. The group with two elements even and odd and “multiplication” given by
the usual rules of addition of even and odd numbers; here even is the identity element.
This group is denoted Z/2Z.
Example 1.6. The group of integers mod n is a group with m(a, b) = a + b mod n and
identity 0. This group is denoted Z/nZ and also by Cn, the cyclic group of length n.
1

2
DANNY CALEGARI
Deﬁnition 1.7. If G and H are groups, one can form the Cartesian product, denoted G⊕H.
This is a group whose elements are the elements of G×H where m : (G×H)×(G×H) →
G × H is deﬁned by
m((g1, h1), (g2, h2)) = (mG(g1, g2), mH(h1, h2))
The identity element is (eG, eH).
Example 1.8. Let S be a regular tetrahedron; label opposite pairs of edges by A, B, C.
Then the group of symmetries which preserves the labels is Z/2Z ⊕Z/2Z. It is also
known as the Klein 4–group.
In all of the examples above, m(a, b) = m(b, a). A group with this property is called
commutative or Abelian. Not all groups are Abelian!
Example 1.9. Let T be an equilateral triangle with sides A, B, C opposite vertices a, b, c
in anticlockwise order. The symmetries of T are the reﬂections in the lines running from
the corners to the midpoints of opposite sides, and the rotations. There are three possible
rotations, through anticlockwise angles 0, 2π/3, 4π/3 which can be thought of as e, ω, ω2.
Observe that ω−1 = ω2. Let ra be a reﬂection through the line from the vertex a to
the midpoint of A. Then ra = r−1
a
and similarly for rb, rc. Then ω−1raω = rc but
raω−1ω = ra so this group is not commutative. It is callec the dihedral group D3 and has
6 elements.
Example 1.10. If P is an equilateral n–gon, the symmetries are reﬂections as above and
rotations. This is called the dihedral group Dn and has 2n elements. The elements are
e, ω, ω2, . . . , ωn−1 = ω−1 and r1, r2, . . . , rn where r2
i = e for all i, rirj = ω2(i−j) and
ω−1riω = ri−1.
Example 1.11. The symmetries of an “equilateral ∞–gon” (i.e. the unique inﬁnite 2–valent
tree) deﬁnes a group D∞, the inﬁnite dihedral group.
Example 1.12. The set of 2 × 2 matrices whose entries are real numbers and whose de-
terminants do not vanish is a group, where multiplication is the usual multiplication of
matrices. The set of all 2×2 matrices is not naturally a group, since some matrices are not
invertible.
Example 1.13. The group of permutations of the set {1 . . . n} is called the symmetric group
Sn. A permutation breaks the set up into subsets on which it acts by cycling the members.
For example, (3, 2, 4)(5, 1) denotes the element of S5 which takes 1 →5, 2 →4, 3 →
2, 4 →3, 5 →1. The group Sn has n! elements. A transposition is a permutation which
interchanges exactly two elements. A permutation is even if it can be written as a product
of an even number of transpositions, and odd otherwise.
Exercise 1.14. Show that the symmetric group is not commutative for n > 2. Identify S3
and S4 as groups of rigid motions of familiar objects. Show that an even permutation is
not an odd permutation, and vice versa.
Deﬁnition 1.15. A subgroup H of G is a subset such that if h ∈H then h−1 ∈H, and
if h1, h2 ∈H then h1h2 ∈H. With its inherited multiplication operation from G, H is
a group. The right cosets of H in G are the equivalence classes [g] of elements g ∈G
where the equivalence relation is given by g1 ∼g2 if and only if there is an h ∈H with
g1 = g2h.
Exercise 1.16. If H is ﬁnite, the number of elements of G in each equivalence class are
equal to |H|, the number of elements in H. Consequently, if |G| is ﬁnite, |H| divides |G|.

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
3
Exercise 1.17. Show that the subset of even permutations is a subgroup of the symmetric
group, known as the alternating group and denoted An. Identify A5 as a group of rigid
motions of a familiar object.
Example 1.18. Given a collection of elements {gi} ⊂G (not necessarily ﬁnite or even
countable), the subgroup generated by the gi is the subgroup whose elements are obtained
by multiplying together ﬁnitely many of the gi and their inverses in some order.
Exercise 1.19. Why are only ﬁnite multiplications allowed in deﬁning subgroups? Show
that a group in which inﬁnite multiplication makes sense is a trivial group. This fact is not
as useless as it might seem . . .
Deﬁnition 1.20. A group is cyclic if it is generated by a single element. This justiﬁes the
notation Cn for Z/nZ used before.
Deﬁnition 1.21. A homomorphism between groups is a map f : G1 →G2 such that
f(g1)f(g2) = f(g1g2) for any g1, g2 in G1. The kernel of a homomorphism is the sub-
group K ⊂G1 deﬁned by K = f −1(e). If K = e then we say f is injective. If every
element of G2 is in the image of f, we say it is surjective. A homomorphism which is
injective and surjective is called an isomorphism.
Example 1.22. Every ﬁnite group G is isomorphic to a subgroup of Sn where n is the
number of elements in G. For, let b : G →{1, . . . , n} be a bijection, and identify an
element g with the permutation which takes b(h) →b(gh) for all h.
Deﬁnition 1.23. An exact sequence of groups is a (possibly terminating in either direction)
sequence
· · · →Gi →Gi+1 →Gi+2 →. . .
joined by a sequence of homomorphisms hi : Gi →Gi+1 such that the image of hi is
equal to the kernel of hi+1 for each i.
Deﬁnition 1.24. If a, b ∈G, then bab−1 is called the conjugate of a by b, and aba−1b−1
is called the commutator of a and b. Abelian groups are characterized by the property that
a conjugate of a is equal to a and every commutator is trivial.
Deﬁnition 1.25. A subgroup N ⊂G is normal, denoted N ◁G if for any n ∈N and
g ∈G we have gng−1 ∈N. A kernel of a homomorphism is normal. Conversely, if N
is normal, we can deﬁne the quotient group G/N whose elements are equivalence classes
[g] of elements in G, and two elements g, h are equivalent iff g = hn for some n ∈N.
The multiplication is given by m([g], [h]) = [gh] and the fact that N is normal says this is
well–deﬁned. Thus normal subgroups are exactly kernels of homomorphisms.
Example 1.26. Any subgroup of an abelian group is normal.
Example 1.27. Z is a normal subgroup of R. The quotient group R/Z is also called the
circle group S1. Can you see why?
Example 1.28. Let Dn be the dihedral group, and let Cn be the subgroup generated by ω.
Then Cn is normal, and Dn/Cn ∼= Z/2Z.
Deﬁnition 1.29. If G is a group, the subgroup G1 generated by the commutators in G is
called the commutator subgroup of G. Let G2 be the subgroup generated by commutators
of elements of G with elements of G1. We denote G1 = [G, G] and G2 = [G, G1]. Deﬁne
Gi inductively by Gi = [G, Gi−1]. The elements of Gi are the elements which can be
written as products of iterated commutators of length i. If Gi is trivial for some i — that

4
DANNY CALEGARI
is, there is some i such that every commutator of length i in G is trivial — we say G is
nilpotent.
Observe that every Gi is normal, and every quotient G/Gi is nilpotent.
Deﬁnition 1.30. If G is a group, let G0 = G1 and deﬁne Gi = [Gi−1, Gi−1]. If Gi is
trivial for some i, we say that G is solvable. Again, every Gi is normal and every G/Gi is
solvable. Obviously a nilpotent group is solvable.
Deﬁnition 1.31. An isomorphism of a group G to itself is called an automorphism. The set
of automorphisms of G is naturally a group, denoted Aut(G). There is a homomorphism
from ρ : G →Aut(G) where g goes to the automorphism consisting of conjugation by
g. That is, ρ(g)(h) = ghg−1 for any h ∈G. The automorphisms in the image of ρ are
called inner automorphisms, and are denoted by Inn(G). They form a normal subgroup of
Aut(G). The quotient group is called the group of outer automorphisms and is denote by
Out(G) = Aut(G)/Inn(G).
Deﬁnition 1.32. Suppose we have two groups G, H and a homomorphism ρ : G →
Aut(H). Then we can form a new group called the semi–direct product of G and H
denoted G ⋉H whose elements are the elements of G × H and multiplication is given by
m((g1, h1), (g2, h2)) = (g1g2, h1ρ(g1)(h2))
Observe that H is a normal subgroup of G ⋉H, and there is an exact sequence
1 →H →G ⋉H →G →1
Example 1.33. The dihedral group Dn is equal to Z/2Z ⋉Cn where the homomorphism
ρ : Z/2Z →Aut(Cn) takes the generator of Z/2Z to the automorphism ω →ω−1, where
ω denotes the generator of Cn.
Example 1.34. The group Z/2Z ⋉R where the nontrivial element of Z/2Z acts on R
by x →−x is isomorphic to the group of isometries (i.e. 1–1 and distance preserving
transformations) of the real line. It contains D∞as a subgroup.
Exercise 1.35. Find an action of Z/2Z on the group S1 so that Dn is a subgroup of
Z/2Z ⋉S1 for every n.
Example 1.36. The group whose elements consist of words in the alphabet a, b, A, B sub-
ject to the equivalence relation that when one of aA, Aa, bB, Bb appear in a word, they
may be removed, so for example
aBaAbb ∼aBbb ∼ab
A word in which none of these special subwords appears is called reduced; it is clear that
the equivalence classes are in 1–1 correspondence with reduced words. Multiplication is
given by concatenation of words. The identity is the empty word, A = a−1, B = b−1. In
general, the inverse of a word is obtained by reversing the order of the letters and changing
the case. This is called the free group F2 on two generators, in this case the letters a, b.
It is easy to generalize to the free group Fn on n generators, given by words in letters
a1, . . . , an and their “inverse letters” A1, . . . , An. One can also denote the letters Ai by
the “letters” a−1
i .
Exercise 1.37. Let G be an arbitrary group and g1, g2 . . . gn a ﬁnite subset of G. Show
that there is a unique homomorphism from Fn →G sending ai →gi.

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
5
Example 1.38. If we have an alphabet consisting of letters a1, . . . , an and their inverses,
we can consider a collection of words in these letters r1, . . . , rm. If R denotes the subgroup
of Fn generated by the ri and all their conjugates, then R is a normal subroup of Fn and
we can form the quotient Fn/R. This is denoted by
⟨a1, . . . , an|r1, . . . , rm⟩
and an equivalent description is that it is the group whose elements are words in the ai
and their inverses modulo the equivalence relation that two words are equivalent if they
are equivalent in the free group, or if one can be obtained from the other by inserting or
deleting some ri or its inverse as a subword somewhere. The ai are the generators and
the ri the relations. Groups deﬁned this way are very important in topology. Notice that a
presentation of a group in terms of generators and relations is far from unique.
Deﬁnition 1.39. A group G is ﬁnitely generated if there is a ﬁnite subset of G which
generates G. This is equivalent to the property that there is a surjective homomorphism
from some Fn to G. A group G is ﬁnitely presented if it can be expressed as ⟨A|R⟩for
some ﬁnite set of generators A and relations R.
Exercise 1.40. Let G be any ﬁnite group. Show that G is ﬁnitely presented.
Exercise 1.41. Let F2 be the free group on generators x, y. Let i : F2 →Z be the
homomorphism which takes x →1 and y →1. Show that the kernel of i is not ﬁnitely
generated.
Exercise 1.42. (Harder). Let i : F2 ⊕F2 →Z be the homomorphism which restricts on
either factor to i in the previous exercise. Show that the kernel of i is ﬁnitely generated but
not ﬁnitely presented.
Deﬁnition 1.43. Given groups G, H the free product of G and H, denoted G ∗H, is the
group of words whose letters alternate between elements of G and H, with concatenation as
multiplication, and the obvious proviso that the identity is in either G or H. It is the unique
group with the universal property that there are injective homomorphisms iG : G →G∗H
and iH : H →G ∗H, and given any other group I and homomorphisms jG : G →I and
jH : H →I there is a unique homomorphism c from G ∗H to I satisfying c ◦iG = jG
and c ◦iH = jH.
Exercise 1.44. Show that ∗deﬁnes an associative and commutative product on groups up
to isomorphism, and
Fn = Z ∗Z ∗· · · ∗Z
where we take n copies of Z in the product above.
Exercise 1.45. Show that Z/2Z ∗Z/2Z ∼= D∞.
Remark 1.46. Actually, one can extend ∗to inﬁnite (even uncountable) products of groups
by the universal property. If one has an arbitrary set S the free group generated by S is the
free product of a collection of copies of Z, one for each element of S.
Exercise 1.47. (Hard). Every subgroup of a free group is free.
Deﬁnition 1.48. A topological group is a group which is also a space (i.e. we understand
what continuous maps of the space are) such that m : G × G →G and i : G →G, the
multiplication and inverse maps respectively, are continuous. If G is a smooth manifold
(see appendix for deﬁnition) and the maps m and i are smooth maps, then G is called a Lie
group.

6
DANNY CALEGARI
Remark 1.49. Actually, the usual deﬁnition of Lie group requires that G be a real analytic
manifold and that the maps m and i be real analytic. A real analytic manifold is like a
smooth manifold, except that the co–ordinate transformations between charts are required
to be real analytic, rather than merely smooth. It turns out that any connected, locally
connected, locally compact (see appendix for deﬁnition) topological group is actually a
Lie group.
2. MODEL GEOMETRIES IN DIMENSION TWO
2.1. The Euclidean plane.
2.1.1. Euclid’s axioms.
Notation 2.1. The Euclidean plane will be denoted by E2.
Euclid, who taught at Alexandria in Egypt and lived from about 325 BC to 265 BC,
is thought to have written 13 famous mathematical books called the Elements. In these
are found the earliest (?) historical example of the axiomatic method. Euclid proposed
5 postulates or axioms of geometry, from which all true statements about the Euclidean
plane were supposed to inevitably follow. These axioms were as follows:
(1) A straight line segment can be drawn joining any two points.
(2) Any straight line segment is contained in a unique straight line.
(3) Given any straight line segment, a circle can be drawn having the segment as radius
and one endpoint as center.
(4) All right angles are congruent.
(5) One and only one line can be drawn through a point parallel to a given line.
The terms point, line, plane are supposed to be primitive concepts, in the sense that they
can’t be described in terms of simpler concepts. Since they are not deﬁned, one is not
supposed to use one’s personal notions or intuitions about these objects to prove theorems
about them; one strategy to achieve this end is to replace the terms by other terms (Hilbert’s
suggestion is glass, beer mat, table; Queneau’s is word, sentence, paragraph) or even
nonsense terms. The point is not that intuition is worthless (it is not), but that by proving
theorems about objects by only using the properties expressed in a list of axioms, the proof
immediately applies to any other objects which satisfy the same list of axioms, including
collections of objects that one might not have originally had in mind. In this way, our
ordinary geometric intuitions of space and movement can be used to reason about objects
far from our immediate experience. One important remark to make is that, by modern
standards, Euclid’s foundations are far from rigorous. For instance, it is implicit in the
statement of the axioms that angles can be added, but nowhere is it said what properties
this addition satisﬁes; angles are not numbers, neither are lengths, but they have properties
in common with them.
2.1.2. A closer look at the fourth postulate. Notice that Euclid does not deﬁne “congru-
ence”. A working deﬁnition is that two ﬁgures X and Y in a space Z are congruent if there
is a transformation of Z which takes X to Y . But which transformations are allowed? By
including certain kinds of transformations and excluding others, we can drastically affect
the ﬂavor of the geometry in question. If not enough transformations are allowed, distinct
objects are incomparable and one cannot say anything meaningful about them. If too many
transformations are allowed, differences collapse and the supply of distinct objects to in-
vestigate dries up. One way of reformulating the fourth postulate is to say that space is

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
7
homogeneous: that is, the properties of an object do not depend on where it is placed in
space. Most of the spaces we will encounter in the sequel will be homogeneous.
2.1.3. A closer look at the parallel postulate. The ﬁfth axiom above is also known as the
parallel postulate. To decode it, one needs a workable deﬁnition of parallel. The “usual”
deﬁnition is that two distinct lines are parallel if and only if they do not intersect. So the
postulate says that given a line l and a point p disjoint from l, there is a unique line lp
through p such that lp and l are disjoint. Historically, this axiom was seen as unsatisfying,
and much effort was put into attempts to show that it followed inevitably as a consequence
of the other four axioms. Such an attempt was doomed to failure, for the simple reason
that there are interpretations of the “undeﬁned concepts” point, line, plane which satisfy
the ﬁrst four axioms but which do not satisfy the ﬁfth. If we say that given l and p there
is no line lp through p which does not intersect l, we get elliptic geometry. If we say that
given l and p there are inﬁnitely many lines lp through p which do not intersect l, we get
hyperbolic geometry. Together with Euclidean geometry, these geometries will be the main
focus of this course.
2.1.4. Symmetries of E2. What are the “allowable” transformations in Euclidean geome-
try? That is, what are the transformations of E2 which preserve the geometrical properties
which characterize it? These special transformations are called the symmetries (also called
automorphisms) of E2; they form a group, which we will denote by Aut(E2). A symmetry
of E2 takes lines to lines, and preserves angles, but a symmetry of E2 does not have to
preserve lengths. A symmetry can either preserve or reverse orientation. Basic symmetries
include translations, rotations, reﬂections, dilations. It turns out that all symmetries of E2
can be expressed as simple combinations of these.
Exercise 2.2. Let f : E2 →E2 be orientation–reversing. Show that there is a unique line
l such that f can be written as g ◦r where r is a reﬂection in l and g is an orientation–
preserving symmetry which ﬁxes l, in which case g is either a translation parallel to l or a
dilation whose center is on l. A reﬂection in l followed by a translation parallel to l is also
called a glide reﬂection.
Denote by Aut+(E2) the orientation–preserving symmetries, and by Isom+(E2) the
orientation–preserving symmetries which are also distance–preserving.
Exercise 2.3. Suppose f : E2 →E2 is in Aut+(E2) but not in Isom+(E2). Then there is a
unique point p ﬁxed by f, and we can write f as r ◦d where d is a dilation with center p
and r is a rotation with center p.
Exercise 2.4. Suppose f ∈Isom+(E2). Then either f is a rotation or a translation, and it
is a translation exactly when it does not have a ﬁxed point. In either case, f can be written
as r1 ◦r2 where ri is a reﬂection in some line li. f is a translation exactly when l1 and l2
are parallel.
These exercises show that any distance–preserving symmetry can be written as a prod-
uct of at most 3 reﬂections. An interesting feature of these exercises is that they can be
established without using the parallel postulate. So they describe true facts (where rele-
vant) about elliptic and about hyperbolic geometry. So, for instance, a distance preserving
symmetry of the hyperbolic plane can be written as a product r1 ◦r2 of reﬂections in lines
l1, l2, and this transformation has a ﬁxed point if and only if the lines l1, l2 intersect.
Exercise 2.5. Verify that the group of orientation–preserving similarities of E2 which ﬁx
the origin is isomorphic to C∗, the group of non–zero complex numbers with multiplication

8
DANNY CALEGARI
as the group operation. Verify too that the group of translations of E2 is isomorphic to C
with addition as the group operation.
Exercise 2.6. Verify that the group Aut+(E2) of orientation–preserving similarities of E2 is
isomorphic to C∗⋉C where C∗acts on C by multiplication. In this way identify Aut+(E2)
with the group of 2 × 2 complex matrices of the form
α
β
0
1

and Isom+(E2) with the subgroup where |α| = 1.
2.2. The 2–sphere.
2.2.1. Elliptic geometry.
Notation 2.7. The 2–sphere will be denoted by S2.
A very interesting “re–interpretation” of Euclid’s ﬁrst 4 axioms gives us elliptic geom-
etry. A point in elliptic geometry consists of two antipodal points in S2. A line in elliptic
geometry consists of a great circle in S2. The antipodal map i : S2 →S2 is the map which
takes any point to its antipodal point. A “line” or “point” with the interpretation above is
invariant (as a set) under i, so we may think of the action as all taking place in the “quotient
space” S2/i. An object in this quotient space is just an object in S2 which is invariant as
a set by i. Any two great circles intersect in a pair of antipodal points, which is a single
“point” in S2/i. If we think of S2 as a subset of E3, a great circle is the intersection of the
sphere with a plane in E3 through the origin. A pair of antipodal points is the intersection
of the sphere with a line in E3 through the origin. Thus, the geometry of S2/i is equivalent
to the geometry of planes and lines in E3. A plane in E3 through the origin is perpen-
dicular to a unique line in E3 through the origin, and vice–versa. This deﬁnes a “duality”
between lines and points in S2/i; so for any theorem one proves about lines and points in
elliptic geometry, there is an analogous “dual” theorem with the idea of “line” and “point”
interchanged. Let d denote the transformation which takes points to lines and vice versa.
Circles and angles make sense on a sphere, and one sees that the ﬁrst 4 axioms of Euclid
are satisﬁed in this model.
As distinct from Euclidean geometry where there are symmetries which change lengths,
there is a natural length scale on the sphere. We set the diameter equal to 2π.
2.2.2. Spherical trigonometry. An example of this duality (and a justiﬁcation of the choice
of length scale) is given by the following
Lemma 2.8 (Spherical law of sines). If T is a spherical triangle with side–lengths A, B, C
and opposite angles α, β, γ, then
sin(A)
sin(α) = sin(B)
sin(β) = sin(C)
sin(γ)
Notice that the triangle d(T) has side lengths (π −α), (π −β), (π −γ) and angles
(π −A), (π −B), (π −C). Notice too that sin(t) ≈t for small t, so that if T is a
very small triangle, this formula approximates the sine rule for Euclidean space. Let S2
t
denote the sphere scaled to have diameter 2πt; then the term sin(A)
sin(α) in the spherical sine
rule should be replaced with t sin(t−1A)
sin(α)
. In this way we may think of E2 as the “limit” as
t →∞of S2.

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
9
Exercise 2.9. Prove the spherical law of sines. Think of the sides of T as the intersection
of S2 with planes πi through the origin in E3, intersecting in lines li in E3. Then the lengths
A, B, C are the angles between the li and the angles α, β, γ are the angles between the
planes πi.
2.2.3. The area of a spherical triangle. If L is a lune of S2 between the longitude 0 and
the longitude α, then the area of L is 2α.
Now, let T be an arbitrary spherical triangle. If T is bounded by sides li which meet
at vertices vi then we can extend the sides li to great circles which cut up S2 into eight
regions. Each pair of lines bound two lunes, and the six lunes so produced fall into two
sets of three which intersect exactly along the triangle T and the antipodal triangle i(T). It
follows that we can calculate the area of S as follows
4π = area(S2) =
X
area(lunes) −4 area(T) = 4(α + β + γ) −4 area(T)
In particular, we have the beautiful formula, which is a special case of the Gauss–Bonnet
theorem:
Theorem 2.10. Let T be a spherical triangle with angles α, β, γ. Then
area(T) = α + β + γ −π
Notice that as T gets very small and the area →0, the sum of the angles of T approach
π. Thus in the limit, we have Euclidean geometry in which the sum of the angles of
a triangle are π. The angle formula for Euclidean triangles is equivalent to the parallel
postulate.
Exercise 2.11. Derive a formula for the area of a spherical polygon with n vertices in
terms of the angles.
Exercise 2.12. Using the spherical law of sines and the area formula, calculate the area
of a regular spherical n–gon with sides of length t.
2.2.4. Kissing numbers — the Newton–Gregory problem. How many balls of radius 1 can
be arranged in E3 so that they all touch a ﬁxed ball of radius 1? It is understood that the
balls are non–overlapping, but they may touch each other at a single point; ﬁguratively,
one says that the balls are “kissing” or “osculating” (from the Latin word for kiss), and that
one wants to know the kissing number in 3–dimensions.
Exercise 2.13. What is the kissing number in 2–dimensions? That is, how many disks of
radius 1 can be arranged in E2 so that they all touch a ﬁxed disk of radius 1?
This question ﬁrst arose in a conversation between Isaac Newton and David Gregory in
1694. Newton thought 12 balls was the maximum; Gregory thought 13 might be possible.
It is quite easy to arrange 12 balls which all touch a ﬁxed ball — arrange the centers at
the vertices of a regular icosahedron. If the distance from the center of the icosahedron
to the vertices is 2, it turns out the distance between adjacent vertices is ≈2.103, so this
conﬁguration can be physically realized (i.e. there is no overlapping). The problem is that
there is some slack in this conﬁguration — the balls roll around, and it is unclear whether
by packing them more tightly there would be room for another ball.
Suppose we have a conﬁguration of non–overlapping spheres Si all touching the central
sphere S. Let vi be the points on S where they all touch. The non–overlapping condition is
exactly equivalent to the condition that no two of the vi are a distance of less than π
3 apart.
If some of the Si are loose, roll them around on the surface until they come into contact
with other Sj; it’s clear that we can roll “loose” Si around until every Si touches at least

10
DANNY CALEGARI
two other Sj, Sk. If Si touches Sj1, . . . , Sjn then join vi to vj1, . . . , vjn by segments of
great circles on S. This gives a decomposition of S into spherical polygons, every edge of
which has length π
3 . It’s easy to see that no polygon has 6 or more sides (why?).
Let fn be the number of faces with n sides. Then there are 3
2f3+2f4+ 5
2f5 edges, since
every edge is contained in two faces. Recall Euler’s formula for a polygonal decomposition
of a sphere
faces −edges + vertices = 2
so the number of vertices is 2 + 1
2f3 + f4 + 3
2f5
Exercise 2.14. Show that the largest spherical quadrilateral or pentagon with side lengths
π
3 is the regular one. Use your formula for the area of such a polygon and the fact above
to show that the kissing number is 12 in 3–dimensions. This was ﬁrst shown in the 19th
century.
Exercise 2.15. Show what we have implicitly assumed: namely that a connected nonempty
graph in S2 with embedded edges, and no vertices of valence 1, has polygonal complemen-
tary regions.
Remark 2.16. In 1951 Schutte and van der Waerden ([8]) found an arrangement of 13 unit
spheres which touches a central sphere of radius r ≈1.04556 where r is a root of the
polynomial
4096x16 −18432x12 + 24576x10 −13952x8 + 4096x6 −608x4 + 32x2 + 1
This r is thought to be optimal.
2.2.5. Reﬂections, rotations, involutions; SO(3). By thinking of S2 as the unit sphere in
E3, and by thinking of points and lines in S2 as the intersection of the sphere with lines and
planes in E3 we see that symmetries of S2 extend to linear maps of E3 to itself which ﬁx
the origin. These are expressed as 3 × 3 matrices. The condition that a matrix M induce
a symmetry of S2 is exactly that it preserves distances on S2; equivalently, it preserves the
angles between lines through the origin in E3. Consequently, it takes orthonormal frames
to orthonormal frames. (A frame is another word for a basis.)
Any frame can be expressed as a 3 × 3 matrix F, where the columns give each of the
vectors. F is orthonormal if F tF = id. If M preserves orthonormality, then F tM tMF =
id for every orthonormal F; in particular, M tM = FF t = id. Observe that each of these
transformations actually induces a symmetry of S2; in particular, we can identify the set of
symmetries of S2 with the set of orthonormal frames in E3, which can be identiﬁed with
the set of 3×3 matrices M satisfying M tM = id. It is easy to see that such matrices form
a group, known as the orthogonal group and denoted O(3). The subgroup of orientation–
preserving matrices (those with determinant 1) are denoted SO(3) and called the special
orthogonal group.
Exercise 2.17. Show that every element of O(3) has an eigenvector with eigenvalue 1 or
−1. Deduce that a symmetry of S2 is either a rotation, a reﬂection, or a product s◦r where
r is reﬂection in some great circle l and s is a rotation which ﬁxes that circle. (How is this
like a “glide reﬂection”?) In particular, every symmetry of S2 is a product of at most three
reﬂections. Compare with the Euclidean case.
2.2.6. Algebraic groups. Once we have “algebraized” the geometry of S2 by comparing it
with the group of matrices O(3) we can generalize in unexpected ways. Let A denote the
ﬁeld of real algebraic numbers. That is, the elements of A are the real roots of polynomials
with rational coefﬁcients. If a, b ∈A and b ̸= 0 then a + b, a −b, ab, a/b are all in A (this

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
11
is the deﬁning property of a ﬁeld). There is a natural subgroup of O(3) denoted O(3, A)
called the 3–dimensional orthogonal group over A which consists of the 3 × 3 matrices M
with entries in A satisfying M tM = id. Observe that this, too is a group. If p = (0, 0, 1)
we can consider the subset S2(A), the set of points in S2 which are translates of p by
elements of O(3, A).
We think of S2(A) as the points in a funny kind of space. Let
S1(A) = S2(A) ∩{z = 0}
and deﬁne the set of lines in S2(A) as the translates of S1(A) by elements of O(3, A).
First observe that if q, r are any two points in S2(A) thought of as vectors in E3 then the
length of their vector cross–product is in A. If q, r are two points in S2(A) then together
with 0 they lie on a plane π(q, r). Then the triple
 
q, q ×
q × r
∥q × r∥, q × r
∥q × r∥
!
is an orthonormal frame with co–ordinates in A. If we think of this triple as an element of
O(3, A) then the image of S1(A) contains q and r. Thus there is a “line” in S2(A) through
q and r. (Here × denotes the usual cross product of vectors.)
Exercise 2.18. Show that the set S2(A) is exactly the set of points in S2 ⊂E3 with co–
ordinates in A.
Exercise 2.19. Explore the extent to which Euclid’s axioms hold or fail to hold for S2(A)
or S2(A)/i. What if one replaces A with another ﬁeld, like Q?
Let O(2, A) be the subgroup of O(3, A) which ﬁxes the vector p = (0, 0, 1). Then if
M ∈O(2, A) and N ∈O(3, A), N(p) = NM(p). So we can identify S2(A) with the
quotient space O(3, A)/O(2, A), which is the set of equivalence classes [N] where N ∈
O(3, A) and [N] ∼[N ′] if and only if there is a M ∈O(2, A) with N = N ′M. In general,
if F denotes an arbitrary ﬁeld, we can think of the group O(3, F) as the set of 3×3 matrices
with entries in F such that M tM = id. This contains O(2, F) naturally as the subgroup
which ﬁxes the vector (0, 0, 1), and we can study the quotient space O(3, F)/O(2, F) as a
geometrical space in its own right. Notice that O(3, F) acts by symmetries on this space,
by M · [N] →[MN]. The quotient space is called a homogeneous space of O(3, F).
Exercise 2.20. Let F be the ﬁeld of integers modulo multiples of 2. What is the group
O(3, F)? How many points are in the space O(3, F)/O(2, F)?
In general, if we have a group of matrices deﬁned by some algebraic condition, for
instance det(M) = 1 or M tM = id or M tJM = J for J =

0
I
−I
0

etc. then we can
consider the group of matrices satisfying the condition with coefﬁcients in some ﬁeld. This
is called an algebraic group. Many properties of certain algebraic groups are independent
of the coefﬁcient ﬁeld. An algebraic group over a ﬁnite ﬁeld is a ﬁnite group; such ﬁnite
groups are very important, and form the building blocks of “most” of ﬁnite group theory.
2.2.7. Quaternions and the group S3. Recall that the quaternions are elements of the 4–
dimensional real vector space spanned by 1, i, j, k with multiplication which is linear in
each factor, and on the basis elements is given by
ij = k, jk = i, ki = j, i2 = j2 = k2 = −1

12
DANNY CALEGARI
This multiplication is associative. The norm of a quaternion, denoted by
∥a1 + a2i + a3j + a4k∥= (a2
1 + a2
2 + a2
3 + a2
4)1/2
is equal to the length of the corresponding vector (a1, a2, a3, a4) in R4. Norms are mul-
tiplicative. That is, ∥αβ∥= ∥α∥∥β∥. The non–zero quaternions form a group under
multiplication; the unit quaternions, which correspond exactly the to the unit length vec-
tors in R4, are a subgroup which is denoted S3. Let π be the set of quaternions of the form
1 + ai + bj + ck. Then π is a copy of R3, and is the tangent space to the sphere S3 of unit
norm quaternions at 1. The group S acts on π by
α · z = α−1zα
for z ∈π. Since it preserves lengths, the image is isomorphic to a subgroup of SO(3, R),
which can be thought of as the group of orthogonal transformations of π. In fact, this
homomorphism is surjective. Moreover, the kernel is exactly the center of S3, which is
±1. That is, we have the isomorphism S3/ ± 1 ∼= SO(3, R).
Exercise 2.21. Write down the formula for an explicit homomorphism, in terms of standard
quaternionic co–ordinates for S3 and matrix co–ordinates for SO(3, R).
In general, the conjugation action of a Lie group on its tangent space at the identity is
called the adjoint action of the group. Since the group of linear transformations of this
vector space is a matrix group, this gives a homomorphism of the Lie group to a matrix
group.
2.3. The hyperbolic plane.
2.3.1. The problem of models.
Notation 2.22. The hyperbolic plane will be denoted by H2.
The sphere is relatively easy to understand and visualize because there is a very nice
model of it in Euclidean space: the unit sphere in E3. Symmetries of the sphere extend
to symmetries of the ambient space, and distances and angles in the sphere are what one
expects from the ambient embedding. No such model exists of the hyperbolic plane. Bits of
the hyperbolic plane can be isometrically (i.e. in a distance–preserving way) embedded, but
not in such a way that the natural symmetries of the plane can be realized as symmetries of
the embedding. However, if we are willing to look at embeddings which distort distances,
there are some very nice models of the hyperbolic plane which one can play with and get
a good feel for.
2.3.2. The Poincar´e Model: Suppose we imagine the world as being circumscribed by the
unit circle in the plane. In order to prevent people from falling off the edge, we make
the edges very cold. As everyone knows, objects shrink when they get cold, so people
wandering around on the disk would get smaller and smaller as they approached the edge,
so that its apparent distance (to them) would get larger and larger and they could never
reach it. Technically, the “length elements” at the point (x, y) are
 
2dx
(1 −x2 −y2),
2dy
(1 −x2 −y2)
!
or in polar co–ordinates, the “length elements” at the point r, θ are
 
2dr
(1 −r2),
2rdθ
(1 −r2)
!

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
13
This is called the Poincar´e metric on the unit disk, and the disk with this metric is called
the Poincar´e model of the hyperbolic plane. With this choice of metric, the length of a
radial line from the origin to the point (r1, 0) is
Z r1
0
2dr
(1 −r2) = log
 
1 + r
1 −r
!
r1
0
= log
 
1 + r1
1 −r1
!
If γ is any other path from the origin to (r1, 0) whose Euclidean length is l, then its length
in the hyperbolic metric is
hyperbolic length of γ =
Z l
0
2dt
(1 −r2(γ(t)))
where r(γ(t)) is the distance from the point γ(t) to the origin. Obviously, l ≥r1 and
r(γ(t)) ≤t with equality if and only if γ is a Euclidean straight line. This implies that the
shortest curve in the hyperbolic metric from the origin to a point in the disk is the Euclidean
straight line.
Notice that for a point p at Euclidean distance ϵ from the boundary circle, the ratio of
the hyperbolic to the Euclidean metric is
2
1 −(1 −ϵ)2 ≈1
ϵ
for sufﬁciently small ϵ.
Exercise 2.23. (Hard). Let E be a simply–connected (i.e. without holes) domain in R2
bounded by a smooth curve γ. Deﬁne a “metric” on E as follows. Let f be a smooth,
nowhere zero function on E which is equal to
1
dist(p,γ) for all p sufﬁciently close to γ. Let
the length elements on E be given by (dxf, dyf) where (dx, dy) are the usual Euclidean
length elements. Show that there is a continuous, 1–1 map φ : E →D which distorts the
lengths of curves by a bounded amount. That is, there is a constant K > 0 such that for
any curve α in E,
1
K lengthD(φ(α)) ≤lengthE(α) ≤KlengthD(φ(α))
Deﬁnition 2.24. The circle ∂D is called the circle at inﬁnity of D, and is denoted S1
∞. A
point in S1
∞is called an ideal point.
Now think of the unit disk D as the set of complex numbers of norm ≤1. Let α, β be
two complex numbers with |α|2 −|β2| = 1. The set of matrices of the form
M =

α
¯β
β
¯α

form a group, called the special unitary group SU(1, 1). This is exactly the group of
complex linear transformations of C2 which preserves the function v(z, w) = |z|2 −|w|2
and have determinant 1. These are the matrices M of determinant 1 satisfying M
tJM = J
where J =
1
0
0
−1

.
Exercise 2.25. Deﬁne U(1, 1) to be the group of 2×2 complex matrices M with M
tJM =
J with J as above, and no condition on the determinant. Find the most general form of a
matrix in U(1, 1). Show that these are exactly the matrices whose column vectors are an
orthonormal basis for the “norm” deﬁned by v.

14
DANNY CALEGARI
Now, there is a natural action of SU(1, 1) on D by
α
¯β
β
¯α

· z →αz + ¯β
βz + ¯α
Observe that two matrices which differ by ±1 act on D in the same way. So the action
descends to the quotient group SU(1, 1)/ ± 1 which is denoted by PSU(1, 1) for the
projective special unitary group.
Observe that this transformation preserves the boundary circle. Furthermore it takes
lines and circles to lines and circles, and preserves angles of intersection between them; in
particular, it permutes segments of lines and circles perpendicular to ∂D.
Exercise 2.26. Show that there is a transformation in PSU(1, 1) taking any point in the
interior of D to any other point.
Exercise 2.27. Show that the subgroup of PSU(1, 1) ﬁxing any point is isomorphic to a
circle. Deduce that we can identify D with the coset space PSU(1, 1)/S1; i.e. D is a
homogeneous space for PSU(1, 1).
Exercise 2.28. Show that the action of PSU(1, 1) preserves the Poincar´e metric in D2.
Deduce that the shortest hyperbolic path between any two points is through an arc of a
circle orthogonal to ∂D or, if the points are on the same diameter, by a segment of this
diameter.
2.3.3. The upper half–space model. The upper half–space, denoted H, is the set of points
x, y ∈R2 with y > 0. Suppose now that the real line is chilled, so that distances in
this model are scaled in proportion to the distance to the boundary. That is, in (x, y) co–
ordinates the “length elements” of the metric are
 
dx
y , dy
y
!
Observe that translations parallel to the x–axis preserve the metric, and are therefore isome-
tries. Also, dilations centered at points on the x–axis preserve the metric too. The length
of a vertical line segment from (x, y1) to (x, y2) is
Z y2
y1
dy
y = log y2
y1
A similar argument to before shows that this is the shortest path between these two points.
The group of 2×2 matrices with real coefﬁcients and determinant 1 is called the special
linear group, and denoted SL(2, R) or SL(2) if the coefﬁcients are understood. These
matrices act on the upper half–plane, thought of as a domain in C, by
α
β
γ
δ

· z →αz + β
γz + δ
Again, two matrices which differ by a constant multiple act on H in the same way, so the
action descends to the quotient group SL(2, R)/ ± 1 which is denoted by PSL(2, R) for
the projective special linear group.
As before, these transformations take lines and circles to lines and circles, and preserve
the real line.
Exercise 2.29. Show that the action of PSL(2, R) preserves the metric on H. Deduce that
the shortest hyperbolic path between any two points in the upper half–space is through an
arc of a circle orthogonal to R or, if the points are on the same vertical line, through a
segment of this line.

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
15
Exercise 2.30. Find a transformation from D to H which takes the Poincar´e metric on
the disk to the hyperbolic metric on H. Deduce that these models describe “the same”
geometry. Find an explicit isomorphism PSL(2, R) ∼= PSU(1, 1).
2.3.4. The hyperboloid model. In R3 let H denote the sheet of the hyperboloid x2 + y2 −
z2 = −1 with z positive. Let O(2, 1) denote the set of 3 × 3 matrices with real entries
which preserve the function v(x, y, z) = x2 + y2 −z2, and SO(2, 1) the subgroup with
determinant 1. Equivalently, O(2, 1) is the group of real matrices M such that M tJM = J
where
J =


1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
−1


Then SO(2, 1) preserves the sheet H.
Deﬁnition 2.31. A vector v in R3 is timelike if vtJv < 0, spacelike if vtJv > 0 and
lightlike if vtJv = 0. The Lorentz length of a vector is (vtJv)1/2, denoted ∥v∥, and can
be positive, zero, or imaginary. The timelike angle between two timelike vectors v, w is
η(v, w) = cosh−1
 
vtJw
∥v∥∥w∥
!
Compare this with the usual angle between two vectors in R3:
ν(v, w) = cos−1
 
vtw
∥v∥∥w∥
!
where in this equation ∥·∥denotes the usual length of a vector. Notice that H is exactly the
set of vectors of Lorentz length i, just as S2 is the set of vectors of usual length 1 (this has
led some people to comment that the hyperbolic plane should be thought of as a “sphere of
imaginary radius”). Since distances between points in S2 are deﬁned as the angle between
the vectors, it makes sense to deﬁne distances in H as the timelike angle between vectors.
For two vectors v, w ∈H the formula above simpliﬁes to
η(v, w) = cosh−1(−vtJw)
Exercise 2.32. Let K be the group of matrices of the form


cos(α)
sin(α)
0
−sin(α)
cos(α)
0
0
0
1


and A the group of matrices of the form


cosh(γ)
0
sinh(γ)
0
1
0
sinh(γ)
0
cosh(γ)


Show that every element of SO(2, 1) can be expressed as k1ak2 for some k1, k2 ∈K and
a ∈A; that is, we can write SO(2, 1) = KAK. How unique is such an expression?
Notice the group K above is precisely the stabilizer of the point (0, 0, 1) ∈H. Thus we
can identify H with the homogeneous space SO(2, 1)/K.
Exercise 2.33. Let K′ be the subgroup of PSL(2, R) consisting of matrices of the form
 cos(α)
sin(α)
−sin(α)
cos(α)

and A′ the subgroup of matrices of the form
s
0
0
s−1

. Find an

16
DANNY CALEGARI
isomorphism from SO(2, 1) to PSL(2, R) taking K to K′ and A to A′. (Careful! The
isomorphism K →K′ might not be the one you ﬁrst think of . . .)
Remark 2.34. The isomorphisms PSU(1, 1) ∼= PSL(2, R) ∼= SO(2, 1) are known as
exceptional isomorphisms, and one should not assume that the matter is so simple in higher
dimensions. Such exceptional isomorphisms are rare and are a very powerful tool, since
difﬁcult problems about one of the groups can become simpler when translated into a
problem about another of the groups.
After identifying PSL(2, R) with SO(2, 1) we can identify their homogeneous spaces
PSL(2, R)/K′ and SO(2, 1)/K. This identiﬁcation of H with H shows that H is an
equivalent model of the hyperbolic plane. The straight lines in H are the intersection of
planes in R3 through the origin with H. In many ways, the hyperboloid model of the
hyperbolic plane is the closest to the model of S2 as the unit sphere in R3.
Exercise 2.35. Show that the identiﬁcation of H with H preserves metrics.
Two vectors v, w ∈R3 are Lorentz orthogonal if vtJw = 0. It is easy to see that if v is
timelike, any orthogonal vector w is spacelike. If v ∈H and w is a tangent vector to H at
v, then vtJw = 0, since the derivative d
dt∥v + tw∥should be equal to 0 at t = 0 (by the
deﬁnition of a tangent vector). For two spacelike vectors v, w which span a spacelike vector
space, the value of
vtJw
∥v∥∥w∥< 1, so η(v, w) is an imaginary number. The spacelike angle
between v and w is deﬁned to be −iη(v, w). It is a fact that the hyperbolic angle between
two tangent vectors at a point in H is exactly equal to their spacelike angle. The “proof”
of this fact is just that the symmetries of the space H preserve this spacelike angle, and
the total spacelike angle of a circle is 2π. Since these two properties uniquely characterize
hyperbolic angles, the two notions of angle agree.
The fact that hyperbolic lengths and angles can be expressed so easily in terms of
trigonometric functions and linear algebra makes the hyperboloid model the model of
choice for doing hyperbolic trigonometry.
2.3.5. The Klein (projective) model. Let D1 be the disk consisting of points in R3 with
x2 +y2 ≤1 and z = 1. Then we can project H to D1 along rays in R3 which pass through
the origin.
Exercise 2.36. Verify that this stereographic projection is 1–1 and onto.
This projection takes the straight lines in H to (Euclidean) straight lines in D1. This
gives us a new model of the hyperbolic plane as the unit disk, whose points are usual
points, and whose lines are exactly the segments of Euclidean lines which intersect D1.
One should be wary that Euclidean angles in this model do not accurately depict the true
hyperbolic angles. In this model, two lines l1, l2 are perpendicular under the following
circumstances:
• If l1 passes through the origin, l2 is perpendicular to l1 if any only if it is perpen-
dicular in the Euclidean sense.
• Otherwise, let m1, m2 be the two tangent lines to ∂D1 which pass through the
endpoints of l1. Then l1 and l2 are perpendicular if and only if l2, m1, m2 intersect
in a point.
Exercise 2.37. Verify that l1 is perpendicular to l2 if and only if l2 is perpendicular to l1.
It is easy to verify in this model that all Euclid’s axioms but the ﬁfth are satisﬁed.

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
17
The relationship between the Klein model and the Poincar´e model is as follows: we
can map the Poincar´e disk to the northern hemisphere of the unit sphere by stereographic
projection. This preserves angles and takes lines and circles to lines and circles. In this
model, the straight lines are exactly the arcs of circles perpendicular to the equator. Then
the Klein model and this (curvy) Poincar´e model are related by placing thinking of the
Klein disk as the ﬂat Euclidean disk spanning the equator, and mapping D1 to the upper
hemisphere by projecting points along lines parallel to the z–axis. This takes lines in D1
to the intersection of the upper hemisphere with vertical planes. These intersections are
the circular arcs which are perpendicular to the equator, so this map takes straight lines to
straight lines as it should.
Exercise 2.38. Write down the metric in D1 for the Klein model. Using this formula,
calculate the hyperbolic distance between the center and a point at radius r1 in D1.
Exercise 2.39. Show that Pappus’ theorem is true in the hyperbolic plane; this theorem
says that if a1, a2, a3 and b1, b2, b3 are points in two lines l1 and l2, then the six line
segments joining the ai to the bj for i ̸= j intersect in three points which are collinear.
2.3.6. Hyperbolic trigonometry. Hyperbolic and spherical geometry are two sides of the
same coin. For many theorems in spherical geometry, there is an analogous theorem in
hyperbolic geometry. For instance, we have the
Lemma 2.40 (Hyperbolic law of sines). If T is a hyperbolic triangle with sides of length
A, B, C opposite angles α, β, γ then
sinh(A)
sin(α) = sinh(B)
sin(β) = sinh(C)
sin(γ)
Exercise 2.41. Prove the hyperbolic law of sines by using the hyperboloid model and
trying to imitate the vector proof of the spherical law of sines.
2.3.7. The area of a hyperbolic triangle. The parallels between spherical and hyperbolic
geometry are carried further by the theorem for the area of a hyperbolic triangle. We relax
slightly the notion of a triangle: we allow some or all of the vertices of our triangle to be
ideal points. If all three vertices are ideal, we say that we have an ideal triangle. Notice
that since every hyperbolic straight line is perpendicular to S1
∞, the angle of a triangle at
an ideal point is 0.
Theorem 2.42. Let T be a hyperbolic triangle with angles α, β, γ. Then
area(T) = π −α −β −γ
Proof:
In the upper half–space model, let T be the triangle with one ideal point at ∞
and two ordinary points at (cos(α), sin(α)) and (cos(π −β), sin(π −β)) in Euclidean co–
ordinates, where α, β are both ≤π/2. Such a triangle has angles 0, α, β. The hyperbolic
area is
Z cos(α)
x=cos(π−β)
 Z ∞
y=1−x2
1
y2 dy
!
dx
=
Z cos(α)
x=cos(π−β)
1
1 −x2 dx
= −cos−1(x)

cos(α)
cos(π−β) = π −α −β

18
DANNY CALEGARI
In particular, a triangle with one or two ideal points satisﬁes the formula. Now, for an
arbitrary triangle T with angles α, β, γ we can dissect an ideal triangles with all angles 0
into T and three triangles, each of which has two ideal points, and whose third angle is one
of π −α, π −β, π −γ. That is,
area(T) = π −(π −(π −α)) −(π −(π −β)) −(π −(π −γ)) = π −α −β −γ
2.3.8. Projective geometry. The group PSL(2, R) acts in a natural way on another space
called the projective line, denoted RP1. This is the space whose points are the lines through
the origin in R2. Equivalently, this is is the quotient of the space R2 −0 by the equiva-
lence relation that (x, y) ∼(λx, λy) for any λ ∈R∗. The unit circle maps 2–1 to RP1,
so one sees that RP1 is itself a circle. The natural action of PSL(2, R) on RP1 is the
projectivization of the natural action of SL(2, R) on R2. That is,
α
β
γ
δ

·
x
y

=
αx + βy
γx + δy

We can write an equivalence class (x, y) unambiguously as x/y, where we write ∞
when y = 0; in this way, we can naturally identify RP1 with R ∪∞. One sees that
in this formulation, this is exactly the action of PSL(2, R) on the ideal boundary of H2
in the upper half–space model. That is, the geometry of RP1 is hyperbolic geometry at
inﬁnity. Observe that for any two triples of points a1, a2, a3 and b1, b2, b3 in RP1 which
are circularly ordered, there is a unique element of PSL(2, R) taking ai to bi. For a
four–tuple of points a1, a2, a3, a4 let γ be the transformation taking a1, a2, a3 to 0, 1, ∞.
Then γ(a4) is an invariant of the 4–tuple, called the cross–ratio of the four points, denoted
[a1, a2, a3, a4]. Explicitly,
[a1, a2, a3, a4] = (a1 −a3)(a2 −a4)
(a1 −a2)(a3 −a4)
The subgroup of PSL(2, R) which ﬁxes a point in R ∪∞is isomorphic to the group of
orientation preserving similarities of R, which we could denote by Aut+(R). This group
is isomorphic to R+ ⋉R. where R+ acts on R by multiplication. We can think of RP1 as
the homogeneous space PSL(2, R)/R+ ⋉R.
Projective geometry is the geometry of perspective. Imagine that we have a transparent
glass pane, and we are trying to capture a landscape by setting up the pane and painting
the scenery on the pane as it appears to us. We could move the pane to the right or left;
this would translate the scene left or right respectively. We could move the pane closer or
further away; this would shrink or magnify the image. Or we could rotate the pane and
ourselves so that the sun doesn’t get in our eyes. The horizon in our picture is RP1, and the
transformations we can perform on the image is precisely the projective group PSL(2, R).
2.3.9. Elliptic, parabolic, hyperbolic isometries. There are three different kinds of trans-
formations in PSL(2, R) which can be distinguished by their action on S1
∞.
Deﬁnition 2.43. A non–trivial element α ∈PSL(2, R) is elliptic, parabolic or hyperbolic
if it has respectively 0, 1 or 2 ﬁxed points in S1
∞. These cases can be distinguished by the
property that |tr(γ)| is <, = or > 2, where tr denotes the trace of a matrix representative
of γ.
An elliptic transformation has a unique ﬁxed point in H2 and acts as a rotation about
that point. A hyperbolic transformation ﬁxes the geodesic running between its two ideal

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
19
ﬁxed points and acts as a translation along this geodesic. Furthermore, the points in H2
moved the shortest distance by the transformation are exactly the points on this geodesic.
A parabolic transformation has no analogue in Euclidean or Spherical geometry. It
has no ﬁxed point, but moves points an arbitrarily short amount. In some sense, it is
like a “rotation about an ideal point”. Two elliptic elements are conjugate iff they rotate
about their respective ﬁxed points by the same amount. This angle of rotation is equal
to cos−1(|tr(γ)/2|). Two hyperbolic elements are conjugate iff they translate along their
geodesic by the same amount. This translation length is equal to cosh−1(|tr(γ)/2|). If
a, b are any two parabolic elements then either a and b are conjugate or a−1 and b are
conjugate.
Exercise 2.44. Prove the claims made in the previous paragraph.
Exercise 2.45. Recall the subgroups K′ and A′ deﬁned in the prequel. Let N denote the
group of matrices of the form
1
t
0
1

. Show that every element of PSL(2, R) can be
expressed as kan for some k ∈K′, a ∈A′ and n ∈N. How unique is this expression?
This is an example of what is known as the KAN or Iwasawa decomposition.
Exercise 2.46. Consider the group SL(n, R) of n × n matrices with real entries and
determinant 1. Let K be the subgroup SO(n, R) of real n × n matrices M satisfying
M tM = id. Let A be the subgroup of diagonal matrices. Let N be the subgroup of
matrices with 1’s on the diagonal and 0’s below the diagonal. Show A is abelian and N is
nilpotent. Further, K is compact (see appendix), thought of as a topological subspace of
the space Rn2 of n × n matrices. Show that there is a KAN decomposition for SL(n, R).
2.3.10. Horocircular geometry. In the Poincar´e disk model, the Euclidean circles in D
which are tangent to S1
∞are special; they are called horocircles and one can think of
them as circles of inﬁnite radius. If the point of tangency is taken to be ∞in the upper
half–space model, these circles correspond to the horizontal lines in the upper half–plane.
Observe that a parabolic element ﬁxes the family of horocircles tangent to its ﬁxed ideal
point, and acts on each of them by translation.
3. TESSELLATIONS
3.1. The topology of surfaces.
3.1.1. Gluing polygons. Certain computer games get around the constraint of a ﬁnite
screen by means of a trick: when a spaceship comes to the left side of the screen, it
disappears and “reappears” on the right side of the screen. Likewise, an asteroid which
disappears beyond the top of the screen might reappear menacingly from the bottom. The
screen can be represented by a square whose sides are labelled in pairs: the left and right
sides get one label, the top and bottom sides get another label. These labels are instructions
for obtaining an idealized topological space from the ﬂat screen: the left and right sides
can be glued together to make a cylinder, then the top and bottom sides can be glued to-
gether to make a torus (the surface of a donut). Actually, we have to be somewhat careful:
there are two ways to glue two sides together; an unambiguous instruction must specify the
orientation of each edge.
If we have a collection of polygons Pi to be glued together along pairs of edges, we can
imagine a graph Γ whose vertices are the polygons, and whose edges are the pairs of edges
in the collection. We can glue in any order. If we ﬁrst glue along the edges corresponding
to a maximal tree in Γ, the result of this ﬁrst round of gluing will produce a connected

20
DANNY CALEGARI
polygon. Thus, without loss of generality, it sufﬁces to consider gluings of the sides of a
single polygon.
Deﬁnition 3.1. A surface is a 2–dimensional manifold. That is, a Hausdorff topological
space with a countable basis, such that every point has a neighborhood homeomorphic to
the open unit disk in R2 (see appendix for deﬁnitions). A piecewise–linear surface is a
surface obtained from a countable collection of polygons by glueing together the edges in
pairs, in such a way that only ﬁnitely many edges are incident to any vertex.
Exercise 3.2. Why is the ﬁniteness condition imposed on vertices?
The following theorem was proved by T. Rado in 1924 (see [6]):
Theorem 3.3. Any surface is homeomorphic to a piecewise–linear surface. Any compact
surface is homeomorphic to a piecewise–linear surface made from only ﬁnitely many poly-
gons.
Deﬁnition 3.4. A surface is oriented if there is an unambiguous choice of “top” and “bot-
tom” side of each polygon which is compatible with the glueing. i.e. an orientable surface
is “two–sided”.
3.1.2. The fundamental group. The deﬁnition of the fundamental group of a surface Σ
requires a choice of a basepoint in Σ. Let p ∈Σ be such a point.
Deﬁnition 3.5. Deﬁne Ω1(Σ, p) to be the space of continuous maps c : S1 →Σ sending
0 ∈S1 to p ∈Σ (here we think of S1 as I/0 ∼1). Two such maps c1, c2 are called
homotopic if there is a map C : S1 × I →Σ such that
(1) C(·, 0) = c1(·).
(2) C(·, 1) = c2(·).
(3) C(0, ·) = p.
Exercise 3.6. Show that the relation of being homotopic is an equivalence relation on
Ω1(Σ, p).
In fact, Ω1(Σ, p) has the natural structure of a topological space; with respect to this
topological structure, the equivalence classes determined by the homotopy relation are the
path–connected components.
The importance of the relation of homotopy equivalence is that the equivalence classes
form a group:
Deﬁnition 3.7. The fundamental group of Σ with basepoint p, denoted π1(Σ, p), has as
elements the equivalence classes
π1(Σ, p) = Ω1(Σ, p)/homotopy equivalence
with the group operation deﬁned by
[c1] · [c2] = [c1 ∗c2]
where c1 ∗c2 denotes the map S1 →Σ deﬁned by
c1 ∗c2(t) =
(
c1(2t)
for t ≤1/2
c2(2t −1)
for t ≥1/2
where the identity is given by the equivalence class [e] of the constant map e : S1 →p, and
inverse is deﬁned by [c]−1 = [i(c)], where i(c) is the map deﬁned by i(c)(t) = c(1 −t).

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
21
Exercise 3.8. Check that [c][c]−1 = [e] with the deﬁnitions given above, so that π1(Σ, p)
really is a group.
For Σ a piecewise–linear surface with basepoint v a vertex of Σ, deﬁne O1(Σ) to be the
space of polygonal loops γ from v to v contained in the edges of Σ. Such a loop consists
of a sequence of oriented edges
γ = e1, e2, . . . , en
where e1 starts at v and en ends there, and ei ends where ei+1 starts. Let r(e) denote the
same edge e with the opposite orientation. For a polygonal path γ (not necessarily starting
and ending at v) let γ−1 denote the path obtained by reversing the order and the orientation
of the edges in γ.
One can perform an elementary move on a polygonal loop γ, which is one of the fol-
lowing two operations:
• If there is a vertex w which is the endpoint of some ei, and α is any polygonal
path beginning at w, we can insert or delete γγ−1 between ei and ei+1. That is,
e1, e2, . . . , ei, γ, γ−1, ei+1, . . . , en ←→e1, e2, . . . , en
• If γ is a loop which is the boundary of a polygonal region, and starts and ends at a
vertex w which is the endpoint of some ei, then we can insert or delete γ between
ei and ei+1. That is,
e1, e2, . . . , ei, γ, ei+1, . . . , en ←→e1, e2, . . . , en
Deﬁnition 3.9. Deﬁne the combinatorial fundamental group of Σ, denoted p1(Σ, v), to be
the group whose elements are the equivalence classes
O1(Σ, v)/elementary moves
With the group operation deﬁned by [α][β] = [αβ], where the identity is given by the
“empty” polygonal loop 0 starting and ending at v, and with inverse given by i(γ) = γ−1.
Exercise 3.10. Check that the above makes sense, and that p1(Σ, v) is a group.
Now suppose that Σ is obtained by glueing up the sides of a single polygon P in pairs.
Suppose further that after the result of this glueing, all the vertices of this polygon are
identiﬁed to a single vertex v. Let e1, . . . , en be the edges and
γ = e±1
i1 e±1
i2 . . . e±1
im
the oriented boundary of P. Then there is a natural isomorphism
p1(Σ, v) = ⟨e1, . . . , en|γ⟩
that is, p1 can be thought of as the group generated by the edges ei subject to the relation
deﬁned by γ. Notice that each of the ei appears twice in γ, possibly with distinct signs. If
Σ is orientable, each ei appears with opposite signs.
Example 3.11. Let T denote the surface obtained by glueing opposite sides of a square
by translation. Thus the edges of the square can be labelled (in the circular ordering) by
a, b, a−1, b−1 and a presentation for the group is
p1(T, v) = ⟨a, b|[a, b]⟩
It is not too hard to see that this is isomorphic to the group Z ⊕Z.

22
DANNY CALEGARI
3.1.3. Homotopy theory. The following deﬁnition generalizes the notation of homotopy
equivalence of maps S1 →Σ:
Deﬁnition 3.12. Two continuous maps f1, f2 : X →Y are homotopic if there is a map
F : X × I →Y satisfying F(·, 0) = f1 and F(·, 1) = f2. If M ⊂X and N ⊂Y with
f1|M = f2|M and fi(M) ⊂N, then f1, f2 are homotopic relative to M if a map F can
be chosen as above with F(m, ·) constant for every m ∈M.
The set of homotopy classes of maps from X to Y is usually denoted [X, Y ]. If these
space have basepoints x, y the set of maps taking x to y modulo the equivalence relation
of homotopy relative to x is denoted [X, Y ]0.
We can deﬁne a very important category whose objects are topological spaces and
whose morphisms are homotopy equivalence classes of continuous maps. A reﬁnement
of this category is the category whose objects are topological spaces with basepoints, and
whose morphisms are homotopy equivalence classes of continuous maps relative to base
points.
Deﬁnition 3.13. The fundamental group π1(X, x) of an arbitrary topological space with a
basepoint x as the group whose elements are homotopy classes of maps (S1, 0) →(X, x),
where multiplication is deﬁned by [c1][c2] = [c1 ∗c2]. In the notation above, the elements
of π1(X, x) correspond to elements of [S1, X]0.
Lemma 3.14. Let f : X →Y be a continuous map taking x to y. Then f induces a
natural homomorphism f∗: π1(X, x) →π1(Y, y).
Deﬁnition 3.15. A path–connected space X is simply–connected if π1(X, x) is the trivial
group.
Observe that a path–connected space is simply–connected if and only if every loop in
X can be shrunk to a point.
3.1.4. Simplicial approximation. The following is known as the simplicial approximation
theorem:
Theorem 3.16. Let K, L be two simplicial complexes. Then any continuous map f :
K →L is homotopic to a simplicial map f ′ : K′ →L where K′ is obtained from K by
subdividing simplices. Furthermore, if C ⊂K is a simplicial subset, and f : C →L is
simplicial, then we can require f ′ to agree with f restricted to C.
Exercise 3.17. Using this theorem, show that by choosing p = v, every continuous map
c : S1 →Σ taking the base point to v is homotopic through basepoint–preserving maps to
a simplicial loop γ ⊂Σ which begins and ends at v. Moreover, two such simplicial loops
are homotopic if and only if they differ by a sequence of elementary moves. Thus there is a
natural isomorphism π1(Σ, p) ∼= p1(Σ, v).
This is actually a very powerful observation: the group π1(Σ, p) is a priori very difﬁcult
to compute, but manifestly doesn’t depend on a piecewise linear structure on Σ. On the
other hand, p1(Σ, v) is easy to compute (or at least ﬁnd a presentation for), but it is a priori
hard to see that this group, up to isomorphism, doesn’t depend on the piecewise linear
structure.
Exercise 3.18. Suppose K is a simplicial complex. Let K2 denote the union of the sim-
plices of K of dimension at most 2. Use the simplicial approximation theorem to show that
for any vertex v of K, π1(K, v) ∼= π1(K2, v).

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
23
3.1.5. Covering spaces.
Deﬁnition 3.19. A space Y is a covering space for X if there is a map f : Y →X (called
a covering projection) with the property that every point x ∈X has an open neighborhood
x ∈U such that f −1(U) is a disjoint union of open sets Ui ⊂Y , and f maps each Ui
homeomorphically to U. The universal cover of a space X (if one exists) is a simply–
connected space e
X which is a covering space of X.
An open neighborhood U of a point x of the kind provided in the deﬁnition is said to
be evenly covered by its preimages f −1(U). If X is locally connected, we can assume that
the open neighborhoods which are evenly covered are connected.
For a path I ⊂X we can ﬁnd, for each point p ∈I an open neighborhood Up of
p which is evenly covered. Since I is compact (see appendix) only ﬁnitely many open
neighborhoods are needed to cover I; call these U1, . . . , Un. If we let V1 denote some
component of f −1(U1) which maps homeomorphically to U1. Then there is a unique map
g : I ∩U1 →V1 such that fg = id. Moreover, there is a unique choice of V2 from amongst
the components of f −1(U2) such that g can be extended to g : I ∩(U1 ∪U2) →V1 ∪V2
with fg = id. Continuing inductively, we see that the choice of V3, V4, . . . , Vn are all
uniquely determined by the original choice V1.
Exercise 3.20. Modify the above argument to show that for every map g : I →X any
every p ∈f −1g(0) there is a unique lift eg : I →Y such that eg(0) = p and feg = g.
Exercise 3.21. Suppose g1, g2 : I →X with g1(0) = g2(0) and g1(1) = g2(1) are
homotopic through homotopies which keep the endpoints of I ﬁxed. Let eg1 be some lift of
g1. Show that the lift eg2 of g2 with eg1(0) = eg2(0) also satisﬁes eg1(1) = eg2(1), and these
two lifts are also homotopic rel. endpoints. (Hint: let G : I × I →X be a homotopy
between g1 and g2. Try to “lift” G to a map eG : I × I →X satisfying appropriate
conditions.)
Let p ∈X be a basepoint, and let ep ∈f −1(p). Then the projection f : Y →X
induces a homomorphism f∗: π1(Y, ep) →π1(X, p). Let K ⊂π1(X, p) denote the image
of f∗. Then a loop α : S1 →X with [α] ∈K can be lifted to a loop eα : S1 →Y , by
the argument of the previous exercise. Conversely, if two loops α, β represent the same
element of K, then their lifts represent the same element of π1(Y, ep). Thus we may identify
π1(Y, ep) with the subgroup K.
Exercise 3.22. Show that for a space Z and a map g : Z →X there is a lift of g to
eg : Z →Y with feg = g if and only if g∗(π1(Z)) ⊂K.
Deﬁnition 3.23. A space is semi–locally simply–connected if every point p has a neigh-
borhood U so that every loop in U can be shrunk to a point in a possibly larger open
neighborhood V .
Informally, a space is semi–locally simply–connected if sufﬁciently small loops in the
space are homotopically inessential.
Theorem 3.24. Let X be connected, locally connected and semi–locally simply–connected.
For any subgroup G ⊂π1(X, x) there is a covering space XG of X and a point y ∈
f −1(x) such that f∗(π1(XG, y)) = G.
Sketch of proof:
Let Ω(X) be the space of paths γ : I →X which start at x. We
induce an equivalence relation on Ω(X) where we say two paths γ1, γ2 are equivalent if
[γ−1
2
∗γ1] ∈G. Set XG = Ω(X)/ ∼. Since X is semi–locally simply connected, for

24
DANNY CALEGARI
sufﬁciently small paths γ1, γ2 between points x1, x2 ∈X the loop γ−1
2
∗γ1 is contractible.
So any two paths which differ only by substituting γ1 in one for γ2 in the other will be
equivalent in Ω(X), and this says that the equivalence classes of Ω(X) are parameterized
locally by points in X; that is, XG is a covered space of X. It can be veriﬁed that XG is
simply connected, and that it satisﬁes the conditions of the theorem.
Exercise 3.25. Fill in the gaps in the sketch of the proof above.
Exercise 3.26. Show that the universal cover of a space X, it if exists, is unique, by using
the lifting property.
3.1.6. Discrete groups.
Deﬁnition 3.27. Let Γ be a group of symmetries of a space X which is one of Sn, En, Hn
for some n. Γ is properly discontinuous if, for each closed and bounded subset K of X,
the set of γ ∈Γ such that γ(K) ∩K ̸= ∅is ﬁnite. Γ acts freely if no γ ∈Γ has a ﬁxed
point; that is, if γ(p) = p for any p, then γ = id.
For a point p ∈X, the subgroup of Γ which ﬁxes p is called the stabilizer of p, and is
typically denoted by Γ(p). If Γ acts properly discontinuously, then Γ(p) is ﬁnite for any p.
Deﬁnition 3.28. A subgroup Γ of a Lie group G is discrete if K ∩Γ is ﬁnite for any
compact subset K ⊂G.
Exercise 3.29. Show that if G is a Lie group of symmetries of a space X as above, then a
subgroup Γ is discrete iff it acts properly discontinuously on X.
Suppose Γ acts on X freely and properly discontinuously. We can deﬁne a quotient
space M = X/Γ where two points x, y ∈X are identiﬁed exactly when there is some
γ ∈Γ such that γ(x) = y.
Theorem 3.30. If Γ acts on X freely and properly discontinuously, where X is one of
Sn, En, Hn for some n, then the projection X →X/Γ is a covering space, and X is the
universal cover of X/Γ.
Proof:
Pick a point x ∈X and let U be a neighborhood of x which intersects only
ﬁnitely many translates γ(U). Then there is a smaller V ⊂U which is disjoint from all its
translates. Then under the quotient map, each translate γ(V ) is mapped homeomorphically
to its image. Thus X is a covering space of X/Γ, and since it is simply–connected, it is
the universal cover.
3.1.7. Fundamental domains. Let Γ act on X properly discontinuously, where X is one
of the spaces Sn, En, Hn.
Deﬁnition 3.31. A fundamental domain for the action of Γ is a polygon P ⊂X such that
for all p in the interior of P, α(p) ∩P = ∅unless α = id, and such that the faces of P are
paired by the action of Γ.
The translates of a fundamental domain are disjoint except along their boundaries.
Moreover, these translates cover all of X. Thus they give a tessellation of X, whose sym-
metry group contains Γ as a subgroup. For “generic” fundamental domains, there are no
“accidental” symmetries, and the group of symmetries of the tessellation is exactly Γ. In
general, fundamental domains can be decorated with some extra marking which destroys
any additional extra symmetries of a fundamental domain.

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
25
Deﬁnition 3.32. Choose a point p ∈X. The Dirichlet domain of Γ centered at p, is the
set
D = {q ∈X such that d(p, q) ≤d(p, α(q)) for all α ∈Γ}
In dimension 2, 3, in the cases we are interested in, D will be a locally ﬁnite polygon in
X whose faces are paired by the action of Γ; but in general, D might not be a polygon.
A Dirichlet domain is a fundamental domain for Γ.
3.2. Lattices in E2.
3.2.1. Discrete groups in Isom(E2). Perhaps the most important theorem about discrete
subgroups of Isom(En) is Bieberbach’s theorem, that such a group has a free abelian sub-
group of ﬁnite index. In dimension two, this can be reﬁned as follows:
Theorem 3.33. Let Γ act properly discontinuously on E2 by isometries. Then Γ has a
subgroup Γ+ of index at most 2 which is orientation–preserving. Moreover, Γ+ is one of
the following:
• Γ+ is a subgroup of stab(p) for some p. In this case, Γ+ ∼= Z/nZ consists of
powers of a single rotation.
• Γ+ is a semi–direct product
Γ+ = Z/nZ ⋉Z
where the Z factor is generated by a translation, and n is 1 or 2. In the second
case, the conjugation action takes x →−x.
• Γ+ is a semi–direct product
Γ+ = Z/nZ ⋉(Z ⊕Z)
where the Z ⊕Z factor is generated by a pair of linearly indpendent translations,
and n = 1, 2, 3, 4 or 6. If n = 4, the Z⊕Z is conjugate to the group of translations
of the form z →z+n+mi for integers n, m. If n = 3 or 6, the Z⊕Z is conjugate
to the group of translations of the form z →z + n + m 1+i
√
3
2
for integers n, m.
Proof:
First, there is a homomorphism
o : Isom(E2) →Z/2Z
where o(α) is 0 or 1 depending on whether or not α is orientation preserving. The in-
tersection of Γ with the kernel of o is Γ+, and it has index at most 2. Next, there is a
homomorphism
a : Isom+(E2) →S1
given by the action of isometries on equivalence classes of parallel lines, where the image
is the angles of rotation. There is an induced homomorphism
a : Γ+ →S1
The kernel K of a in Γ+ consists of a group of translations, and is therefore abelian.
Suppose θ = a(α) for some α ∈Γ+, and θ nonzero. Then α is a rotation, and therefore
ﬁxes some p. Since Γ+ is properly discontinuous, either Γ+ ⊂stab(p) in which case Γ+
is cyclic and consists of the powers of a ﬁxed rotation, or there is a (non–unique) closest
image q ̸= p of p under some β. Since q = β(p), no translate of p is closer to q than p. If
|θ| < 2π
6 , then
0 < d(q, α(q)) = 2 sin
θ
2

d(p, q) < d(p, q)

26
DANNY CALEGARI
which is a contradiction. Since the same must also be true for each power of α, the order
of α is ≤6. If the order is 5, then 0 < d(α(q), βα−1β−1(p)) < d(p, q), which is a
contradiction. Hence the image a(Γ+) is Z/nZ where n = 1, 2, 3, 4 or 6. In any case, the
image is cyclic, and is therefore generated by a single a(α) where α is a rotation, so Γ+ is
a semi–direct product.
The kernel K of a in Γ+ is a properly discontinuous group of translations. If K is
nontrivial and the elements of K are linearly dependent, they are all powers of the element
α of shortest translation length. The image a(Γ+) must preserve the translation of α; in
particular, this image must be trivial or Z/2Z.
If K is nontrivial and the elements of K are linearly independent, they are generated
by two elements of shortest translation length. The image a(Γ+) must preserve the set of
nonzero elements of shortest length, so if this image is Z/4Z the group K is generated by
two perpendicular vectors of equal length. If the image is Z/3Z or Z/6Z, K is generated
by two vectors at angle 2π
6 of equal length.
The two special lattices (i.e. groups of translations generated by two linearly indepen-
dent elements) appearing in theorem 3.33 are often called the square and hexagonal lattices
respectively.
3.2.2. Integral quadratic forms. A good reference for the material in this and the next
section is [2].
Deﬁnition 3.34. A quadratic form is a homogeneous polyonomial of degree 2 in some
variables. That is, a function of variables x1, . . . , xn such that
f(λ1x1, . . . , λnxn) =
n
Y
i=1
λ2
i f(x1, . . . , xn)
A quadratic form is integral if its coefﬁcients as a polynomial are integers.
We will be concerned in the sequel with integral quadratic forms of two variables, such
as 3x2 + 2xy −7y2 or −x2 −3xy.
Notice for every quadratic form f(·, ·) there corresponds uniquely a symmetric matrix
Mf such that f(x, y) =
x
y
Mf
x
y

. In particular, if f(x, y) = ax2 + bxy + cy2 then
Mf =
a
b
2
b
2
c

Deﬁnition 3.35. We say that a quadratic form f(x, y) represents an integer n if there is
some assignment of integer values n1, n2 to x, y for which
f(n1, n2) = n
Given an integral quadratic form, it is a natural question to ask what interger values
it represents. Observe that there are some elementary transformations on quadratic forms
which do not change the set of values represented. If we substitute x →x±y or y →y±x
we get a new quadratic form. Since this substitution is invertible, the new quadratic form
obtained represents exactly the same set of values as the original. For instance,
x2 + y2 ←→x2 + 2xy + 2y2
This substitution deﬁnes an equivalence relation on quadratic forms.

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
27
The most general form of substitution allowed is a transformation of the form
x →px + qy, y →rx + sy
For integers p, q, r, s. Again, since this substitution must be invertible, we should have
ps −qr = ±1. That is, the matrix
p
q
r
s

is in ±SL(2, Z). Since these forms are
homogeneous of degree 2, the substitution x →−x, y →−y does nothing. One can
easily check that every other substitution has a nontrivial effect on some quadratic form.
In particular, we have the following theorem:
Theorem 3.36. Integral quadratic forms up to equivalence are parameterized by equiva-
lence classes of matrices of the form

a
b
2
b
2
c

for integers a, b, c modulo the conjugation
action of PSL(2, Z).
Observe that what is really going on here is that we are evaluating the quadratic form f
on the integral lattice Z ⊕Z. The group SL(2, Z) acts by automorphisms of this lattice,
and therefore permutes the set of values attained by the form f.
There is nothing special about the integral lattice here; it is obvious that SL(2, Z) acts
by automorphisms of any lattice L. In particular, if L = ⟨e1, e2⟩then M =
α
β
γ
δ

∈
SL(2, Z) acts on elements of this lattice by
M · re1 + se2 →(αr + βs)e1 + (γr + δs)e2
3.2.3. Moduli of tori, continued fractions and PSL(2, Z).
Deﬁnition 3.37. Let r be a real number. A continued fraction expansion of r is an expres-
sion of r as a limit of a (possibly terminating) sequence
n1, n1 + 1
m1
, n1 +
1
m1 +
1
n2
, n1 +
1
m1 +
1
n2+
1
m2
, . . .
where each of the ni, mi is a positive integer.
A continued fraction expansion of r can be obtained inductively by Euclid’s algorithm.
First, n1 is the biggest integer ≤r. So 0 ≤r −n1 < 1. If r −n1 = 0 we are done.
Otherwise, r′ =
1
r−n1 > 1 and we can deﬁne m1 as the biggest integer ≤r′. So 0 ≤
r′ −m1 < 1. continuing inductively, we produce a series of integers n1, m1, n2, m2, . . .
which is the continued fraction expansion of r. If r is rational, this procedure terminates at
a ﬁnite stage. The usual notation for the continued fraction expansion of a real number r is
r = n1 +
1
m1+
1
n2+
1
m2+
1
n3+ . . .
The following theorem is quite easy to verify:
Theorem 3.38. If n1, m1, . . . is a continued fraction expansion of r, then the successive
approximations
n1, n1 + 1
m1
, n1 +
1
m1 +
1
n2
, . . .
denoted r1, r2, r3, . . . satisfy
|r −ri| ≤|r −p/q|
for any integers (p, q), where q < the denominator of ri+1.

28
DANNY CALEGARI
Thus, the continued fraction approximations of r are the best rational approximations
to r for a given bound on the denominator.
Let T be a ﬂat torus. Then the isometry group of T is transitive (this is not too hard
to show). Pick a point p, and cut T up along the two shortest simple closed curves which
start and end at p. This produces a Euclidean parallelogram P. After rescaling T, we can
assume that the shortest side has length 1. We place P in E2 so that this short side is the
segment from 0 to 1, and the other side runs from 0 to z where Im(z) > 0. By hypothesis,
|z| ≥1. Moreover, if |Re(z)| ≥1
2 we can replace z by z + 1 or z −1 with smaller norm,
contradicting the choice of curves used for the decomposition. Let D be the region in the
upper half–plane bounded by the two vertical lines Re(z) = 1
2, Re(z) = −1
2 and the circle
|z| = 1.
The group PSL(2, Z) acts naturally on H as a subgroup of PSL(2, R). The action there
is properly discontinuous. The action of PSL(2, Z) permutes the sides of D. The element
1
1
0
1

pairs the two vertical sides, and the element
 0
1
−1
0

preserves the bottom side,
interchanging the left and right pieces of it. In particular, D is a fundamental domain for
PSL(2, Z). The quotient is topologically a disk, but with two “cone points” of order 2 and
3 respectively, which correspond to the points i and 1+i
√
3
2
respectively, whose stabilizers
are Z/2Z and Z/3Z respectively.
This quotient is an example of an orbifold.
Deﬁnition 3.39. An n–dimensional orbifold is a space which is locally modelled on Rn
modulo some ﬁnite group.
A 2–dimensional orbifold looks like a surface except at a collection of isolated points
pi where it looks like the quotient of a disk by the action of Z/niZ, a group of rotations
centered at pi. The point pi is a cone point, sometimes also called an orbifold point. The
ﬁnite group is part of the data of the orbifold. One can think of the orbifold combinatorially
as a surface (in the usual sense) with a ﬁnite number of distinguished points, each of which
has an integer attached to it. Geometrically, this point looks like a “cone” made from a
wedge of angle 2π/ni.
We can deﬁne an orbifold fundamental group πo
1(·) for a surface orbifold. Thinking
of our orbifold Σ as X/Γ for the moment where Γ acts properly discontinuously but not
freely, the orbifold fundamental group of Σ should be exactly Γ. This means that a small
loop around an orbifold point pi should have order ni in πo
1(Σ). Note that we are being
casual about basepoints here, so we are only thinking of these groups up to isomorphism.
In any case, the orbifold H2/PSL(2, Z) should have orbifold fundamental group iso-
morphic to PSL(2, Z). There is an element of order 2 corresponding to the loop around
the order 2 point; a representative of this element in PSL(2, Z) is
 0
1
−1
0

. There is an
element of order 3 corresponding to the loop around the order 3 point; a representative
of this element in PSL(2, Z) is
 1
1
−1
0

. Note that these elements have order 2 and 3
respectively in PSL(2, Z), even though the corresponding matrices have orders 4 and 6
respectively in SL(2, Z).
Every loop in the disk can be shrunk to a point; it follows that every loop in the orbifold
H2/PSL(2, Z) can be shrunk down to a collection of small loops around the two cone
points in some order. That is, the group PSL(2, Z) is generated by these two elements.

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
29
Theorem 3.40. A presentation for PSL(2, Z) is given by
PSL(2, Z) ∼= ⟨α, β|α2, β3⟩= Z/2Z ∗Z/3Z
where representatives of α and β are the two matrices given above.
Proof:
By the discussion above, all that needs to be established is that there are no
other relations that do not follow from the relations α2 = id and β3 = id. That is, there
is a homomorphism φ : G →PSL(2, Z) sending α, β to the two matrices given; all we
need to check is that the kernel of this homomorphism consists of the identity element.
A general element of G = ⟨α, β|α2, β3⟩is a product αa1βb1αa2βb2 . . . αanβbn where
each of the ai, bi are integers. We reduce the ai mod 2 and the bi mod 3; after rewriting of
this kind, we are left with a product of the form above where every ai = 1 and every bi is 1
or 2. We write L = αβ and R = αβ2, so that every nontrivial element of G is of the form
w, β±1w, wα, β±1wα where w is a word in the letters L and R. Furthermore, we have the
relation (αβαβ2)3
We show that no word w in the letters L and R is trivial in the group PSL(2, Z). A
similar argument works for elements of G of the other forms.
Now, φ(L) =
1
0
1
1

and φ(R) =
1
1
0
1

in PSL(2, Z). Suppose that
w = Lm1Rn1Lm2Rn2 . . . LmkRnk
where all the mi, ni are nonzero, say. Then we can calculate
φ(w) =
p
r
q
s

where
p
q =
1
m1+
1
n1+
1
m2+
1
n2+ . . . 1
mk
r
s =
1
m1+
1
n1+
1
m2+
1
n2+ . . .
1
mk+
1
nk
where the notation is for a continued fraction expansion. That is, the alternating coefﬁcients
mi, ni give the continued fraction expansions of p
q and r
s. In particular, φ(w) ̸= Id unless
w is the empty word, and φ is an isomorphism.
Notice actually that this method of proof does considerably more. We have shown that
every element obtained by a product of positive multiples of L and R is non–trivial. It is
not true that the group generated by L and R is free, since LR−1 has order 3. In fact, L
and R together generate the entire group PSL(2, Z). But the group generated by L2 and
R2 is free, since a fundamental domain for its action is the domain D′ bounded by the lines
Re(z) = 1, Re(z) = −1
and the semicircles
|z −1/2| = 1/2, |z + 1/2| = 1/2
Let Γ denote this subgroup of PSL(2, Z). The domain D′ is a regular ideal hyperbolic
quadrilateral; the quotient H2/Γ is therefore topologically a punctured torus. By the argu-
ment of the previous section, a presentation is
π1(punctured torus) ∼= ⟨α, β| ⟩
That is, Γ ∼= Z ∗Z.

30
DANNY CALEGARI
Another description of Γ is the following: there is an obvious homomorphism ψ :
PSL(2, Z) →PSL(2, Z/2Z) given by reducing the entries mod 2. The image group
has order 6 and the surjection is onto, so the kernel is a subgroup of index 6. Since the
fundamental domain D′ can be made from 6 copies of D, it follows that the index of Γ in
PSL(2, Z) is 6. Moreover, Γ is certainly contained in the kernel of ψ. It follows that Γ is
exactly equal to this kernel.
Γ is sometimes also denoted by Γ(2) (for “reduction mod 2”) and is of considerable
interest to number theorists, who like to refer to it as the principal congruence subgroup of
level 2.
Notice that the domain D′ is obtained from two ideal triangles. The union of all the
translates of D′ by Γ(2) gives a tessellation of H2 by regular ideal quadrilaterals; a sub-
division of D′ into two ideal triangles gives a subdivision of H2 into ideal triangles. If
we choose the subdivision along the line Re(z) = 0, the ideal triangulation T of H2 so
obtained admits reﬂection symmetry along every edge. The 1–skeleton of the dual cell–
decomposition to this ideal triangulation is the inﬁnite 3–valent tree. There is a natural ac-
tion of PSL(2, Z) on this tree, where the elements of order 3 are the stabilizers of vertices
and the elements of order 2 are the stabilizers of edges. This description of PSL(2, Z)
as a group of automorphisms of a tree gives another way to see that it is isomorphic to
Z/2Z ∗Z/3Z.
For a rational point p/q we can consider the straight line l perpendicular to the real
axis given by Re(z) = p/q. As this line l moves from ∞to p/q it crosses through many
different triangles of T, and therefore determines a word w in the letters R, L and their
inverses. By induction, it is easy to show that the word w is of the form
w = Lm1Rn1Lm2Rn2 . . . LmkRnk
where
p
q =
1
m1+
1
n1+
1
m2+
1
n2+ . . . 1
mk
An irrational point r determines an inﬁnite word
w = Lm1Rn1Lm2Rn2 . . .
where
r =
1
m1+
1
n1+
1
m2+
1
n2+ . . .
is an inﬁnite continued fraction expansion of r.
Notice that this word w is eventually periodic exactly when r is of the form a +
√
b for
rational numbers a, b.
3.3. Finite subgroups of SO(3) and S3.
3.3.1. The “fair dice”. A die is a convex 3–dimensional polyhedron. We can ask under
what conditions a die is fair — that is, the probability that the die will land on a given
side is 1/n where n is the number of sides. This is a very hard problem to treat in full
generality, since it is very hard to calculate these probabilities for a generic polyhedron.
But there are certain circumstances under which it is easy to show that these probabilities
are all equal; if for any two faces f1, f2 of a die D there is a symmetry of D to itself taking
f1 to f2 then the die is manifestly fair. The group G of all symmetries of D is a subgroup
of the group of permutations of the vertices. Any symmetry of D extends to an isometry
of E3, in particular it is an afﬁne map. It follows that if the vertices of D are at the vectors
v1, v2, . . . , vn then the images of these vertices under a symmetry σ are the same set of

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
31
vectors in permuted order. Thus the symmetry ﬁxes the center of gravity of D; as a vector
this is
Pn
i=1 vi
n
.
Translating this center of gravity to the origin in E3, we see that G is a ﬁnite subgroup
of O(3). That is, G is a properly discontinuous group of isometries of S2.
3.3.2. Spherical orbifolds. Of course, any properly discontinuous group Γ of isometries
of S2 has a subgroup Γ+ of index at most two which consists of orientation–preserving
elements. Every orientation–preserving isometry of S2 has a ﬁxed point, so Γ+ does not
act freely unless it is trivial. In any case, the quotient S2/Γ+ will be a spherical orbifold Σ.
This orbifold is topologially a surface with ﬁnitely many cone points p1, . . . , pm of orders
n1, . . . , nm. The Gauss–Bonnet formula gives
area(Σ) =
Z
Σ
κ = 2π
 
χ(Σ) −
m
X
i=1
ni −1
ni
!
Since the area is positive, Σ must be topologically a sphere, since that is the only surface
with positive Euler characteristic. Each ni−1
ni
term is at least 1/2, so it follows that there can
be at most 3 cone points. Notice too that if Σ has two cone points, small loops around them
are isotopic, and therefore should represent the same element of the orbifold fundamental
group; in particular, they should have the same order. Similarly, Σ cannot have a single
cone point, since a nontrivial element of the orbifold fundamental group could be shrunk
to a point.
We therefore have the following theorem:
Theorem 3.41. Let Γ be a properly discontinuous group of isometries of S2. Then Γ has
a subgroup Γ+ of index at most 2 which is orientation–preserving. The following are the
possibilities for Γ+:
• Γ+ ﬁxes a pair of antipodal points. Γ+ ∼= Z/nZ and is generated by a single
rotation.
• Γ+ is generated by two rotations r1, r2 of order 2 whose axes are at an angle of
2π
n to each other. The group Γ+ = ⟨r1, r2⟩is the dihedral group Dn.
• The quotient S2/Γ+ is a sphere with 3 cone points of orders (2, 3, 3), (2, 3, 4) or
(2, 3, 5). Γ+ in these cases is the group of orientation–preserving symmetries of
the regular tetrahedron, octahedron, and dodecahedron respectively. As a group,
Γ+ is isomorphic to A4, S4, A5 respectively.
An orbifold Σ whose underlying surface is a sphere with three cone points p1, p2, p3
is called a triangle orbifold. For the sake of generality, we can think of a puncture as a
“cone point of order ∞”, so that H2/PSL(2, Z) is the triangle orbifold with cone points
of order (2, 3, ∞). The triangle orbifold with cone points of order (p, q, r) will be denoted
∆(p, q, r).
A presentation for the triangle orbifold with cone points (p, q, r) is
πo
1(∆(p, q, r)) ∼= ⟨α, β|αp, βq, (αβ)r⟩
Lemma 3.42. For r = 3, 4, 5 there is an isomorphism
πo
1(∆(2, 3, r)) →PSL(2, Z/rZ)
where in each case, the image of the small loops α, β around the cone points of order 2, 3
correspond to the equivalence classes of matrices
α →

0
1
−1
0

, β →

1
1
−1
0


32
DANNY CALEGARI
Proof:
There are certainly homomorphisms from πo
1(∆(2, 3, r)) onto PSL(2, Z/rZ)
determined by the maps in question, since the relations α2 = id and β3 = id hold in
PSL(2, Z/nZ) for any n, and αβ =
1
0
1
1

which has order r in PSL(2, Z/rZ).
To see that these maps are injective, observe that the orders of the groups for r = 3, 4, 5
are both equal to 12, 24 and 60 respectively, so the maps are isomorphisms.
For r > 5, the group πo
1(∆(2, 3, r)) is inﬁnite, and therefore cannot be isomorphic to
PSL(2, Z/rZ). But for r = ∞we have seen
πo
1(∆(2, 3, ∞)) ∼= PSL(2, Z)
The homomorphism PSL(2, Z) →PSL(2, Z/rZ) for 3 ≤r ≤5 is induced by the map
from ∆(2, 3, ∞) to ∆(2, 3, r) which is the identity away from the special points, sends
the order 2, 3 points to order 2, 3 points respectively, and “sends the puncture” to the cone
point of order r.
3.3.3. Reﬂection groups, Coxeter diagrams. If P is a polyhedron in X one of Sn, En, Hn
whose dihedral angles between top dimensional faces are all of the form π/mi for integers
mi, the group GP generated by reﬂections in these faces of P acts properly discontin-
uously on X with fundamental domain P. GP has a subgroup of index 2 consisting of
orientation preserving elements, which has as fundamental domain a copy of P and its
mirror image P ′. This follows from a theorem called Poincar´e’s polyhedron theorem. A
precise statement and discussion are found in [7].
If X = Sn, we can think of Sn ⊂Rn+1 as the unit sphere, and reﬂections through
hyperplanes in Sn correspond to reﬂections in hyperplanes through the origin in Rn+1. If
πi, πj are two of these hyperplanes, and the corresponding reﬂections are denoted ri, rj
then the composition ri, rj is a rotation through an angle 2θij, where θij is the angle
between the planes πi and πj, and the rotation is in the plane spanned by the two perpen-
diculars to πi, πj. A presentation for the group G generated by reﬂections in the sides of
P is
GP ∼= ⟨r1, r2, . . . , rn|(r1)2, (r2)2, . . . , (rn)2, (r1r2)m12, . . . , (rirj)mij, . . . ⟩
where the angle between πi and πj is π/mij.
The subgroup G+
P of orientation–preserving elements of GP is generated by the el-
ements of the form rirj, which is to say, G+
P consists of products of even numbers of
reﬂections.
Deﬁnition 3.43. A Coxeter group G is an abstract group deﬁned by a group presentation
of the form ⟨ri|(rirj)kij⟩where
• the indices vary over some index set I
• the exponent kij = kji is either a positive integer or ∞for each pair i, j
• kii = 1 for each i
• kij > 1 for each i ̸= j
If kij = ∞for some i, j then the corresponding relation is meaningless and may be deleted
from the presentation.
Deﬁnition 3.44. The Coxeter graph of the Coxeter group G is a labelled graph Γ with
vertices corresponding to the index set I and edges ⟨(i, j) : kij > 2⟩labelled by kij.
For simplicity, edges with kij = 3 are usually left unlabelled.

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
33
Theorem 3.45. Finite Coxeter groups can be realized as properly discontinuous spherical
reﬂection groups.
Notice that fundamental groups of triangle orbifolds are index 2 subgroups of reﬂection
groups whose Coxeter graphs have three vertices.
3.3.4. “Bad” orbifolds. If Σ is a spherical orbifold with two cone points of order p, q > 1
where p ̸= q, the orbifold Euler characteristic of Σ is 2 −p−1
p
−q−1
q
> 0, so the universal
cover of Σ should be S2. But we have seen that this is impossible; the loop around the
point of order p is freely homotopic to the loop of order q, so a presentation for πo
1(Σ) is
⟨α|αp, αq, αp−q⟩. This group is Z/dZ where d is the greatest common divisor of p and q;
but every Z/dZ subgroup of SO(3, R) has as quotient the spherical orbifold with two cone
points of order d.
Thus Σ is not obtained from a smooth surface by the action of a properly discontinuous
group. An orbifold with no manifold cover is called a bad orbifold. A spherical orbifold
with two cone points of unequal order is a bad orbifold; similarly, a spherical orbifold with
one cone point is a bad orbifold.
It turns out that any orbifold whose underlying surface is not the sphere, but a surface of
higher genus, is a good orbifold, and is obtained as a quotient X/Γ for X one of S2, E2, H2
and Γ a properly discontinuous group of isometries.
3.4. Discrete subgroups of PSL(2, R).
3.4.1. Glueing hyperbolic polygons. Gluing up hyperbolic polygons to make a closed hy-
perbolic surface is not essentially different from glueing up spherical or ﬂat polygons. If
Σg denotes the unique (up to homeomorphism) closed orientable surface of genus g > 1,
then we can decompose Σg (nonuniquely) into pairs of pants.
Deﬁnition 3.46. A pair of pants is the topological surface obtained from a disk by remov-
ing two subdisks — that is, a disk with two holes.
A pair of pants can also be thought of as a sphere minus three subdisks. The Euler
characteristic of a pair of pants is −1. Since the Euler characteristic of its boundary is 0, a
surface obtained from glueing n pairs of pants has Euler characteristic −n. So Σg can be
decomposed (in many different ways) into 2g −2 pairs of pants.
Exercise 3.47. Show that the number of decompositions of Σg into pairs of pants, up to
combinatorial equivalence, is equal to the number of graphs with 2g −2 vertices with 3
edges at every vertex. Such graphs are called trivalent graphs. Show that the number of
such graphs is positive for g > 1, and enumerate such graphs for g ≤5 (you might need
to write a computer program . .)
For α a closed loop in Σg, a choice of hyperbolic metric on Σg determines a unique
shortest loop αg — a geodesic — which is homotopic to α. For, if p ∈α and eα denotes
an arc in H2, the universal cover of Σg, whose endpoints project to p and such that eα
projects to α under the covering map, then there is a unique isometry γ ∈PSL(2, R)
corresponding to an element of π1(Σg) taking one end of eα to the other. If f
αg denotes the
invariant axis of γ, then f
αg/γ = αg a geodesic in Σg.
Exercise 3.48. If α is an essential simple closed curve in Σg — that is, it is embedded and
does not bound a disk, then αg is also simple. Furthermore, if α, β are disjoint essential
simple closed curves, their geodesic representatives αg, βg are disjoint.

34
DANNY CALEGARI
By the exercise, a combinatorial decomposition of Σg into pairs of pants determines, for
a hyperbolic metric on Σg, a (combinatorially equivalent) decomposition of that surface
into hyperbolic pairs of pants with geodesic boundary. Call such an object a geodesic pair
of pants.
Let P be a geodesic pair of pants with boundary circles α, β, γ, and δ an embedded
arc joining two distinct boundary components α, β. Then we can let Q be the surface,
topologically a torus with two disks removed, obtained from two copies of P with opposite
orientations glued along the pairs of circles corresponding to α, β. Then the two copies of
δ make up a closed loop ˆδ which has a unique geodesic representative ˆδg ⊂Q. There
is an orientation–reversing map i from Q to itself which ﬁxes α ∪β. By uniqueness,
ˆδg is invariant under i, and therefore it intersects the boundary curves in right angles.
We obtain an arc δg in P perpendicular to α and β. There are two other arcs ϵg, λg in
P perpendicular to α, γ and β, γ. These decompose P into two right angled hyperbolic
hexagons H1, H2. The alternate sides of H1 and H2 are equal, and therefore they are
isometric, by an orientation–reversing isometry.
Exercise 3.49. Prove the claim made in the previous paragraph. That is, show that a right–
angled hyperbolic hexagon is determined up to isometry by the lengths of three nonadja-
cent sides. Conversely show that for any three number p, q, r > 0 there is a right–angled
hexagon with three nonadjacent sides with those lengths.
In short we have proved the following fact:
Lemma 3.50. Let Σg be a surface of genus g. A combinatorial decomposition into pairs of
pants and a hyperbolic metric on Σg determine a decomposition of Σg into 2g−2 geodesic
pairs of pants. The geometry of these pairs of pants is determined uniquely by the lengths
of the closed geodesics along which Σg was decomposed.
It remains to understand how the pairs of pants can be put back together to give Σg.
For P1, P2 a pair of geodesic pairs of pants with boundary components α1 ⊂∂P1 and
α2 ⊂∂P2 with the same length, for any two points p1 ∈α1 and p2 ∈α2 there is a
unique way to glue P1 to P2 by identifying α1, α2 so that p1, p2 match up. There is
a 1–parameter family of glueings, parameterized by the amount of “twisting” of these
geodesics. In particular, the geometry of Σg is determined uniquely by the 3g −3 lengths
of the geodesics along which it is decomposed, together with 3g −3 twist parameters.
Thus we have a correspondence:
(metric on Σg, pair of pants decomposition) ←→(R+)3g−3 × (R/Z)3g−3
Here the pair of pants decomposition is thought of as ordered, in the sense that the 3g −3
curves are given speciﬁc labels, which correspond to the 3g −3 co–ordinates on the right.
Although this is a nice characterization, the information contained in a pair of pants
decomposition is both too little and too much — too little because we have not resolved
the Z–ambiguity in the twist parameters, and too much because it does not answer the
question of what the space of hyperbolic structures on a surface is parameterized by. We
address these issues now.
Deﬁnition 3.51. Fix a base surface Σ of genus g > 1. The space of marked hyperbolic
structures on Σ, denoted MH(Σ) is the space of equivalence classes of pairs (f, Σ′) where
Σ′ is a hyperbolic surface and f : Σ →Σ′ is a homeomorphism, and two such pairs
(f1, Σ1) and (f2, Σ2) are equivalent if there is an isometry i : Σ1 →Σ2 such that f1 ◦i is
homotopic to f2 as a map from Σ to Σ2.

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
35
Exercise 3.52. Show that the relation deﬁned in the deﬁnition of marked hyperbolic struc-
ture is really an equivalence relation. That is, show it is symmetric, reﬂexive and transitive.
Theorem 3.53. For Σ a surface of genus g, there is a 1–1 correspondence
MH(Σ) ←→(R+)3g−3 × R3g−3
The correspondence is deﬁned as follows: there is a pair of pants decomposition along es-
sential simple closed curves α1, . . . , α3g−3 for Σ, and a collection of loops β1, . . . , β3g−3
transverse to the αi such that if (f, Σ′) is an element in MH(Σ), the corresponding co–
ordinates are given by
(length((f(α1))g), . . . , length((f(α3g−3))g), twist((f(α1))g), . . . , twist((f(α3g−3))g))
where the twist parameters are normalized so that twist 0 corresponds, for ﬁxed lengths of
(f(αi))g, to the unique marked surface for which the length of βi is minimized.
This requires some explanation. The image of a ﬁxed pair of pants decomposition of
Σ under f determines one in Σ′, and therefore the lengths of the decomposed geodesics
are well–deﬁned and the twist parameters are well–deﬁned mod 2π. Let P1, P2 be two
geometric pairs of pants glued along boundaries to make a sphere with 4 disks removed
Q. If αi is the common loop in ∂P1 ∩∂P2, then βi is a dual curve which cuts Q into
two other pairs of pants P ′
1, P ′
2 such that P ′
1 has one boundary component in common with
each of P1, P2 and similarly for P ′
2. Then twisting αi through 2π replaces βi with a new
curve tαi(βi), the curve obtained by a Dehn twist around αi. Brieﬂy: βi decomposes into
two arcs δ, ϵ along αi, and αi decomposes into two arcs µ, ν along βi. Then tαi(βi) is the
simple closed curve homotopic to δ∗µ∗ϵ∗ν, wher ∗denotes concatenation of arcs. Imagine
βi as a rubber band on the surface Q. When the two sides P1, P2 are twisted independently
along αi, the rubber band becomes twisted up, and when P1 and P2 return to their original
conﬁguration, the rubber band detects how many full rotations the two sides went through.
It is true, though we don’t prove it here, that there is a unique rotation for which the length
of the geodesic representative of βi is minimized. For a reference, see [1]. Thus for ﬁxed
sets of lengths of the geodesic representatives of all the αj, we have well–deﬁned twist
parameters which detect the amount of twisting relative to this minimal twist. This shows
the map to parameter space is well–deﬁned. Conversely, such a collection of parameters
deﬁnes a collection of geodesic pairs of pants and instructions for glueing them together to
give a marked hyperbolic structure on Σ. Thus the two sets are the same and the theorem
is proved.
Deﬁnition 3.54. Let Σ be a closed surface. The mapping class group of Σ, denoted
MC(Σ), is deﬁned to be the quotient group
MC(Σ) = Homeo(Σ)/Homeo0(Σ)
where Homeo0(Σ) denotes the normal subgroup of self–homeomorphisms of Σ which are
homotopic to the identity.
Exercise 3.55. Show Homeo0(Σ) is a normal subgroup of Homeo(Σ).
Notice that Homeo(Σ) acts on MH(Σ) by
ψ : (f, Σ′) →(ψ ◦f, Σ′)
Moreover, if ψ ∈Homeo0(Σ), then
ψ(f, Σ′) ∼(f, Σ′)

36
DANNY CALEGARI
with respect to the equivalence relation deﬁned on representatives. That is, MC(Σ) acts
on MH(Σ). Moreover, the quotient space is exactly the space of equivalence classes
of elements in MH(Σ) where (f1, Σ1) ∼(f2, Σ2) if and only if there is an isometry
i : Σ1 →Σ2. That is, two marked hyperbolic structures have the same orbits under
MC(Σ) if and only if the underlying hyperbolic structures (forgetting the marking) are
equivalent. In particular, there is a corresponding action of MC(Σ) on (R+)3g−3 × R3g−3
and therefore a correspondence
hyperbolic structures on Σ ←→{(R+)3g−3 × R3g−3}/MC(Σ)
The action of MC(Σ) on R6g−6 is properly discontinuous, but it is not free. Thus the space
of hyperbolic structures on Σ is best thought of as an orbifold. This quotient space is also
known as moduli space.
Exercise 3.56. Verify the claims made above. In particular, show that the action of MC(Σ)
on MH(Σ) is well–deﬁned, independently of the choice of representative of an element in
MH(Σ).
The space MH(Σ) is also known as the Teichm¨uller space of Σ, and denoted Teich(Σ).
Deﬁnition 3.57. Let Σ be a closed surface.
Let Homeo+(Σ) denote the subgroup of Σ consisting of orientation–preserving home-
omorphisms. Then deﬁne
MC+(Σ) = Homeo+(Σ)/Homeo0(Σ)
Notice that in this deﬁnition we use implicitly the fact that for a closed surface, the sub-
group of self–homeomorphisms homotopic to the identity are all orientation–preserving.
This is not true for surfaces with boundary without some extra constraints on the boundary
behaviour of these homeomorphisms.
Exercise 3.58. Let Σ be the unit disk. Find a self–homeomorphism homotopic to the
identity which is orientation–reversing. Do the same with Σ an annulus. What about if Σ
is a punctured surface of genus g ≥2?
3.5. Dehn twists and Lickorish’s theorem.
Deﬁnition 3.59. An oriented (polyhedral) simple closed curve c in a surface Σ and an
annulus neighborhood A of c parameterized as S1×I deﬁne a homeomorphism tc : Σ →Σ
by
tc :
(
x →x
for x outside A
(θ, t) →(θ −2tπ, t)
for (θ, t) ∈A
This homeomorphism is known as a Dehn twist about c. As an element of MC(Σ), it
depends only on the isotopy class of c.
Note that [tc]−1 = [tc′] where c′ denotes c with the opposite orientation.
Exercise 3.60. If h : Σ →Σ is a homeomorphism, p a simple closed loop in Σ, and
h(p) = q, then
tp = h−1tqh
The following theorem is proved in [4], and is often referred to as the Lickorish twist
theorem:
Theorem 3.61 (Lickorish). If Σg denotes the oriented surface of genus g, then the group
MC+(Σg) is generated by Dehn twists in 3g −1 (explicitly described) simple closed
curves. In particular, this group is ﬁnitely generated.

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
37
Sketch of proof:
The method of proof proceeds as follows: let c be a simple closed
curve in Σ, and let A be a collection of simple closed curves in Σ. Then either c intersects
each element α of A not at all, exactly once, or exactly twice with opposite orientations,
or there exists a loop d which intersects α fewer times than c, and each element of A
at most as many times as c, such that tα(c) has fewer intersections with α and the same
number or fewer intersections with each other element of A. Proceeding inductively, we
see that if C is a maximal collection of disjoint essential simple closed curves and ψ is
a homeomorphism of Σ, then there are a sequence of Dehn twists t1, t2, . . . such that
tntn−1 . . . t1ψ(C) intersects C in one of ﬁnitely many possibilities. After twisting some
more in elements of C, we can assume the image of C is one of ﬁnitely many possibilities,
which can be explicitly identiﬁed. In short, ψ can be written as a product of Dehn twists.
Now, for each such twist tc, we can replace tc by tdttd(c)t−1
d
where each d, td(c) in-
tersect C more simply than c. In this way, each tc can be expanded as a product of Dehn
twists in curves which intersect C very simply. After twisting in C, it follows that these
involve only ﬁnitely many possibilities, which can be explicitly enumerated.
Remark 3.62. Casson has shown that the number of twist generators required is at most
2g + 2. Furthermore, it is known that MC+(Σ) is generated by only 2 elements (which are
not Dehn twists).
4. APPENDIX — WHAT IS GEOMETRY?
Geometry is a beast that can be approached from many angles. Four of the most impor-
tant concepts that arise from our different primitive intuitions of geometry are symmetry,
measurement, analysis, and continuity. We brieﬂy discuss these four faces of geometry,
and mention some fundamental concepts in each. Don’t worry if these concepts seem very
technical or abstract — think of this section as an abstraction of the concrete notions found
in the main body of the text.
4.1. Klein’s “Erlanger Programm”. At an address at Friedrich–Alexander–Universitaet
in Erlangen Germany on December 17 1872, Felix Klein proposed a program to unify
the study of geometry by the use of algebraic methods, more speciﬁcally, by the use of
group theory. In particular, the geometrical properties of a space can be understood and
explored by a study of the symmetries of that space. These symmetries can be organized
into a natural algebraic object — a group. Conversely, this group can often be given a
natural geometric structure, and investigated in its turn as a geometric space! The interplay
between geometry and algebra leads to an enrichment of both structures.
4.1.1. Category theory.
Example 4.1. This is not really an example, but rather a template for the examples we
will meet that ﬁt into Klein’s program. We are given a space X together with some sort of
structure. A structure–preserving map from X to itself is called a morphism. The map from
X to itself which does nothing is a distinguished morphism, the identity morphism, denoted
1X. A morphism f is invertible if there is another morphism f −1 such that f ◦f −1 =
f −1 ◦f = 1X. The invertible morphisms are also called automorphisms. The set of
automorphisms of X is a group called Aut(X), with 1X as the identity, and composition
as multiplication. Observe that a structure on a space can be deﬁned by the admissible
morphisms. This is a simple example of what is known as a category; in particular, it is a
category with one object X.

38
DANNY CALEGARI
Deﬁnition 4.2. More generally, a category can be thought of as a collection of objects
(denoted O) and a collection of morphisms or admissible maps between objects (denoted
M). Every morphism m has a source object s(m) and a target object t(m), which might
be the same object. For every object o, there is a special morphism called the identity
morphism
1o : o →o
which acts like the usual identity: i.e.
1xm = m for any m with t(m) = x
m1x = m for any m with s(m) = x
The composition of two morphisms is another morphism, and this composition is associa-
tive; composition can be expressed as a function c : M × M →M. That is, c satisﬁes
c(m, c(n, r)) = c(c(m, n), r) for any m, n, r ∈M
Sometimes a category is written as a 5–tuple (O, M, s, t, c), but in practice it is frequently
sufﬁcient to specify the objects and the morphisms.
A category is something like a class in an object–oriented programming language like
C++; one deﬁnes at the same time the data types (the objects in the category) and the
admissible functions which operate on them (the morphisms).
Example 4.3. The category whose objects are all sets and whose morphisms are all func-
tions between sets is a category called SET. If X is an object in SET (i.e. a set) then
Aut(X) is the group of permutations of X.
Example 4.4. The category whose objects are all groups and whose morphisms are all
homomorphisms between groups is called GROUP.
A very readable introduction to category theory, with numerous exercises, are the notes
by John Stallings [9].
4.2. Metric geometry. One of our basic intuitions in geometry is that of distance. In fact
the word geometry literally means “measuring the earth”. Metric geometry is the study of
the concept of distance, and its various generalizations and abstractions. A beautiful (but
quite advanced) reference for this subject is [3].
4.2.1. Metric spaces.
Deﬁnition 4.5. A metric space X, d is a set X together with a function
d : X × X →R+
0
where R+
0 denotes the non–negative real numbers, with the following properties:
(1) d is symmetric. That is,
d(x, y) = d(y, x)
(2) d is nondegenerate in the sense that
d(x, y) = 0 iff x = y
(3) d satisﬁes the triangle inequality. That is,
d(x, y) + d(y, z) ≥d(x, z)
for all triples x, y, z ∈X.

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
39
Example 4.6. The real line R is a metric space with
d(x, y) = |x −y|
Example 4.7. The plane R2 is a metric space with
d((x1, y1), (x2, y2)) = (x1 −x2)2 + (y1 −y2)2
Example 4.8. The plane R2 is a metric space with
d((x1, y1), (x2, y2)) = |x1 −x2| + |y1 −y2|
This metric is known as the Manhattan metric. Can you see why?
Deﬁnition 4.9. An isometry of a metric space X is a 1–1 and onto transformation of X
to itself which preserves distances between points. The set of isometries of a space X is a
group Isom(X), where multiplication in the group is composition of symmetries, and e is
the trivial symmetry which ﬁxes every x in X. This is an example of a group of the form
Aut(X) where the relevant structure on X is that of the category of metric spaces MET
whose objects are metric spaces and whose morphisms are isometries.
Deﬁnition 4.10. Isometries are frequently too restrictive for many circumstances; a typical
metric space of study might admit no non–trivial isometries at all. We can enrich the
structure by allowing as morphisms those maps which, though they don’t literally preserve
distances between points, at least don’t increase distances between points by too much.
Such a map is called a Lipschitz map, and metric spaces with these as morphisms deﬁne a
category LIP which is in many ways a much more interesting object than MET.
A map f : X →Y between metric spaces is bilipschitz if there is a K > 1 so that
1
K dY (f(x), f(y)) ≤dX(x, y) ≤KdY (f(x), f(y))
One may think of this as a map which only distorts distances up to a bounded factor.
A bilipschitz map is 1–1, since metrics are nondegenerate. An invertible Lipschitz map
with Lipschitz inverse is bilipschitz, so that the automorphisms in the category LIP are
bilipschitz. Moreover, the composition of two bilipshitz maps is bilipschitz.
Exercise 4.11.
(1) Show that the set of bilipschitz self–maps is a group for X = R
with the Euclidean metric.
(2) (Harder) Show that the set of bilipschitz self–maps is a group for X = R2 with
the Euclidean metric, and also with the Manhattan metric.
(3) Show that the bilipschitz self–maps of R2 with the Euclidean or the Manhattan
metric are the same
4.3. Differential geometry. Differential geometry is the abstraction of calculus and anal-
ysis on n–dimensional Euclidean space to generalized geometric spaces called “smooth
Riemannian manifolds”. These are spaces which look like Euclidean space on a small
scale, but on larger scales they are deformed or “curved”. Einstein’s theory of general
relativity says that our own universe is a certain kind of curved space, where the curva-
ture is proportional to the strength of the gravitational force; on the human scale it looks
Euclidean, but near massive objects like neutron stars, the “curvature” of the space is evi-
denced by the bending of light rays. The concept of curvature is a very important connec-
tion between geometry and topology.
Since calculus and analysis are basically local, one can do calculus on such spaces,
since on smaller and smaller scales they look more and more like Rn so that limits, deriva-
tives, differentiability etc. all make sense, and the tools of multivariable calculus can be
transplanted to this setting.

40
DANNY CALEGARI
The morphisms which preserve the structure used to do differential geometry are the
smooth maps, generalizations of differentiable functions.
4.3.1. Smooth Manifolds. A manifold is a space which, on a small scale, resembles Eu-
clidean space of some dimension. The dimension is usually assumed to be constant over
the space, and is called the dimension of the manifold.
A circle or a line is an example of a 1–dimensional manifold. A sphere or the surface
of a donut is an example of a 2–dimensional manifold. Our universe, or the space outside
a knot or link are examples of 3–dimensional manifolds.
Deﬁnition 4.12. A smooth manifold is a manifold on which one can do Calculus. One
covers the space with a collection of little snapshots called “charts” which are meant to
be all the different possible choices of local parameters for the space. Technically one has
a collection of charts, which are subsets Ui of the manifold M, and a collection of ways
of parameterizing these charts as subsets of Euclidean space; that is, maps φi : Ui →Vi
which are continuous and have continuous inverses, where Vi is some open region in some
Rn. These maps should be compatible, in the sense that if two charts Ui, Uj overlap, the
map ρ = φjφ−1
i
between the appropriate subsets of Rn (where ρ is deﬁned) should be
smooth (i.e. it should have continuous partial derivatives of all orders), and it should be
locally invertible; that is, the matrix of partial derivatives
dρ =


∂ρ(x1)
∂x1
∂ρ(x2)
∂x1
. . .
∂ρ(xn)
∂x1
∂ρ(x1)
∂x2
∂ρ(x2)
∂x2
. . .
∂ρ(xn)
∂x2
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
∂ρ(x1)
∂xn
∂ρ(x2)
∂xn
. . .
∂ρ(xn)
∂xn


should be invertible at every point.
This deﬁnition seems bulky but it is actually quite elegant. When doing multivariable
calculus, we are used to switching back and forth between local co–ordinates which might
only be deﬁned on certain subsets of Rn.
Example 4.13. In the plane R2, we might switch between x, y Cartesian co–ordinates and
r, θ polar co–ordinates. Note that θ is not really a “co–ordinate” on the whole of R2, since
its value is only well–deﬁned up to multiples of 2π, and at the origin there is no sensible
value for it. These co–ordinates are actually maps from subsets of the manifold R2 to the
“standard” Euclidean space, which in this case also happens to be R2. The ﬁrst chart U1
can be taken to be all of R2, and the function φ1 is just the identity φ1 : (x, y) →(x, y).
The second function φ2 is not deﬁned on all of R2, and might be given in the chart U2 =
{x, y > 1} for instance, by
φ2 : (x, y) →
p
x2 + y2, arctan x
y

Deﬁning ρ = φ2φ−1
1
= φ2 as above, check that dρ is invertible everywhere in the overlap
of the two charts.
The charts on a smooth manifold are just the collection of all the possible local co–
ordinates for subsets of the manifold; this collection of charts is called an atlas.
Example 4.14. The spaces Rn are smooth manifolds for any n.
Example 4.15. An open subset of a smooth manifold is itself a smooth manifold, by re-
striction of charts and functions.

CLASSICAL GEOMETRY — LECTURE NOTES
41
In differential geometry, the allowable morphisms are typically the smooth maps. A map
f : M m →N n is smooth if for charts Ui ⊂M, Uj ⊂N, the composition φj ◦f ◦φ−1
i
is a
smooth map from the appropriate subset of Rm to the appropriate subset of Rn. That is, the
co–ordinate maps have continuous partial derivatives of all orders. The category of smooth
manifolds, denoted DIFF has as objects smooth manifolds, and as morphisms smooth
maps. An invertible smooth map is called a diffeomorphism; the group of diffeomorphisms
of a smooth manifold is typically a huge, unmanageable object, but certain features of it
can be studied.
4.4. Topology. Basic notions of incidence or connectivity are part of our fundamental
geometric intution.
Concepts such as “inside” and “outside”, or “bounded” and “un-
bounded” are topological. Topology can be thought of as the study of the qualitative
properties of a space that are left unchanged under continuous deformations of the space;
that is, deformations which may bend or stretch the space but do not cut or tear it. An
allowable morphism between topological spaces is just a continuous map; invertible mor-
phisms are called homeomorphisms.
4.4.1. Continuous maps. Topologists frequently discuss spaces far more abstract than man-
ifolds. The concept of continuity in this general context relies on the deﬁnition of the
following structure on a space.
Deﬁnition 4.16. A topology on a set X is a collection of subsets of X
U ⊂{U ⊂X}
with the following properties:
• The empty set and X are both in U.
• If U1, . . . , Un are a ﬁnite collection of elements in U then ∩iUi is in U.
• If V ⊂U is an arbitrary collection of elements in U, then ∪V ∈VV is in U.
Thus, a topology is a system of subsets X which includes the empty set and X, and is
closed under ﬁnite intersections and arbitrary unions. The sets in U are called the open sets
in X. Their complements are called the closed sets. From the deﬁnition, ﬁnite unions and
arbitrary intersections of closed sets are closed.
Remark 4.17. It sufﬁces, when deﬁning a topology, to give a set of subsets of the space
which are supposed to be open, and then let the open sets be the smallest collection of
subsets, including the given sets, which satisfy the axioms of a topology. We call the given
colletion of sets a basis for the topology. Most of the spaces we will encounter have a
countable basis.
Deﬁnition 4.18. Given a set Y ⊂X, the closure of Y is the intersection of the closed
subsets of X containing Y . Given a set Y , the interior of Y is the complement of the
closure of the complement of Y . It is the union of all the open sets in X contained in Y .
Example 4.19. Let Y ⊂X be a subset. The subspace topology on Y is the topology whose
open sets are the intersections U ∪Y where U is open in X.
We will not discuss topological spaces in general in the sequel and stick only to some
very concrete examples.
Let’s suppose we have two spaces X and Y where we understand what the open sets
are. For instance, in R the open sets are the unions of intervals of the kind (a, b), where
we don’t include the endpoints. In this context we can deﬁne abstractly what is meant by a
continuous map.

42
DANNY CALEGARI
Deﬁnition 4.20. A map from X to Y is continuous if the inverse of any open set is open.
Example 4.21. Let ∼be an equivalence relation on X, and let π : X →X/ ∼be the
quotient map to the space of equivalence classes. The quotient topology on X/ ∼is the
topology whose open sets are those U ⊂X/ ∼such that π−1(U) is open in X. Thus,
X/ ∼has as many open sets as it is allowed subject to the condition that π is continuous.
Deﬁnition 4.22. A homeomorphism from X to Y is a continuous map which is invertible
and has a continuous inverse.
The category of topological manifolds is denoted TOP and has as objects topological
manifolds and as morphisms all continuous maps.
The group of homeomorphisms of a space are typically even larger and harder to under-
stand than groups of diffeomorphisms. The advantage of working with arbitrary continuous
maps is that many natural maps and constructions are on the face of them continuous rather
than smooth, and one can accomplish more by allowing oneself greater ﬂexibility.
We list some frequently encountered topological concepts:
Deﬁnition 4.23. A neighborhood of a point p ∈X is any open set U ∈X containing p.
Deﬁnition 4.24. A topological space is Hausdorff if for any two distinct points p, q ∈X
there are neighborhoods of p and of q which are disjoint.
Deﬁnition 4.25. A manifold is deﬁned much as a smooth manifold, with charts Ui and
functions φi : Ui →Rn for some (typically ﬁxed) n, but now we don’t require that the
transition functions φjφ−1
i
be smooth, merely homeomorphisms. Formally, a manifold is
a Hausdorff topological space with a countable basis, such that every point has a neighbor-
hood homeomorphic to an open subset of Rn for some (usually ﬁxed) n.
Deﬁnition 4.26. A space X is connected if there are no proper nonempty subsets U ⊂X
which are both closed and open. A space is locally connected if for any point p and any
open set O ⊂X there is another U ⊂O such that U is connected, as a subspace of X.
Deﬁnition 4.27. A subset X ⊂Y (perhaps all of Y ) is compact if it is closed, and for
every collection U of open sets in Y whose union contains X, there is a ﬁnite subcollection
whose union contains X. A space X is locally compact if every p ∈X has a neighborhood
whose closure is compact.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Benedetti and C. Petronio, Lectures on Hyperbolic Geometry, Springer–Verlag Universitext (1992)
[2] J. Conway, The sensual quadratic form, Math. Ass. Amer. Carus mathematical monographs 26, (1997)
[3] M. Gromov, Metric structures for Riemannian and non–Riemannian spaces, Birkhauser (1999)
[4] R. Lickorish, A ﬁnite set of generators for the homeotopy group of a 2–manifold, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 60
(1964), pp. 769–778
[5] J. Montesinos, Classical tessellations and three–manifolds, Springer–Verlag (1987)
[6] T. Rado, ¨Uber den Begriff der Riemannsche Fl¨ache, Acta Univ. Szeged 2 (1924–26), pp. 101–121
[7] J. Ratcliffe, Foundations of hyperbolic manifolds, Springer–Verlag GTM 149 (1994)
[8] K. Sch¨utte and B. L. van der Waerden, Auf welcher Kugel haben 5, 6, 7, 8 oder 9 Punkte mit Mindestabstand
Eins Platz, Math. Ann. 123 (1951), pp. 96–124
[9] J. Stallings, Category language, notes; available at http://www.math.berkeley.edu/∼stall
[10] W. Thurston, Three–dimensional geometry and topology, vol. 1, Princeton University Press, Princeton Math.
Series 35 (1997)
DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS, HARVARD, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02138
E-mail address: dannyc@math.harvard.edu

