The British Society for the Philosophy of Science
Classical and Non-Classical Concepts in the Quantum Theory. An Answer to Heisenberg's
Physics and Philosophy
Author(s): David Bohm
Source: The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 12, No. 48 (Feb., 1962), pp.
265-280
Published by: Oxford University Press on behalf of The British Society for the Philosophy of
Science
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/685396 .
Accessed: 29/05/2014 22:20
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 .
Oxford University Press and The British Society for the Philosophy of Science are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science.
http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

The 
British 
Journal 
for 
the 
Philosophy 
of 
Science 
VOLUME XII 
FEBRUARY, I962 
No. 48 
CLASSICAL AND NON-CLASSICAL CONCEPTS 
IN THE QUANTUM THEORY * 
An Answer to Heisenberg's 
Physics and Philosophy 
DAVID BOaM 
Physics and Philosophyt 
by W. Heisenberg makes a very useful con- 
tribution to the literature 
on the interpretation 
of the quantum theory. 
It is of interest, first of all, because it can be regarded 
as an authoritative 
presentation 
of what has come to be known as the 'Copenhagen' 
point of view (because 
of its association 
with Niels Bohr). Professor 
Heisenberg 
has played a leading role, both in the development 
of the 
quantum theory itself and in the formulation of its interpretation 
according to the Copenhagen school. He is therefore eminently 
qualified to discuss this subject. 
In view of the scarcity of clear expressions 
of the Copenhagen 
interpretation, 
this book is to be welcomed, particularly 
because in it 
many essential points which have hitherto been only implicit conse- 
quences of remarks in obscure articles are brought out openly and 
explicitly. By the same token, the author's efforts to relate his view 
to the natural science, the history of physics, and to philosophy in 
general, are illuminating, 
while his answers to criticisms 
of the Copen- 
hagen interpretation 
will certainly be of interest to all those who are 
concerned with the subject, either from a scientific or a philosophical 
point of view. 
Because this book presents the basic features of the Copenhagen 
interpretation 
in such a clear light, it constitutes 
a useful basis on which 
* Received 4.1.61. This article was originally planned as a review of Physics 
and Philosophy by Werner Heisenberg. But since Heisenberg and the author of this 
article actually have criticised each other before, and since this debate is partly con- 
tinued by Heisenberg 
in Physics 
and Philosophy, 
it may be fairer to describe this article 
as an answer to Heisenberg rather than a review. 
t W. Heisenberg, Physia and Philosophy, 
London, 1959. 
265 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DAVID 
BOHM 
further criticisms of this interpretation can be developed. An article 
of this kind does not provide adequate space for an exhaustive analysis 
along these lines, but it may be of interest here to go into a few of the 
most important points involved. 
First of all, with regard to the uncertainty principle, Heisenberg 
brings out a point which has not been sufficiently emphasised elsewhere; 
namely, that the ambiguities which arise in the measurement process 
are only a special case of a universal ambiguity in the very mode of 
existence of everything. What is important here is not the impossi- 
bility of our obtaining perfectly precise knowledge about micro- 
systems, which follows in a well-known way from the disturbance due 
to the quanta by which the apparatus must interact with the observed 
system. Rather, the essential point is, as Heisenberg states, that 'a 
large part of the universe, including ourselves, does not belong to the 
object'. (By 'object', Heisenberg means here the particular object 
under investigation.) 
It therefore appears to be recognised in this book that the underlying 
basis of the uncertainty principle is the real interconnection of every- 
thing in the universe, by means of quanta. Because these quanta are 
indivisible, 
they belong as much to one side of the connection as to the 
other. An essential aspect of what each thing is therefore lies in all 
other things, with which it is thus indivisibly related. From this, it 
follows that precisely definable modes of description of the detailed 
attributes of a thing (e.g. in terms of continuous mathematical variables) 
must be subject to a minimum degree of ambiguity, this ambiguity 
being objective and universal, and not restricted 
just to the relationship 
between objects and observing 
apparatus. 
It follows from the above described point of view that the common 
notion of what is called an ' object ' must be changed in a fundamental 
way. For nothing (neither an electron nor an observing apparatus nor 
a man nor anything else) can correctly be regarded, even abstractly and 
conceptually, as having at each moment a complete and separate 
existence, the state of which is merely modified with the passage of 
time by its interaction with other things. Rather, as we have already 
indicated, there is an interpenetration 
in the very modes of existence of 
different things, such that only in the classical limit is the approximation 
of separately existing objects valid. This interpenetration can, in 
principle, include even a human being who observes the wor'd and in 
the same act participates in it. It is with this possibility in mind that 
I op. cit., bottom of p. 52 
266 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

CONCEPTS 
IN THE QUANTUM 
THEORY 
Heisenberg 
1 calls attention to the need to give up the attitude which 
he calls ' objectivisation 
', that is, the use of the concept of the separately 
existing object beyond its proper domain of validity. On the other 
hand, we are not thereby led to fall into the opposite error, termed by 
him 'subjectivism', that is, the tendency to regard all our experience 
(e.g. measurements 
and observations) 
as referring only to our private 
knowledge and not to a real world of which we are a part. For in all 
cases of experimentation 
in physics (as well as in practical 
applications), 
the major source of interconnection 
with the observed system is by 
way of the apparatus, 
while the human being has direct contact only 
with the latter, which being in the large-scale 
domain, is influenced 
in 
a negligible way by the contact. It follows then that in physics, the 
universe as a whole, including 
the apparatus, 
can for practical 
purposes 
be 
regarded as a separate object. However, no distinction between the 
object of investigation 
and the observing apparatus 
can be made at a 
quantum 
level of accuracy, 
nor can a perfectly sharp distinction 
be made 
between any two objects whatsoever 
in the universe, whether they are 
part of an experiment or not. 
In the further development 
of his exposition of this notion, however, 
Heisenberg 
introduces 
ideas which do not seem to be entirely consistent 
with the above described point of view. Thus he states' that in the 
quantum theory the probability function (derived in the well known 
way from the wave function) combines objective and subjective ele- 
ments. It contains statements about possibilities or potentialities, 
which are 'completely objective, not depending on any observer.' 
However, he further asserts, the probability, 'contains statements 
about our knowledge of the system, which are subjective insofar as 
they may be different for different observers 
'. Moreover, he later 
goes on to say ' the observation 
itself changes the probability 
function 
discontinuously; 
it selects of all possible events the actual one that has 
taken place.' Therefore, 
he concludes, ' the transition 
from the " pos- 
sible " to the " actual " takes place during the act of observation'. 
Thus Heisenberg seems to be saying here that whereas possibilities 
can exist outside the human mind, actuality 
can only be when someone 
perceives it. 
In the next step, however, he recognises 
that this view is evidently 
not adequate, and in order to deal with this problem in another way, 
he introduces 
a distinction between the 'psychic' and the 'physical' 
act of observation.' He defines the physical act of observation 
as the 
op. cit., p. 75 
top. cit., p. 53 
267 
'op. cit., p. 53 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DAVID 
BOHM 
process of interaction 
of the measuring 
apparatus 
with the observed 
system; and in this process, he further states: 
The transition 
from the' posible ' to the 'actual' takes place as soon as the 
interaction 
of the object with the measuring 
device, and thereby with the rest 
of the world, has come into play; it is not connected 
with the act of registration 
of the result by the mind of the observer. The discontinuous change in the 
probability 
function, however, takes place with the act of registration, 
because 
it is the discontinuous 
change of our knowledge in the instant of registration 
that has its image in the discontinuous 
change of probability 
function. 
Heisenberg has thus brought into consideration 
two kinds of 
actualities,1 
namely, 'the psychic' and the 'physical'. In order to 
bring out in more detail the kind of problem to which this leads, we 
shall consider specific examples of measurement 
of the position of an 
electron, with the aid of a set of Geiger counters arranged 
on a grid so 
as to cover the region of interest. Let us suppose then that the electron 
has already entered the system and triggered off one of the counters, 
but that no observer has yet looked to see which counter this is. Now, 
as Heisenberg 
indicated, 
at this stage one knows what are the objective 
physical possibilities; 
namely, that the counter in question must be one 
of those located where the amplitude of the electron wave function 
(and therefore the probability 
function) is appreciable. If, however, 
one tries to describe the fact that there is also what Heisenberg 
called 
' physical actuality' (viz. that among the above described 
possibilities, 
some counter has actually functioned), 
one discovers that there is no 
way in the theory to do so. For, as Heisenberg 
points out, the wave 
function, with its associated probabilities 
(which must, of course, 
contain all the information 
about the observed system that there can 
be) describes only 'psychic' actualities. In other words, until an 
observer actually 
perceives 
which counter 
has operated, 
so that he can write 
a new wave function representing 
the actual state to which the previous 
possibilities 
have ' collapsed' as a result of his perception, 
there is, as 
far as anything that can appear in the theory is concerned, 
no actuality 
at all, but only the above described 
set of possibilities.2 The physical 
'The word 'actuality' refers, as its root implies, to some kind of act. In 
Heisenberg's discussion of the problem, this act is an observation. 
2 This conclusion is not altered if we treat both the apparatus and the observed 
system quantum mechanically. For, in this case, there will be a wave function of the 
combined system, which after interaction is over, but before an observer has perceived 
the result, will still spread over the same range of possibilities as was obtained when we 
treated only the observed system quantum-mechanically. For a more detailed dis- 
cussion, see, for example. D. Bohm, Quantum Theory, New York, 195%, chap. 22. 
268 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

CONCEPTS 
IN THE QUANTUM 
THEORY 
actualities introduced by Heisenberg therefore play no part what- 
soever in the theory, since no predicted result would be changed in 
any way at all if the theory were developed without mentioning them. 
Nevertheless, 
Heisenberg 
evidently feels that it would not be permis- 
sible to leave them out of consideration altogether, for then we would 
be left only with ' psychic ' actualities, 
and therefore, 
with a subjectivist 
point of view, which he quite justifiably wishes to avoid. It would 
appear then that in order to keep away from subjectivism, 
he is ready 
to adopt the completely 'metaphysical' assumption 
of physical actu- 
alities which play no part at all in the theory, but which are introduced 
only to avoid what he would otherwise regard as an untenable philo- 
sophical position. 
If one wishes to deal with this problem in a more adequate way, 
it would seem almost inevitable that one will have somehow to intro- 
duce further physical conceptions and associated 
mathematical 
func- 
tions, which could represent the state of the 'physical' actuality as 
existing outside the mind of the observer who perceives it. These 
new 'actuality functions' would supplement the wave function, 
which latter would then constitute only one side of the theory. 
Naturally, the theory would have to be developed in such a way as to 
define the relationship 
between the actuality functions and the wave 
function, as well as to bring out the relationship 
of both to experiment. 
Of course, this could be done adequately 
only by in some way en- 
riching, developing, and extending the laws of the quantum theory, 
so that the physical actualities 
would cease to be purely ' metaphysical 
', 
and would instead play a real and essential role, both in the theory 
and in experiment. 
It was on the basis of a consideration 
of the problem described 
above that the writer of this article was first led to criticise the Copen- 
hagen interpretation. While trying to find a way to remedy the 
absence of' actuality functions ' he developed a definite example of an 
alternative 
interpretation, 
which permitted the quantum theory to be 
extended so as to include them in a logically consistent 
way." In this 
interpretation, 
it was proposed, in connection with an electron, for 
example, that in addition to the Schr6dinger 
wave fimction, there 
was also a particle with a well-defined 
position and momentum, which 
interacted 
with the wave in a certain prescribed 
manner. The position 
of this particle plays the part here of an actuality function, in the sense 
1 D. Bohm, Phys. Rev., i952, 85, 166; x8o. See also Causality 
and Chance in 
Modern 
Physics, 
London, 1957. 
269 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DAVID 
BOHM 
that when the wave function spreads out over many possibilities, this 
particle determines which of these possibilities is actually present. 
In his book, Heisenberg devotes considerable attention to the above 
criticism of the Copenhagen point of view as well as to many other 
criticisms that have been made by various authors. With regard to 
his discussion of the proposals described above (which alone will be 
considered here), Heisenberg's answer divides naturally into two 
parts. 
In the first part,' he begins by objecting to various aspects of the 
model described above, stating that they are physically implausible and 
mathematically inelegant,3 without, however, criticising either the 
logical consistency of the model, or its ability to account for all the 
phenomena that are treated in the Copenhagen interpretation. In 
doing this, he shows that he perhaps did not appreciate that the only 
purpose of this phase of the work was to show that an alternative to the 
Copenhagen interpretation is at least logically possible. If one such 
interpretation is possible, then it is very likely that others will be pos- 
sible too. Therefore, it should be reasonable to go on, using the 
original model as a starting point, with the aim of developing a formu- 
lation that is more plausible physically and elegant mathematically. 
(Toward the end of this article, some results of the writer's further 
efforts in this direction will be indicated.) 
At this point, however, Heisenberg raises another kind of objection, 
which leads him to question whether the above described programme 
is feasible at all. For, as he points out, the suggested new interpretation 
leads to precisely the same predictions for all experimental results as 
are given by the Copenhagen interpretation. Therefore, he argues 
that the introduction of the new particle variables, playing the role of 
actuality functions, is only a kind of 'ideological superstructure', 
which can never lead to anything physically new. 
The possibility of such a criticism was, however, already taken 
into account by the writer of this review in the original articles referred 
to above (as well as in subsequent work on the subject). Indeed, with 
this problem in view, it was noted in these articles that the new inter- 
pretation constituted a broadening of the conceptual framework, 
permitting the introduction of a wide range of possible modifications, 
that could not even be expressed in the Copenhagen interpretation. 
Sop. cit., p. 114 
s In particular, he objects especially strongly to its failure to maintain certain kinds 
of symmetry in the formalism, such as that between position and momentum. 
270 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

CONCEPTS 
IN THE QUANTUM 
THEORY 
Several illustrative 
examples of such modifications 
were actually out- 
lined, but they were not described 
in detail, because the writer did not 
regard this particular 
model as a good basis for a definitive theory. 
Nevertheless, 
they were carried far enough to show that the suggested 
actuality functions (i.e. the particle variables) 
were capable of playing a 
part that could, in principle, lead to theoretical 
predictions 
that were 
quite different 
from those that are possible in the Copenhagen 
interpre- 
tation. It was also suggested that such differences 
would be important 
mainly in new domains not at present very well understood 
or investi- 
gated (e.g. that of short distances), 
while it was clear from the way the 
theory was formulated 
that the usual results could be obtained as a good 
approximation 
in the domain where the quantum theory has thus far 
been carefully studied. 
It is in the second part of his discussion 
of this topic, however, that 
Heisenberg makes his main point with regard to the possibility of 
developing alternatives 
to the Copenhagen 
interpretation. For, as can 
be seen from his further comments 
I on the above described 
suggestions 
for modifying the quantum theory, he does not believe that this can 
be done in any way at all. He gives his reason in a quotation from 
Niels Bohr, saying that the expression 
of such an aim is similar to the 
sentence: 'We may hope that it will later turn out that sometimes 
2 + 2 = 5-' 
In other words, the proponents of the Copenhagen 
interpretation 
regard the development 
of any alternative 
to their point 
of view as logically impossible. 
It must be emphasised, 
however, that the above contention is not 
proved, neither in Heisenberg's 
book nor elsewhere in the literature. 
Therefore, if we wish to criticise it, the best that we can do is first to 
explain it by reconstructing 
the probable lines along which such a 
proof might be attempted. In order to do this, we shall begin with the 
stress laid by Heisenberg 
2 on the essential 
character 
for the Copenhagen 
interpretation 
of' the use of classical 
concepts in describing 
our experi- 
mental equipment and, more generally, in describing 
that part of the 
world which does not belong to the object '. In the section following 
this quotation, it is made clear that by the term 'classical concepts', 
one understands, 
firstly, space and time, and secondly, energy and 
momentum. In classical 
physics, the concepts of space and time refer 
to a kinematic description 
of the process of movement of matter; for 
example, the series of positions occupied by an object in a sequence of 
times. The momentum and energy concepts refer, however, to a 
lop. cit., pp. 117 and 118 
2op. cit., p. 82 
271 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DAVID 
BOHM 
description 
of the causal laws that hold in this movement; for example, 
Newton's laws, that the time rate of change of the momentum of a 
body is equal to the force applied to it (which leads in an isolated system 
to the conservation 
of momentum and energy). These laws are, of 
course, completely deterministic, 
in the sense that the initial positions 
and momenta of all the bodies of an isolated system completely deter- 
mine the future behaviour of that system. 
As is well known, in the quantum theory, the laws are not com- 
pletely deterministic, 
but instead take the very different form of deter- 
mining statistical 
relations. What is more important for our purpose 
here, however, is that the concepts (space, time, energy and momentum) 
in terms of which one expresses the experimental 
implications of 
quantum mechanical laws are nevertheless the same ones used in 
classical mechanics. In other words, as Bohr frequently 
emphasisesm, 
the quantum theory introduces 
no new concepts into physics. What 
is new in this connection is, however, that the old concepts, 
such as 
position and momentum, 
can be defined only within maximum 
limits of 
precision 
set by the uncertainty 
principle. This ambiguity applies even to 
large-scale objects, but, of course, its consequences 
with respect to 
these are unimportant 
for practical purposes. Nevertheless, 
from the 
point of view of principle, 
the above described 
ambiguity plays a very 
significant 
part. For it means that from the experimental 
data entering 
into physics (and into any other science) one will be able to infer the 
properties 
of various parts of the universe to a maximum degree of 
precision which is exactly the same as that implied by the current 
quantum theory, when these properties 
are treated in the usual way in 
terms of wave functions, operators, 
etc. As a result there will be no 
room for the possibility 
of inferring anything of a different character 
(such as our proposed particle variables representing 
'actuality func- 
tions '), which would aim to add some new features to the description 
of the state of the system under observation, features that are not 
expressible 
in terms of the formalism 
of the quantum theory as it now 
stands. This would mean, however, that alternatives 
to the Copen- 
hagen point of view could never have any additional experimental 
content, and so would be, as Heisenberg 
suggested, 
just' metaphysical 
' 
additions to the description, 
fulfilling no fiurther 
function. 
In view of the far reaching 
consequences 
of the conclusion 
described 
above, it is evidently important 
to ask what evidence there is in favour 
of its basic premise; namely, that the results of large scale experience 
I Private communication 
272 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

CONCEPTS 
IN THE QUANTUM 
THEORY 
must be expressed in classical concepts. In discussing this question, 
Heisenberg states: 
The concepts of classical physics are just a refinement of the concepts of daily 
life and are an essential part of the language which forms the basis of all natural 
sciece.t 
Our actual situation is that we do use the classical concepts for the 
description of experiments. ... 
There is no use discussing what could be done if 
we were other beings than we are. 
It is clear from the above quotation that Heisenberg feels that 
classical concepts are inherent in all logical thinking about any subject 
whatsoever. Such a point of view implies that every understandable 
and describable aspect of experience could in principle be analysed by 
regarding the world as made up of various component parts, each 
having at any moment a definite position and a definite momentum. 
If we in practice do not do this in everyday life, but use other concepts 
instead, this means only that we are approximating to the ideal of such 
a complete analysis (i.e. by ' refining' these everyday concepts, we 
could come to nothing else but a suitable set of positions and momenta). 
It must be admitted that ideas of the type described above are 
commonly held by physicists. It takes only a little reflection, how- 
ever, to see that there are strong reasons suggesting that such ideas are 
false. To see why this is so, let us concentrate on an essential feature of 
the concepts of space and time as they are used in classical physics, 
namely, the description of the location of an object or an event in 
terms of a set of continuous Cartesian co-ordinates. Is it really true that 
we have no other way to think of space and time except in terms of 
such a concept? We may ask, for example, whether in everyday 
experience we would describe the location of a pencil by giving its 
precise latitude and longitude (which is what is implied by the above 
described' classical 'concept of space). It is evident that we do not do 
this, but that instead, we describe the pencil as being on a certain desk, 
which is in a certain room, which is in a certain house, on a certain 
street, etc. In other words, we locate the pencil with the aid of a 
series of topological relations, in which one entity is within or upon 
another. The same is true of all laboratory experience. For in no 
experiment does one ever give an exact co-ordinate of anything (i.e. 
to an infinite number of decimals). Rather, in a typical measurement, 
one places a pomint between certain marks on a scale, thus once again 
locating it by means of a topological relationship. Indeed, in every 
experiment that can possibly be done, the notion of a precisely defined 
I op. cit., p. 55 
t Italics added 
19 
273 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DAVID 
BOHM 
co-ordinate is seen to be just an abstraction, which is carried out when a 
topologically described experimental result is translated into the lan- 
guage of continuous co-ordinates. 
It is clear then that behind the concept of space and time as des- 
cribed in terms of co-ordinates, there is a more fundamental topological 
concept, which lies at its basis, but which is usuallyjust taken for granted 
without further discussion. For evidently, the idea of defining co- 
ordinates makes sense only if one presupposes that one knows what is 
meant by topological relations such as between, inside, outside, neigh- 
bourhood, etc. This is true not only with regard to the actual physical 
procedures by which measurements are carried out, but also with re- 
gard to the order of logical priority in the definition of the associated 
mathematical concepts. Thus, if the mathematical theory of space 
and time is to be developed in a natural way, it is well known that one 
must begin with topological relations, such as those described above,' 
and that only much later will one arrive at the concept of Cartesian 
co-ordinates (which is essentially a metrical notion). 
We see then that Heisenberg's contention that classical concepts are 
the only possible refinements of everyday concepts must be false. 
For as shown above, one can at the very least obtain refinements 
leading to topological concepts, which are at once closer to everyday 
experience and more fundamental in a logical mathematical sense. 
(Of course, refinements of everyday concepts in still other directions 
should be possible too; but for physics, topology is particularly im- 
portant, since it deals with the description of space and time, which play 
a central role in all physical theory.) We have therefore refuted the 
basic premise underlying the thesis of the inevitability of the Copen- 
hagen interpretation, 
namely, that the only possible concepts are those 
of classical physics. 
At this point, however, we are led naturally to go further, and to 
raise the question of just how topology can play an essential role in the 
quantum theory.2 To do this, we shall give here a brief sketch of 
some of the lines along which the writer of this review has been devel- 
oping a topological 
formulation 
of the quantum 
theory,3 
which constitutes a 
SSee, for example, A. Wallace, Algebraic Topoogy, London, 
o957 
' The idea that there may be a fundamental relationship between quantum theory 
and topology was first suggested, to the author's knowledge, by L. L. Whyte. See, 
for example, his Critique of Physics, London, 1931. 
3 Sonic of the mathematical aspects of this formulation are still being developed, 
but it is expected that the work will be ready for publication in the near future. 
274 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

CONCEPTS IN THE QUANTUM THEORY 
counter-example to the Copenhagen point of view. 
In this way, we 
shall be able to indicate how 'non-classical' concepts can play a basic 
part in physical theory, making possible new kinds of experimental 
predictions which could not be considered within the framework of 
the Copenhagen interpretation, and which, according to Heisenberg's 
conclusions, should not be possible at all. 
Our basic starting point in this formulation is that space and time 
are to be described by topological concepts (which are taken to be 
axiomatic) while concepts involving co-ordinates will play only a 
secondary role. This means that we do not begin, as is done in some 
topological theories,1 
from continuous 
co-ordinates 
to which differen- 
tial equations are assumed to apply 'in the small ' and then deduce 
topological relations' in the large '. Rather, the fundamental equations 
with which we start must be expressed, from the outset, in terms of 
topological notions applying to space and time (such as before, after, 
between, inside, outside, overlap, boundary, path connectivity, etc.). 
The relation between continuous Cartesian co-ordinates and discrete 
topological concepts of the type described above can be brought out m 
more detail by means of the following highly simplified illustration. 
Consider an arbitrary point, P, on a string of unit length. We first 
fold the string in two. 
If P is on the right side of the fold, we assign 
it a ' topological co-ordinate', C, = i; if on the left, C, = o. We 
continue to fold it some finite number, N, of times. In this way, we 
will obtain N topological co-ordinates for the point. 
These co- 
ordinates will give us a topological description of where the point is, 
which locates it as being within certain regions, which in turn are 
inside others, outside still others, etc. (Rather as with the case of the 
location of a pencil in common experience, as described previously.) 
In the limit as N approaches infinity, the set of the c's can be used to 
atC 
define a continuous Cartesian co-ordinate, x = 
2 
, (which expresses 
x as a binary decimal). In the ' classical ' point of view, we regard the 
limit of the above sum as the essential item of information, which must 
enter into the formulation of physical laws (e.g. in a differential 
equation), while the process of summation of the infinite series is 
regarded as irrelevant for this purpose. On the other hand, in the 
topological point of view, we regard the coefficients of the series as 
containing the essential information which must enter into physical 
1 Such an approach to physics has recently been made by several authors; for 
example, J. A. Wheeler, Phys. Rev., 1955, 97, 511 
275 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DAVID BOHM 
laws, while the sum of the series is considered to be only an abstraction 
(applicable in limiting cases when the number of elements is very large). 
It is clear then that the laws of physics will no longer be expressed 
as differential equations in a continuous set of Cartesian co-ordinates, 
but instead as topological relations in a discrete set of topological 
co-ordinates. Some clue as to the precise nature of these topological 
relations can be obtained from the existence of a remarkable analogy 
between the mathematics of topology and that of the modern quantum 
mechanical field theory (which is generally recognised to be the most 
definitive expression of the laws of the quantum theory available to 
date). Even with the simplified example of a topological co-ordinate 
given above, one can see the existence of some kind of analogy. For 
the fundamental field variables of the quantum theory contain' number 
of particle (Fermion) operators ' associated with each point in space and 
time, which resemble our above described topological co-ordinates in 
having possible values that are either zero or unity. Thus, what is 
suggested is that perhaps the deeper meaning of these quantum mech- 
anical operators is that they describe topological relations in space and 
time. This suggestion is in fact supported by a more detailed study 
(which we cannot enter into here), showing that certain groups which 
are basic in topology are also basic in the quantum mechanical field 
theory. From the group isomorphism, it is possible to show that our 
topological theory leads naturally, in the limit in which the approxima- 
tion of continuous co-ordinates can be applied, to a Fermion field 
satisfying Dirac's equation (and of course, the Pauli exclusion principle).' 
It appears then that the utilisation of the above described analogy 
can make possible the development of a topological formulation of the 
quantum theory, which while leading to the results of the usual quantum 
mechanics in suitable limiting cases, nevertheless possesses certain 
genuinely novel features, with regard both to its mathematical formula- 
tion and to its experimental predictions. In order to bring out in more 
detail what these novel features are, we first point out that in the 
topological formulation, a fundamental concept will be that of an 
event. In contradistinction to the 'classical' axiom that fundamental 
events are to be described in the theory as mathematical points, we 
shall start with the axiom that all events (even those used in the ex- 
pression of the basic laws of physics) are to be considered as consti- 
tuting regions, having some spatial extension and temporal duration. 
I Boson fields are also shown to have a certain topological significance., 
which we 
shall not, however, go into here. 
276 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

CONCEPTS 
IN THE QUANTUM 
THEORY 
(' Objects' will then consist of repetitive, persistent, and organised 
patterns of events.) A fundamental relationship into which such events 
can enter is that of containment 
of one event inside another. (For ex- 
ample, a flash of light can be in the space between a certain pair of 
marks on a ruler and occur while a given clock pointer is between a 
certain pair of marks on its dial.) This relationship replaces the classical 
one of coincidence, which evidently can be applied meaningfully only 
to point events. Of course, for the development of a physical theory 
it is not sufficient to specify the containment of one event in another. 
A whole system of containment relations is needed, which would in 
effect constitute an extension of the kind of topological co-ordinates 
that we have described above, so as to set up a fairly detailed topological 
description of what is commonly called the 'space-time frame '. 
The next important concept is that of elementary 
process. An 
elementary process is a relationship between two different events, m 
which one becomes the other. Such an elementary process has by 
its very definition an aspect of indivisibility. For even though it is 
potentially divisible, if such a division were actually to be carried out, 
it would become a different 
process. (As for example, an egg can be 
divided by breaking it, but it thereby ceases to be an egg.) 1 In this 
way, we see that the basic quantum mechanical feature of the indi- 
visibility of elementary processes fits naturally into topological concepts 
of space and time, whereas it does violence to the ' classical ' concep- 
tions, which are inherently those of continuity. 
From the elementary process, the next step is to consider the total 
cosmic process, in which all events that have been, are, and will be, are 
in principle taken into account, in their proper order (described topo- 
logically of course). Naturally, we cannot in practice specify al the 
details of this process; but as is done regularly in the science of cosmo- 
logy, we can consider some model of the cosmos, which aims to treat 
only certain idealised and simplified systems of events, that are relevant 
in the discussion of some limited problem of interest (e.g. an experi- 
ment). In this connection, the observing apparatus, being a part of 
the cosmos that is evidently, in general, significant for the experiment, 
must also be described in the theory, at least in a suitably idealised and 
simplified way. (As, for example, Heisenberg did in his well known 
I A similar result is obtained even in the Copenhagen interpretation. For example, 
by observing a quantum process, we can divide it as a result of the disturbance due to 
the measuring apparatus, but then it ceases to be the same process that was origmally 
under discussion. 
277 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DAVID 
BOHM 
model of a highly idealised microscope with the aid of which he illus- 
trated the uncertainty principle.) However, as we saw earlier, it is 
agreed, even by the proponents of the Copenhagen point of view, that 
at least in physics, the human observer can be left out of the description, 
since his act of perceiving the state of the large scale apparatus makes no 
significant change in the latter. 
The system of events described above is then the' physical actuality 
that, we saw previously, Heisenberg felt to be necessary, even though 
in the Copenhagen point of view, it plays no physical role. In the 
topological formulation, however, the situation is different. For here 
one begins with the actual process with all its events in their proper 
order. To each event in the process, one then associates a particular 
wave function, characteristic 
of that event. In effect, every such event 
is regarded as furnishing a unique and individual perspective on the 
cosmic process (in the sense that in a certain way it ' perceives ' its past, 
in the form of a trace or a set of marks left by this past in this particular 
event). As a detailed development of the theory shows, the perspective 
of a given event is represented mathematically by the wave function 
associated with that event. This wave function then determines 
potentialities for the development of the cosmos subsequent to the 
event in question. 
It is clear from the above discussion that in our formulation of 
the quantum theory, there is an inexhaustible set of wave functions 
(one for each event), whereas in the usual formulation, there is, as is 
well known, only one wave function (or at most, one for each observer). 
To relate the way the wave function appears in both points of view, we 
note that in our theory, the (large scale) events which are the results of 
the functioning of a particular piece of apparatus furnish their own 
special perspective on the cosmic process. When an observer looks 
at the apparatus (of course, without changing it significantly) and per- 
ceives these events, he can, if he wishes, adopt as his own the perspective 
on the cosmic process that is implied by the events in question, and with 
it the corresponding special associated wave function. This wave 
function implies potentialities for the future development of the system 
under discussion, in the same way as happens in the usual formulation 
of the theory, and therefore plays a role analogous to that of the wave 
function as it appears in the Copenhagen interpretation. It is clear, 
however, that our point of view differs from that of the Copenhagen 
interpretation in the essential respect that in it, the wave function does 
not primarily represent ' psychic' actuality (i.e. the perception of the 
278 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

CONCEPTS 
IN THE QUANTUM 
THEORY 
event by an observer), but rather, ' physical' actuality (i.e. the per- 
spective of the associated event on the cosmic process). 
The introduction of one wave function for each event must lead, 
of course, to new features, both in the mathematical formulation of 
the theory, and in the mode of relating it to experiment. Thus, with 
regard to the formulation, it is evidently necessary to ensure that the 
potentialities implied by the wave function of any one event are com- 
patible with those implied by the wave functions of all the other events, 
so that they will fit together to make a coherent whole. 
The steps 
needed to satisfy this requirement lead in fact to a further mathematical 
development, into the details of which we shall not enter here. In 
essence, however, what is done is to determine the future of a given 
set of events as the logical intersection of all the potentialities implied 
by this set of events (i.e. what is common to all these potentialities). 
A little reflection will show that this idea is quite natural, being only a 
refinement of what is done in ' common sense' with regard to similar 
problems. For we are merely requiring that actuality be that which is 
possible, according to every valid perspective. The determination 
(or limitation of range of possibilities) brought about in this way need 
not be complete, but as more perspectives are taken into account, it 
can in general go beyond the limits set by the uncertainty principle, 
which latter follow when we suppose that only a single perspective is 
available. 
The type of determination described above is quite different 
from that appearing either in classical theory or in quantum theory. 
For in the latter two theories, the basic procedure is to start with 
some initial conditions (e.g. precise positions and momenta in classical 
theory, or a definite ' quantum state ' in quantum mechanics), and then 
to predict the corresponding entities to be found in a future experiment. 
As a result, one simply discards a great deal of information contained in 
the observable sequence of events leading up to the initial conditions; for 
it is effectively assumed that nothing matters except the initial conditions 
themselves, independently of the process in which they came to be what 
they are. On the other hand, there is no logical justification for dis- 
carding the additional information which is in the order of this sequence 
(beyond of course, the practical one that in a certain limited range of 
phenomena in which current theories are satisfactory, this order is 
found not to be relevant). And indeed, in the topological formulation 
of the quantum theory, the additional information described above is 
taken into account. For in this formulation, the sequence of actual 
279 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

DAVID 
BOHM 
events not only appears directly in the fundamental mathematical laws 
(which are expressed in terms of the wave functions associated with 
each event in the sequence), but it also appears as part of the basic 
empirical data of any problem (because the observed sequence helps 
to determine, 
or at least to limit, the wave functions described 
above). 
We conclude then that, contrary to what is maintained in the 
Copenhagen interpretation, 
the quantum theory can be developed 
further to introduce the notion of a ' physical actuality ', with a new 
experimental 
and mathematical 
content not expressible 
in the usual 
formulation, 
and nevertheless 
approaching 
the current theory in those 
domains in which the latter has really been well confirmed. In order 
to achieve this result, however, we have been led to introduce 
topologi- 
cal concepts that are quite different from those appearing 
in classical 
physics and in the Copenhagen 
interpretation 
of the quantum theory. 
The applicability 
of such topological concepts is not restricted 
to the 
micro-domain, 
but rather, extends through every level, including the 
large scale level of common experience. For example, the movement 
of a particle is no longer to be described 
in terms of the classical 
con- 
cepts of position and momentum, but rather in terms of a series of 
discrete events.1 The events are so close together in space and time, 
however, that for a certain limited range of practical purposes, they 
may be treated on the large scale level as forming a continuous 
orbit. 
(As the pressure 
on a macroscopic 
object, due to a rain of molecules on 
its surface, can similarly be treated as continuous for some purposes, 
even though we must keep the actual atomic constitution 
of matter in 
mind when we are trying to understand 
pressure in a fundamental 
way.) 
It follows then that the use of topological concepts implies the 
need for a re-evaluation 
of the significance 
of every aspect of physics 
including not only the current quantum theory but also classical 
mechanics. When this re-evaluation 
is accomplished, 
however, it is 
discovered 
that we are simply giving up the excessively 
abstract 
classical 
notion of Cartesian 
co-ordinates, 
and returning 
to a topological notion 
of space and time that is very close to one that we have always been 
using in common experience. 
Birkbeck College 
University of London 
1 The change between one event and its successor takes the place of the concept of 
momentum. 
280 
This content downloaded from 99.49.245.105 on Thu, 29 May 2014 22:20:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

