An Introduction, 
| 
| 
- hte 
—@ 
Alan Carr 


Clinical Psychology 
Clinical Psychology: An Introduction is for students studying clinical 
psychology as part of an undergraduate programme in psychology, 
nursing, sociology or social and behavioural sciences. Undergraduate 
Students who wish to know if postgraduate study in clinical psychology 
would be of interest to them will find this book particularly useful. 
The book will inform students about 
® the profession of clinical psychology 
® how to get onto a clinical psychology postgraduate training pro- 
gramme 
e the way clinical psychologists work with children, adolescents and 
adults with common psychological problems 
© the main models of practice used by clinical psychologists, and 
e the scientific 
evidence 
for the effectiveness 
of psychological 
interventions. 
There is a focus on both clinical case studies and relevant research, 
and the book includes summaries, revision questions, advice on further 
reading and a glossary of key terms, all of which make it an excellent, 
student-friendly introduction to an exceptionally interesting subject. 
Alan Carr is director of clinical psychology training at University College 
Dublin and has a clinical practice at the Clanwilliam Institute, Dublin. He 
has produced over 20 volumes and 200 papers and presentations in the 
areas of clinical psychology, family therapy and positive psychology. 
His books include the Handbook of Child and Adolescent Clinical 
Psychology, the Handbook of Adult Clinical Psychology, the Handbook 
of Intellectual Disability and Clinical Psychology Practice, and What 
Works with Children, Adolescents and Adults? A Review of Research 
on the Effectiveness of Psychotherapy and Positive Psychology. He 
has worked in the fields of clinical psychology and family therapy in the 
UK, Ireland and Canada. 

>» 
& f a 
® 
i ‘. 
i 
sj 
Wiad hei 2) 
Wee TY wane 
aa Y Stik 
tiny Sus 
Lhupmyg ofsuhsip 
meee AB Io (id #6 Lceioyeg 
eae 
cearets: 
SvChitted 
bow ee 
©) OF ot 
es wean 
G 
ave 
i> 
8 Viale etoubrop!seg 8 whrtt 
OF aa 
hy Ginnie 
y Yelm 
ner 
Aded and br tity rome at sannet! io od Shomer 
kode aietnake ett tin Apocd ait 
; 
ioOneot ree) rds he Raeewoig = i 
nin) 
Saoteomes Yoolotang inate @.oio wg i yal - 
ay Pig 
ls INGO 
Raikes 
neiblir rttiw aow miMgeliiad Menkes jawed = 
ering epodtiagig oie Ae ation 
(a 
: 
pers. 
.Guine codon leqinik: 
yo bpay otis to isbepen Car: ott . 
i 
elpdiatiyer 
to amanavinatie 
sn} Wi 
so 
(ene. ot » 
| A Mele? bt aelbute aang 
ie 
i? 
~ SAE neenntan Bnodepup nolan 2 
- 
. 
Aawtarant ow. Hh snare te tee 
verdes ers 
_ceyeeeany thai corneal ie 
oh 
rhecheetien wb 
yare! 
trite 
agi 
means ey 

Clinical Psychology 
An Introduction 
Alan Carr 
‘2 Routledge 
Taylor & Francis Group 
LONDON AND NEW YORK 

First published 2012 
by Routledge 
27 Church Road, Hove, East Sussex BN3 2FA 
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada 
by Routledge 
711 Third Avenue, New York NY 10017 
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business 
© 2012 Alan Carr 
The right of Alan Carr to be identified as author of this work has been asserted 
by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and 
Patents Act 1988. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or 
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in 
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing 
from the publishers. 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation 
without intent to infringe. 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Carr, Alan, 1957— 
Clinical psychology : an introduction / Alan Carr. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references. 
ISBN 978-0-415-68396-8 (hardback)—ISBN 978-0-415-68397-5 (paperback) 
1. Clinical psychology—Textbooks. 
|. Title. 
RC467.C35 2012 
616.89—dc23 
2011038606 
ISBN: 978-0-415-68396-8 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-0-415-68397-5 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-0-203-09763-2 (ebk) 
Typeset in Arial MT and Frutiger by RefineCatch Limited, Bungay, Suffolk 
Paperback cover design by Andrew Ward 

Contents 
List of figures 
ix 
List of tables 
xi 
Preface 
xili 
Acknowledgements 
xvii 
1 What is clinical psychology? 
1 
e Learning objectives 
1 
® Introduction 
1 
e The profession and scientific discipline of clinical psychology 
2 
e Clinical psychologists’ roles 
3 
® Clinical psychology training 
9 
e Getting a place on a clinical psychology programme 
12 
e Training abroad 
24 
® Choosing courses 
26 
® Clinical psychology and related professions 
27 
e Controversies 
29 
® Pros and cons of selecting clinical psychology as a career 
30 
e Summary 
31 
® Questions 
32 
e Further reading 
33 
° Websites 
33 
2 Childhood behaviour disorders 
35 
e Learning objectives 
35 
e Introduction 
35 
e Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
36 
® Conduct disorder and oppositional defiant disorder 
49 
e Psychodynamic theories 
60 
e Cognitive-behavioural theories 
61 
e Systems theory 
63 
e Assessment 
65 
e Intervention 
66 
e Controversies 
68 
e Summary 
70 
e Questions 
71 
e Further reading 
72 
e Websites 
ihe 
3 Eating disorders 
73 
e Learning objectives 
' 
73 
e Introduction 
73 
e Case study of anorexia nervosa 
75 
e Epidemiology, course and outcome 
79 
e Clinical features 
80 
e Aetiological theories 
82 

vi CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
© Biological theories 
83 
e Psychoanalytic theories 
84 
© Cognitive-behavioural theories 
85 
e Systemic theories 
87 
e Assessment 
90 
e Intervention 
91 
® Controversies 
92 
e Summary 
92 
© Questions 
94 
e Further reading 
94 
e Websites 
94 
4 Drug misuse 
95 
e Learning objectives 
95 
e Introduction 
: 
95 
© Acase of harmful polydrug use 
96 
e Acase of early drug experimentation 
98 
e Comparison of cases 
99 
® Classification, epidemiology, risk factors and 
protective factors 
99 
© Clinical features 
101 
e Theories 
105 
© Intrapsychic deficit theories 
110 
® Cognitive-behavioural theories 
412 
e Systemic theories 
114 
e Integrative theories 
iy 
* Assessment 
119 
® Treatment 
120 
e Controversies 
121 
e Summary 
122 
e Questions 
124 
e Further reading 
124 
e Websites 
124 
5 Anxiety disorders 
126 
e Learning objectives 
126 
e Introduction 
126 
e Separation anxiety disorder 
127 
e Phobias 
130 
Generalized anxiety disorder 
131 
® Panic disorder 
33 
e Posttraumatic stress disorder 
136 
® Obsessive compulsive disorder 
137 
® Clinical features of anxiety disorders 
140 
® Epidemiology, risk factors and course 
145 
© Aetiological theories 
146 
® Biological theories 
147 
® Temperament, traits, cognitive biases and coping strategies 
149 
e Psychoanalytic theories 
151 
e Cognitive-behavioural theories 
153 
e Family systems theory 
157 
e An integrative perspective 
159 
e Assessment 
159 
° Treatment 
160 

fe] 
® Controversies 
e Summary 
© Questions 
e Further reading 
e Websites 
Depression 
e Learning objectives 
e Introduction 
e Case example of major depression 
© Clinical features 
e Classification 
e Epidemiology, course and risk factors 
e Aetiological theories 
e Temperament, traits, cognitive biases, coping 
strategies and interpersonal styles 
e Psychoanalytic theories 
e Cognitive and behavioural theories 
e Family systems theory 
e An integrative approach 
e Assessment 
e Suicide risk 
e Treatment 
e Controversies 
e Summary 
® Questions 
e Further reading 
e Websites 
Schizophrenia 
e Learning objectives 
e Introduction 
e Case example of schizophrenia 
e Clinical features 
e Classification 
e Epidemiology, course, outcome and risk factors 
e Aetiological theories 
e Biological theories 
e Antipsychotic medication 
e Stress-vulnerability theory 
e Multimodal interventions 
e Assessment 
e Treatment 
e Controversies 
e Summary 
® Questions 
e Further reading 
e Websites 
Personality disorders 
e Learning objectives 
e Introduction 
© Clinical features and case examples 
e Cluster A: The odd, eccentric group 
162 
163 
165 
165 
166 
167 
167 
167 
169 
72 
176 
ured 
179 
183 
186 
189 
194 
195 
196 
196 
199 
200 
203 
204 
205 
205 
207 
207 
207 
208 
213 
217 
218 
221 
222 
227 
227 
228 
237 
239 
239 
244 
245 
245 
246 
247 
247 
247 
248 
250 
CONTENTS 
vii 

vii CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
e Cluster B: The dramatic, emotional, erratic group 
e Cluster C: The anxious, fearful group 
e Epidemiology and course 
e Theories 
® The effectiveness of psychotherapy and medication 
e Psychodynamic approaches 
© Cognitive-behavioural approaches 
e Marital and family therapy 
e Risk of violence 
e Assessment 
® Treatment 
e Controversies 
e Summary 
® Questions 
e Further reading 
e Websites 
9 Models that influence the practice of clinical psychology 
e Learning objectives 
® Introduction 
® Biological model 
e Psychoanalytic model 
® Cognitive-behavioural model 
e Family systems model 
e Other influential models 
e Summary 
® Questions 
e Further reading 
e Websites 
10 Effectiveness of psychological therapies 
e Learning objectives 
® Introduction 
® Evidence-based practice 
® How effective is psychotherapy? 
e Medical cost offset 
® Common factors and specific psychotherapies 
® Summary 
® Questions 
® Further reading 
© Website 
Glossary 
References 
Index 
254 
259 
263 
265 
269 
269 
276 
278 
278 
279 
280 
281 
288 
289 
290 
290 
291 
291 
291 
292 
298 
300 
303 
305 
306 
308 
308 
308 
310 
310 
310 
311 
314 
321 
322 
328 
329 
329 
329 
330 
342 
387 

List of figures 
Formulation of a case of ADHD 
General formulation model for ADHD 
Formulation of a case of conduct disorder 
General formulation model for conduct disorder and 
oppositional defiant disorder 
Formulation of a case of anorexia nervosa 
Fairburn’s cognitive-behavioural model of eating disorders 
General formulation model for eating disorders 
Formulation of a case of harmful drug use 
The reward system in the human brain 
General formulation model for adolescent drug misuse 
Formulation of a case of separation anxiety disorder 
Formulation of a case of generalized anxiety disorder 
Formulation of a case of panic disorder with agoraphobia 
Formulation of a case of obsessive compulsive disorder 
Psychodynamic triangles of conflict and person 
General formulation model for anxiety disorders 
Formulation of a case of depression 
Cognitive-behavioural model of depression 
General formulation model for depression 
Formulation of a case of schizophrenia 
Beck’s integrated model of schizophrenia for use in CBT 
General formulation model for schizophrenia 
MRI image of grey matter loss in very early 
onset schizophrenia 
Hierarchy of evidence 
Case studies 
Improvement in mean symptom scores on the 
Beck Depression Inventory 
Graphic representation of an effect size of 1 
Success rates of psychotherapy with adults and children 
The effects of psychotherapy compared with 
placebo control groups 
Factors that affect the outcome of psychotherapy 
212 
230 
238 
296 
312 
312 
313 
315 
320 
323 
324 

a 
GHIGA 
lo eeee @ fo nonderngt 
2 
CMQA yet tebeery CHiN 
Meese) 
Shoaib Hubnes to esed's 
ky noire 4 
Ore wbio® toutnoo sot lehonts 
Lewerwen? 
Pe oe 

List of tables 
Main elements of clinical psychologists’ roles 
Populations, problems and work settings 
Components of professional clinical psychology training 
programmes 
Building your profile for admission to clinical 
psychology training 
Diagnostic criteria for attention and hyperactivity 
syndromes in DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10 
Diagnostic criteria for oppositional defiant disorder 
and conduct disorder in DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10 
DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10 diagnostic criteria for 
anorexia and bulimia nervosa 
Risk factors for eating disorders 
DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10 diagnostic criteria for 
drug abuse and dependence 
Risk factors for adolescent drug use 
Clinical features of drug use 
The 12 steps of Narcotics Anonymous 
Clinical features of anxiety disorders 
Criteria for a major depressive episode 
Clinical features of depression 
Risk and protective factors for suicide 
Diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia 
Clinical features of schizophrenia 
Risk factors for schizophrenia 
Risk factors for a poor outcome in schizophrenia 
Main clinical features of major personality disorders 
Epidemiology of major personality disorders 
Defence mechanisms at different levels of maturity 
Factors and facets of the five-factor model of personality 
Profiles of DSM-IV personality disorders from a 
meta-analysis of 30 facets of the five-factor model 
of personality 
Comparison of personality disorders and Axis 1 
disorders with similar features 
Model of abnormal behaviour 
Rates of diagnosis of schizophrenia in the US and the UK 
Interpretation of effect size 
Therapy, client and therapist ‘common factors’ that 
affect positive psychotherapy outcome 
100 
282 
284 
286 
293 
294 
316 
325 

- 
> 
2 
oes to tau 
~ 
} 
: 
ndovar 
’ 
. 
- 
ty ” 
aim aed 
' 
Qitos row 
ore arerer=s 
or <RUUOO4 
Si 
my 
IKONS 
‘av 
iiegesheie 
i itera) 
€.% 
. 
* 
: 
> 
= WT wAQet 
pov 
illd of 
cosine Wels 
Sep peg 
8 
(ATEN! yoo 
. 
ivinkeayrt bne 
ruliatt oO) oie aeaget £5 
oF 
Of -GOi bre ATV 20 ch eesraitye 
enol Tretia henoiiigemeesd.ver Hretep srenayei 
$3 
| 
OF! one AT-Vi-20 of ie eobeed bre 
6! Quinn winged) OP gt bis AT eMied rg 
LeQwAn acta? He RRO 
evabicnd Gulla tay nina nA LL” 
o} auaths Stectpeiy OF 
ae Ma 
fF} 
ae 
ee 
=e 

Preface 
This book will help you find out about the profession of clinical 
psychology, how to get a place on a training programme, what it’s like to 
work as a Clinical psychologist, and the theoretical and scientific basis 
for clinical psychology. The first chapter answers the questions: ‘What 
is it like working as a clinical psychologist?’ and ‘How do | get a place 
on a training programme?’ It provides an overview of the profession 
and academic discipline of clinical psychology. There is a discussion of 
the many settings in which clinical psychologists work, the wide range 
of topics researched in this field, and advice on how to obtain a place 
on a postgraduate clinical psychology professional training programme 
in the UK and Ireland. Reference will be made to training in the US and 
Australia. 
Chapters 2-8 cover common psychological problems of childhood, 
adolescence and adulthood. In Chapter 2 on childhood problems, 
conduct 
disorder, 
oppositional 
defiant 
disorder 
and ADHD 
are 
discussed. Chapters 3 and 4 deal with eating disorders and drug abuse, 
which are common difficulties in adolescence. Anxiety, depression, 
schizophrenia and personality disorders are considered in Chapters 
5-8. In these chapters on specific disorders, case examples are given 
along with relevant theory and research on the diagnosis, classification, 
epidemiology, course, assessment and treatment of these conditions. 
Controversies relevant to each condition are addressed. 
In all of these chapters a description of the principal clinical features 
of a disorder or group of disorders is given, with illustrative clinical 
examples. Formulations and treatment plans, based on best practice 
principles, are included where appropriate. This shows how clinical 
psychologists approach common psychological problems in routine 
practice. Epidemiological information on the prevalence, patterns of 
comorbidity and outcome for each disorder is given. This is followed 
by theoretical explanations from neurobiological and psychological 
perspectives. Where appropriate, 
psychological explanations from 
psychodynamic, cognitive-behavioural and family systems perspectives 
are given. Reference is made to empirical research relevant to each 
theoretical perspective and to research on the effectiveness of various 
treatments. However, this is not intended as a textbook for clinical 
practice, so insufficient information is given for such purposes. 
| 
Virtually all of the assertions made about the psychological problems 
in Chapters 2-8 require qualification as to the limits of their reliability 
and validity. However, | have not peppered the text with statements of 
qualification, since this would detract from the clarity of the prose. In 

xiv CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
adopting this style, there is a risk that readers may get the impression 
that there is considerable consensus within the field about most key 
issues and that most empirical findings are unquestionably reliable 
and valid. To guard against this risk, in Chapters 2-8, a section on 
important controversies about the clinical problems considered in each 
chapter are included. Each chapter opens with learning objectives and 
concludes with a summary and recommendations for further reading. 
An attempt has been made throughout the text to take account of 
two widely used classification systems for psychological problems: the 
fifth chapter of the World Health Organization’s (1992) International 
Classification of Diseases — Tenth Edition (\CD-10) and the American 
Psychiatric Association’s (2000) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders — Fourth Edition Text revision (DSM-IV-TR). In 
DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10 there are slight differences in terminology and 
diagnostic criteria. There are, in addition, differences in the way disorders 
are clustered and subclassified. Also, in routine clinical practice and in 
the scientific literature, in some instances the terminology used differs 
from that in ICD-10 and DSM-IV-TR. Care has been taken throughout 
the text to employ those terms that have widest usage in the clinical 
field and to clarify terminological ambiguity, where appropriate, without 
inundating the reader with multiple terms and criteria for each condition. 
Chapter 9 deals with models that inform clinical psychology research 
and practice. The biological, psychodynamic, cognitive-behavioural and 
family systems models are considered in detail with reference to their 
assumptions, their contributions to our understanding and treatment of 
psychological problems, and their limitations. Other perspectives are 
also mentioned, including humanistic—client-centred tradition, personal 
construct psychology and the positive psychology. This chapter provides 
an opportunity to reconsider the material in the body of the text from a 
critical standpoint and to question the limits of the knowledge claims 
made throughout the text. | was tempted to place this chapter after 
Chapter 2, but my undergraduate students at UCD have told me that 
reviewing models of practice is a more productive learning experience 
after topics contained in the main body of the text have been covered. 
In the final chapter, evidence for the effectiveness of psychological 
interventions is summarized. Evidence-based practice is now embraced 
by clinical psychologists around the world. This chapter underlines the 
importance of evidence-based practice within clinical psychology, and 
the centrality of a scientific perspective to ethical practice. 
Because this text was written with brevity as a central feature, 
inevitably it is not comprehensive in its coverage. Many important topics 
often covered in larger introductory clinical psychology texts have not 
been addressed in this book and these deserve mention, if only to alert 
you to their existence and importance. They include: intellectual disability; 
language delay; specific learning disabilities; pervasive developmental 
disorders; psychological problems of old age, particularly dementia; 
psychological problems secondary to medical conditions such as 
heart disease or epilepsy; neuropsychological problems; somatoform 
disorders such as conversion hysteria; dissociative disorders such 

as dissociative amnesia; 
factitious disorders; 
sexual and gender 
identity disorders; paraphilias such as pedophilia; sleep disorders 
such as insomnia; impulse control disorders such as kleptomania; and 
adjustment disorders which are transient responses to acute stresses. 
In writing this text | have tried to show, as simply as possible, 
that understanding psychological problems in a rigorous clinical and 
scientific way is a complex matter. 
If you read this book with a view to deciding on whether or not to 
become a clinical psychologist, | hope that it helps you make up your 
mind. 
Alan Carr, July 2011 
PREFACE 
XV 

in" 
; ae 
. ae a 
etd an 
e, 
i, 
t 
‘ 
~ 
a 
i 
i 
4 
= 
¥ 
. 
22 
jr< 
i 
nt 
- 
& 
oe 
ae 
a 
@ 
—~— 
ie 
a 
4% 
B 
ear 
ety Ne wet 4 wee natin ts 
aes, OA, 
a 
a 
® 
= iad Ee 
{2 
‘Wires 
ces 
‘ 
an 
; 
p 
+. 
- 
: 
_ 
- 
nu 
ao” 
hs 
rea 
er Ma 
MALI ten. ~ 
a 
ogy, 
Se 
elim 
eepsow 
hh etl 
rf 
Tu 
Yio 
Le 
Qe £6 Pe 
tes 
aarncyicadh sanOacoa 
baht 
averk > yuetoe 
dh granting at 
i 
% 
bts 
Si cd Moser 
aire) 
eit 
6 
i Meter: 
ie 
(fon 
Ji 
+ =w-diitecse 
~ 
Sb 
4) 
suv 
ST (oi) a? Des aow i 
pen 
Soest 
3 7 
Ate Pek eer 
i> eee eed 
tru 
w 
x 
. 
‘ 
> 
- 
7 
‘ 
wh 
» 
a 
a 
’ 
oe 
7 
- 
i? 20> 
A 
: 
ait) 
- 
rd rh 
em 
Cinttuaie 
agi ag 
ae 
ww ib ae Piha. nn 
0 0000 Ere inca errant: 
ieee 
alll ants ~ 

Acknowledgements 
Throughout Clinical Psychology the following are widely taken into 
account: 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition, 
text revision (copyright © 2000) American Psychiatric Association, 
reprinted with permission. 
The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders World 
Health Organization (1992), copyright 
© World Health Organization 
1992, reprinted with permission. 

a
: 
-
ns 
i
a
a 
belwonmlA- 
“Tega iw bebeiget 
MErm 
a Nowe” tot 
Lan 
ANT 
S burs Vine Gre Reng 
<3 
gt avi YAY 
He 
» 
< 
ad 
“ 
~ 
= 
= 
a 
= 
> 
~{ 
Z 
= 
oe 
a. 
, 
q ut ang 
~~ 
=— 
J 
AGtw 
. ae 
y 
pana" 
Sa 
yom) jeichviriod inn HinaAl w woieaigaetyD Oech wet 
VV way 
OG 
> 
Pa 
® Mgryqoo (STR) -etipsinegy anew 
bhew 
, 
eon 
la 
le! ade Os 
isola, Hite GANAGy RRO! 

What is clinical 
psychology? 
Learning objectives 
After studying this chapter you will be able to: 
e outline the basic aspects of the profession of clinical 
psychology 
e give an account of the main features of professional 
clinical psychology training 
e plan your career so as to maximize your chances of 
getting a place on a clinical psychology programme 
e explain the difference between clinical psychology, 
other applied psychology specialties and related 
mental health professions 
e give a balanced view on the pros and cons of clinical 
psychology as a prospective career. 
Introduction 
This chapter will give an overview of the profession and discipline of 
clinical psychology. There will be a description of clinical psychology 
training. The selection procedures used by clinical psychology training 
programmes in the UK and Ireland will be discussed, and there will be 
guidance on how to get a place on a clinical psychology programme. A 
brief account will be given of clinical psychology training in the US and 
elsewhere. The factors that distinguish clinical psychology from other 
types of applied psychology and other mental health professions will be 
discussed. The chapter will close with a consideration of the pros and 
cons of clinical psychology as a career. 

2 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
The profession and scientific discipline 
of clinical psychology 
Clinical psychology is both a health care profession (like medicine, 
surgery or social work), and a health-related scientific discipline (like 
physiology or sociology). 
The profession 
The profession of clinical psychology involves using clinical judgement 
to apply knowledge from the scientific discipline of clinical psychology in 
clinical practice with clients and patients. 
Clinical 
practice refers 
to the assessment, treatment and prevention of psychological prob- 
lems in a range of populations. For example, assessing a boy who is 
failing in school and defiant with parents and teachers; helping a woman 
with depression regulate her mood more effectively; or helping the 
family of a person whose psychotic symptoms have been reduced 
through using medication to develop a supportive style to prevent 
relapse. 
Clinical judgement is developed through supervised clinical practice 
while undertaking professional training, and during post-qualification 
clinical experience. Psychologists who have worked with a wide variety 
of cases over an extended time period have a broader experiential base 
on which to draw when making clinical decisions than their less experi- 
enced colleagues. Scientific knowledge about clinical psychology is 
developed through initial academic training, ongoing continuing profes- 
sional development (CPD) and research. Throughout their careers clin- 
ical psychologists keep up to date with recent developments through 
CPD and must show evidence of this periodically to retain practising 
certificates. 
The scientific discipline 
Within the scientific discipline of clinical psychology, research 
is 
conducted to find out about how best to understand, assess, treat and 
prevent psychological problems, and also to find out how widespread 
psychological problems are. The results of clinical psychology research 
provide information for planning services for whole populations, and 
evaluating and treating individual cases in an evidence-based way. For 
example, the results of epidemiological research indicate that depression 
and anxiety are the most common problems that need to be addressed 
by clinical psychologists in outpatient adult mental health services (Carr 
& McNulty, 2006). The results of research on intelligence testing show 
that people with IQs below 50 require considerable support in community 
settings to be able to sustain a reasonable quality of life (Carr et al., 
2007). Psychotherapy research shows that family therapy is more 
effective than individual therapy in the treatment of anorexia nervosa in 
young adolescent girls (Carr, 2009a). 

1 
* WHAT 
IS CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
3 
TABLE 1.1 
Main elements of clinical psychologists’ roles 
e Direct work with clients, patients,service users 
e Indirect work 
e Administration and management 
e Research 
¢ Continuing professional development 
Clinical psychologists’ roles 
The main elements of clinical psychologists roles are listed in Table 1.1. 
Clinical psychologists’ jobs typically involve both direct and indirect 
work with clients, patients or service users. (Throughout this book the 
terms client, patient and service user will be employed interchangeably, 
as there is not currently a consensus on the most appropriate term to 
use.) Clinical psychologists’ jobs also involve administration or manage- 
ment, research, and continuing professional development (CPD) (Carr, 
2000; Hall & Llewelyn, 2006). Beinart et al.'s (2009) Clinical Psychology 
in Practice gives many detailed example of clinical psychologists’ roles 
from a UK perspective. 
Direct work 
With direct work, clinical psychologists meet with clients, patients or 
service users, and in some instances with their families. In these meet- 
ings they assess psychological problems and provide psychological 
interventions. Assessments may include interviews, psychological test- 
ing and observation. For most cases, psychologists interview clients 
(and in some instances members of their families) to find out about the 
history of the presenting problem, previous attempts to resolve the 
problem, the person’s personal and family history and any other rele- 
vant details. In some cases psychologists administer tests to assess 
patient’s intelligence, memory, personality, psychopathology, family 
relationships and other aspects of their functioning. The main benefit of 
psychological tests is that they measure constructs in a reliable and 
valid way, and yield scores that can be interpreted within the context of 
population norms. For example if a person returns an IQ score of 100, 
the norms indicate that this person is more intelligent than 50% of 
people of the same age within the normal population. With regard to 
intervention, the media typically associate individual psychotherapy 
with the practice of clinical psychology. However, clinical psychologists 
use many other interventions such as parent training to equip parents 
with skills to manage their children’s problems, training in meditation to 
help people regulate depressed mood or impulsivity, and family psycho- 
education to help families provide a supportive environment for family 
members with psychosis. Psychological interventions may be offered 
to individuals, groups with similar sorts of problems, couples and 
families. Increasingly clinical psychologists are supplementing direct 

4 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
face-to-face work with clients with bibliotherapy and computer-based 
interventions (Carr, 2009a). With bibliotherapy patients are invited to 
read specific self-help books that address their main presenting prob- 
lems. For example, a person with panic disorder could be given a book 
that outlines how to manage panic attacks using evidence-based proce- 
dures. There are a growing number of computer-based interventions, 
but the best validated are structured cognitive behavioural programmes 
for managing depression. With these programmes clients work though 
a series of web-based mood management exercises over period of 
weeks. 
Indirect work 
With regard to indirect work, psychologists provide training, clinical 
supervision and consultation to colleagues in psychology, psychother- 
apy, social work, child care, medicine, nursing and other disciplines to 
empower them to provide services to patients. This is referred to as 
indirect work because psychologists influence patients indirectly through 
the actions of their colleagues. In the area of training, clinical psycholo- 
gists may offer lectures or skills building programmes on particular top- 
ics relevant to specific groups, for example teaching foster parents 
about the psychology of attachment. In the area of clinical supervision, 
most senior psychologists in public health services provide placements 
of supervised clinical practice to clinical psychologists in training to help 
them develop the technical and self-reflective skills to practise profes- 
sionally. Technical skills refer to those procedures used to evaluate and 
treat clients. Self-reflective skills refer to the capacity to monitor accu- 
rately the interactions between oneself, clients and colleagues, and the 
impact of these interactions on oneself. With regard to consultation, 
clinical psychologists may advise others how best to manage clients 
with specific problems. For example, in an intellectual disability service 
where a client engages in repeated challenging behaviour (such as 
aggression or self-harm), a clinical psychologist may advise staff in the 
service how to manage this on the basis of a thorough functional analy- 
sis. This type of assessment is used to establish the function of the 
challenging behaviour (for example, communicating to staff that they 
are stressed or bored) by carefully observing, recording and analysing 
the antecedents and consequences of the challenging behaviour. 
Administration and management 
Most clinical psychologists manage waiting lists, set appointment 
schedules, document clinical sessions by writing reports, and commu- 
nicate with colleagues through correspondence, phone calls and meet- 
ings. As psychologists gain increasing managerial responsibility, they 
not only fulfil these functions for their own clinical work, but also support 
their more junior staff in doing so. Psychologists with managerial 
responsibilities also contribute to policy development and service 
planning for clinical psychology services, and in some instances for 

1 
* WHAT 
IS CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
5 
wider 
multidisciplinary teams 
in which 
clinical 
psychologists 
are 
involved. 
Research 
Clinical psychologists conduct a range of different types of research. 
They conduct literature searches to find out about recent developments 
in assessment and treatment, so that their practice with clients is 
informed by up-to-date research findings. Periodically they conduct 
service-based research projects to answer specific questions such as 
‘What are the profiles and outcomes of referrals over a one-year period?’ 
or ‘What are the main reasons clients give for dropping out of therapy?’ 
Large specialist psychology services within university-affiliated agen- 
cies may have broad ongoing research programmes on specific themes 
such as eating disorders, drug abuse or attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD). Postgraduates on clinical psychology training pro- 
grammes may conduct their doctoral research theses within these 
research programmes. In services without such research programmes, 
but which provide placements of supervised clinical practice, psycholo- 
gists in clinical training may initiate smaller research projects to address 
questions of concern to the service, themselves and their university- 
based academic supervisors. 
Continuing professional development 
Clinical psychologists devote a proportion of their time each year to 
CPD. This is a requirement for remaining a registered practitioner. CPD 
includes regular participation in clinical supervision and journal clubs; 
attendance at professional short courses and conferences; and en- 
rolment in advanced specialist training programmes, for example in 
psychotherapy or neuropsychology. 
Populations and work settings 
Clinical psychologists provide services to a wide range of people with 
diverse difficulties in an array of different work settings, as outlined in 
Table 1.2 (Carr, 2000; Hall & Llewelyn, 2006; Beinart et al., 2009). 
Populations and problems 
Clinical psychologists work with people across the life-span including 
children, adolescents, adults and older adults. They provide services to 
people with psychological disorders, intellectual and physical disabili- 
ties and psychological difficulties secondary to physical illnesses such 
as HIV/AIDS, heart disease or cancer. They also work with people 
experiencing significant stress associated with major life transitions and 
challenges such as infertility, child bearing, adoption, fostering, marital 
discord and bereavement. 
Work settings 
Clinical psychologists work in a wide variety of settings including pri- 
mary care, community mental health teams, general and specialist adult 
and paediatric hospitals, disability services, services for older adults, 

6 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
TABLE 1.2 
Populations, problems and work settings 
Populations 
Children 
Adolescents 
Adults 
Older adults 
Problems 
Mental health problems 
Adjustment of physical health problems 
Intellectual disability 
Physical disability 
Adjustment to major life transitions 
Work settings 
Primary care 
Community mental health teams 
Hospitals” 
Disability services 
Oider adult services 
Family services (€.g. fostering, adoption) 
Specialist services (e.g. addiction, chronic pain) 
prisons, fostering and adoption services and hospices. They also work 
in a wide variety of specialist services for people with specific difficulties 
such as addiction, eating disorders, aggression, sexual offending, 
chronic pain and head injury. Most clinical psychologists in the UK and 
Ireland work mainly within the public health service, although some 
work in private practice. The following statements are first-hand 
accounts of a typical day’s work of psychologists working in a number 
of different settings. 
Child and adolescent mental health 
Martin, a clinical psychologist working on a child and adolescent mental 
health team, offered the following brief description of a typical day. 
Today | saw two families in the morning; went to a case conference 
after lunch; made some calls to clients and colleagues after 4pm; 
and (finally) finished a report that I’d been working on for 2 weeks. 
The first family | saw this morning was a case of school refusal or 
separation anxiety. The little fellow was 8 and very anxious. So were 
his parents. We've met for three sessions, and worked today on the 
final elements of a return to school plan. The second case was a 
review of long-term client. This is a 16-year-old girl who came to our 
service first because she was cutting herself. I've seen her for nearly 
2 years and she is doing much better now. This afternoon the case 
conference was about a chaotic family, where there are major child 
protection concerns. The report | finished was an assessment of 
need report on a 7-year-old boy with ADHD. 
The child and adolescent mental health curriculum for the UCD clinical 
psychology programme is contained in the Handbook of Child and 
Adolescent Clinical Psychology (Carr, 2006a). 

1 * WHAT 
IS CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
7 
Adult mental health 
Rose is a clinical psychologist working on a community adult mental 
health team. She gave this account of one day in her working life. 
On Wednesday myself and Paul, my clinical psychology trainee, had 
our anxiety management group for people with panic disorder. This 
was fairly demanding. There are 10 patients in the group and we were 
on session 6 of a 12 week CBT programme. A lot of unexpected 
_ 
issues came up, around abuse one of the group members had expe- 
rienced, that we had to deal with. Afterwards at lunch | debriefed Paul, 
who found the group heavy going. After lunch, we ran our ‘hearing 
voices’ group for people with psychosis. This was a lower key affair. A 
few issues came up around medication and compliance, so after the 
group | phoned Seamus, the psychiatrist to discuss the meds issue. 
| picked up my son, Ruan, from the childminder’s at 5. What a day! 
The adult mental health curriculum for the UCD clinical psychology 
programme is contained in Handbook of Adult Clinical Psychology (Carr 
& McNulty, 2006). 
Older adults 
Fintan works for a specialist older adult service attached to a large 
general hospital. Here is how he described a day at this service. 
On Thursday morning we had a team meeting at 9. The psychiatrist, 
social worker, physiotherapist and occupational therapist were there 
and the secretary for the unit. A lot of the meeting was about 
discharge planning for patients who were about to leave hospital. We 
also reviewed follow-up support plans for some cases where there 
were snags in the support plans that needed to be ironed out. 
Between 11 and 1 the social worker, Sue, and | ran our reminiscence 
group for older adults recovering form depression. We had a journal 
club at lunch time where our team discussed two really interesting 
papers on cognitive rehabilitation for older adults with dementia. In 
the afternoon | did an assessment with a 75-year-old woman. The 
main issue was whether she had dementia or depression. | scored 
the tests and drafted the report. Just as | was leaving at 6, one of the 
nurses on the ward called to ask about a patient whose relatives 
were visiting and wanted some information, so | didn’t leave work till 
nearly 7. It was a long day. 
The older adult mental health curriculum for the UCD clinical psychology 
programme is contained in Handbook of the Clinical Psychology of 
Ageing (Woods & Clare, 2008). 
Intellectual disability service 
Karen is a clinical psychologist working in a community based early 
intervention intellectual disability service. Here is what she had to say 
about her day. 

8 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Monday is always a strange sort of day. | don’t start till 12 but go 
through till 8pm because we run our parent training programme on 
Monday evenings from 6 to 8. This went very well yesterday. We 
have six mums and four dads in the group. We have been doing 
behavioural parent training with them. They are beginning to ‘get it’. 
| like when it clicks and they ‘get it’. They also find the support they 
get from each other very useful too. | think the younger parents in the 
group felt very isolated, and like they were the only ones with 
parenting issues. But now they have other people to talk to about the 
same stuff they.are facing. Before the group session, | did a home 
visit at 12 with a single mother who was having a crisis with managing 
her son’s challenging behaviour. She was very distressed, so | 
stayed quite a while and didn’t make it to the centre till 3. Most of the 
afternoon was spent preparing for the evening group session with 
the social worker who runs the group with me and doing routine 
phone calls and reports. 
The intellectual disability curriculum for the UCD clinical psychology 
programme is contained in Handbook of Intellectual Disability and 
Clinical Psychology Practice (Carr et al., 2007). 
Hospital clinical neuropsychology service 
Morgan, a clinical psychologist working with a neuropsychology service 
in a busy university hospital, gave this account. 
First thing on Friday our team met to review referrals which had 
come in on Thursday afternoon (mainly from the neurological wards). 
| got two cases. One was a 63-year-old woman who had had a 
stroke. | had to do a preliminary assessment of her neuropsychological 
functioning to get a baseline. The second case was a man in his late 
20s who had been in a road traffic accident and had a closed head 
injury. | plan to do periodic follow-up assessments of both of these 
cases to monitor their recovery. It took all day to do these two 
assessments, score tests, phone relatives and get their views, write 
up reports and discuss them with the relevant neurologists. I'll be 
following up both of them next week and meeting with the families 
and patients to talk about how to manage things after discharge. 
Lezak et al.’s (2004) Neuropsychological Assessment is a widely used 
neuropsychology text on many clinical psychology programmes. 
Specialist family therapy service 
| run a family therapy clinic on Thursday evenings at the Clanwilliam 
Institute in Dublin. Here is what happened last Thursday. 
There was a request from a couple for an emergency appointment, 
so | saw them first at 5pm. The husband has bipolar disorder, which 
is moderately well controlled with medication. I've been seeing the 
couple for a long time for relapse prevention therapy. When this 
couple came to me first the husband was being hospitalized five 

1 
* WHAT 
1S CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
9 
times a year. This has reduced significantly in the past few years. 
The main issue on Thursday was helping the couple handle the 
husband’s sudden dip in mood without hospitalization. The next 
clients were a couple who are working on addressing trauma-related 
issues. The woman is a courageous survivor of long-term child 
sexual abuse, who is using couples therapy to find ways to expand 
her constricted lifestyle and deal with trauma-related flashbacks. The 
last family | saw on Thursday night included a 9-year-old girl who has 
difficulty controlling her temper. This leads to major problems at 
home and in school. This little girl was a neglected and abused 
Vietnamese orphan when her parents adopted her 7 years ago. She 
has always had significant behaviour problems, and | have been 
working long-term with this family to help them address these. 
The family therapy curriculum for the UCD clinical psychology pro- 
gramme is contained in Family Therapy: Concepts, Process and Prac- 
tice (Carr, 2006b). 
Clinical psychology training 
The central objective of clinical psychology programmes is to train can- 
didates to a level that will enable them to work safely, competently and 
ethically as basic grade clinical psychologists and to provide a founda- 
tion for later specialization through CPD. Clinical psychology graduates 
are able to provide clinical services to a wide range of client groups, use 
their academic knowledge to solve clinical problems, provide consul- 
tancy and teaching services to colleagues and clients and use their 
research skills to address relevant questions in a scientific way. 
Currently in the UK and Ireland professional clinical psychology train- 
ing programmes are 3 year doctorates and are variously called D Clin 
Psych, Clin Psy D, and D Psych Sc (Clin Psych). In 2011 there were 30 
such programmes in Britain (including England, Scotland and Wales) 
and five in Ireland (including Northern Ireland). The UK programmes 
are listed on the website for Clearing House for Postgraduate Courses 
in Clinical Psychology. The Irish programmes are in UCD, Trinity 
College Dublin (TCD), the National University of Ireland Galway (NUIG), 
the University of Limerick (UL) and Queen’s University Belfast (QUB). 
Web addresses for the clearing house and the Irish universities are 
included at the end of the chapter. All of these programmes are accred- 
ited by professional associations: the British Psychological Society 
(BPsS) or the Psychological Society of Ireland (PsSI). Since the end of 
the first decade of the 21st century they have been approved by statu- 
tory registration bodies. These are the Health Professions Council 
(HPC) in the UK and the Health and Social Care Professional Council 
(HSCPC) in Ireland. Effectively the BPsS and PsSI regulate the content 
of courses, and the HPC and HSCPC approve such courses and pro- 
vide statutory registration for their graduates. 
The roles for which clinical psychologists are trained are conceptual- 
ized by different programmes in different ways. The most common 

10 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
orientations are the scientist-practitioner and the practitioner-scholar 
(McFall, 2006). With the scientist-practitioner model, there is a strong 
emphasis on training psychologists in research skills so that they can 
both generate scientific knowledge and apply scientific knowledge in 
clinical practice. With the practitioner-scholar model, the emphasis 
is predominantly on clinical practice, and on training psychologists 
to inform their clinical work with scholarly Knowledge of the relevant 
scientific literature. Most UK and Irish courses tend more towards the 
scientist-practitioner than the practitioner-scholar model. 
The role of the clinical psychologist has also been conceptualized as 
that of a reflective practitioner (Scaife, 2010); that is, as a professional 
who enhances their practice by sensitively reflecting on the way in 
which personal psychological strengths and vulnerabilities impinge on 
skilled 
clinical 
practice. 
Reflective 
practice 
is enhanced 
through 
engaging in experiential personal and professional processes such as 
personal psychotherapy and process-oriented supervision. Reflective 
practice is increasingly receiving greater emphasis on UK and Irish 
clinical psychology training programmes (Hughes & Youngson, 2009). 
For example, at UCD it is mandatory for postgraduates to engage in 
personal psychotherapy during their training. 
In the UK and Ireland each clinical psychology programme is run by 
a partnership involving a university and a public health service unit. The 
university provides the academic and research foundation for the 
course; the health service unit provides the clinical practice foundation 
for the course and placements of supervised clinical practice. These 
doctoral programmes in clinical psychology have three main elements: 
(1) academic course work, (2) placements of supervised clinical prac- 
tice, and (3) research requirements. A summary of these components is 
given in Table 1.3. 
Academic coursework 
Academic coursework covers theory, research and practice-related 
material essential for developing competencies required to practise as a 
TABLE 1.3 
Components of professional clinical psychology training programmes 
Research 
Doctoral thesis on major research project 
Small-scale service-based research project 
Coursework or research design, methods and statistics 
Academic course 
Children and adolescents 
work 
Adults and older adults 
Intellectual disability 
Assessment and intervention competencies 
Clinical 
Range of populations (child, adult, older adult, disability, 
placements 
specialties) 
Range of competencies (assessment, intervention, training) 
Quality control (placement contract and monitoring) 
Regular supervision (observe and be observed) 

1 * WHAT 
IS CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
Clinical psychologist. These competencies include the ability to assess 
and formulate psychological problems using relevant psychological meth- 
ods and theories; treat psychological problems using evidence-based 
interventions and evaluate the effectiveness of treatment; and work within 
psychology services, multidisciplinary teams, and wider health service 
and multiagency contexts using appropriate communication and organ- 
izational skills. Within academic courses on clinical psychology pro- 
grammes, these issues are covered with reference to psychological 
disorders and problems typical in the fields of child and adolescent men- 
tal health, adult and older adult mental health, intellectual and physical 
disability, and neuropsychological problems. A range of teaching formats 
are used including lectures, video-modelling, role-playing, video feed- 
back, discussion groups, and problem-based learning. 
Placements of supervised clinical practice 
On doctoral programmes in clinical psychology, most of the time is 
spent on placements of supervised clinical practice. For example, on 
the UCD clinical psychology training programme, each year there are 
two 4.5 month placements of supervised clinical practice. This is sig- 
nificantly longer that the two 6 week periods devoted to academic 
coursework. Placements occur in a range of services including primary 
care, secondary and tertiary services; adult mental health services; 
child and adolescent mental health services; intellectual disability ser- 
vices; services for older adults; neuropsychology services; paediatric 
services; and various specialist adult health services such as cardiology 
and oncology. In the UK and Ireland, clinical psychology training pro- 
grammes provide supervisors with ongoing training and CPD to ensure 
that they develop strong supervision skills (Fleming & Steen, 2004; 
Milne, 2009). 
Placement contracts 
At the outset of each clinical placement, contracts are formed between 
postgraduates and clinical supervisors specifying the overall placement 
goals. These goals refer to competencies to be developed, the kinds of 
assessment and treatment procedures to be learned, the types of cases 
to be seen and other types of professional skills to be developed. These 
placement contracts are based on the minimum experience requirements 
listed in the course logbook, the learning opportunities available on the 
placement, the unique skills of clinical supervisors, and the unique 
clinical interests of postgraduates. Over the course of placements, 
postgraduates and supervisors work together to ensure that these goals 
are reached. 
Supervision and quality control 
On most clinical psychology programmes the supervision and quality 
control procedures described below are used to facilitate the develop- 
ment of clinical competence. Postgraduates on clinical placements 
receive a minimum of an hour's supervision per week, and the ratio of 
11 

12 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
postgraduates to supervisors is never greater than 2:1. ‘Observe and 
be observed’ is a central training process on clinical psychology place- 
ments. That is, postgraduates develop clinical competencies by observ- 
ing their supervisors’ 
clinical practices, and also by having their 
supervisors observe their clinical practice and give feedback on this. 
Video 
or audio recording of clinical sessions may be used to facilitate 
this ‘observe and be observed’ training process. In an Irish study, 
Hughes and Byrne (2011) identified the ‘observe and be observed’ 
aspect of supervision as that most valued by clinical psychology post- 
graduates. Progress on clinical placements is monitored through place- 
ment visits made by members of the course team. These visits are 
made towards the middle and end of clinical placements. Mid-placement 
visits offer an opportunity to monitor progress and resolve any teething 
difficulties that have arisen. End-of-placement visits provide a context 
for evaluating whether postgraduates pass or fail placements and for 
identifying areas for competency development in future placements. 
Research requirements 
On UK and Irish programmes, clinical psychologists are trained to be 
competent in research as well as clinical practice. All clinical psychology 
programmes provide training in research design, methods and statistics, 
and require postgraduates 
to complete small-scale service-based 
research and a major doctoral research thesis. On the UCD clinical psy- 
chology programme, postgraduates have regular research seminars 
over the 3 years of the programme and complete small quantitative and 
qualitative service-based research projects, in addition to a major doc- 
toral research project. A day a week over the 3 years of the programme 
is set aside for research, as well as 2 weeks’ study leave per year. 
Assessment 
A range of procedures is used for assessment on doctoral programmes 
in clinical psychology. Academic coursework may be assessed by 
exams or continuing assessment assignments such as essays or 
Clinical case studies. Placements are assessed by end-of-placement 
competency ratings. Research competence is usually assessed by the 
submission and oral defence of a doctoral thesis with an internal and 
external examiner at the end of the programme. 
Getting a place on a clinical 
psychology programme 
Admission information for UK clinical psychology training programmes 
is available on the website of the Clearing House for Postgraduate 
Courses in Clinical Psychology. For Irish programmes, details are given 
at the websites for UCD, TCD, NUIG, UL and QUB. Web addresses for 
these universities and the clearing house are given at the end of the 

1 * WHAT 
IS CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
chapter. The intake for most doctoral programmes in clinical psychology 
in the UK and Ireland varies from about eight to 42 candidates, with 
most courses having annual intakes. In 2010 there were just over 600 
places on UK courses and just under 50 on Irish courses. Between 
2005 and 2010 about 20-30% of applicants were offered places on 
doctoral programmes in clinical psychology in the UK and Ireland. Entry 
requirements for all of these courses are a 2.1 honours degree or higher 
diploma in psychology recognized by the BPsS or PsSI as conferring 
graduate basis for registration, and about a year's relevant clinical 
experience. 
Planning to get onto a clinical psychology programme 
Because entry to doctoral programmes in clinical psychology in the UK 
and Ireland is highly competitive, it is useful to develop a strategy to 
maximize your chances of getting a place. Guidance on applying for UK 
and Irish clinical psychology programmes is given in Knight (2002), 
O’Shea and Byrne (2010), Papworth (2004, 2007) and Roth (1998). 
Most course selection teams judge suitability on the basis of academic 
and clinical criteria. Your strategy should take account of this, and 
balance your efforts so that you do well academically but also make 
time to get relevant clinical experience. A summary of items to consider 
when building your profile for admission to clinical psychology training 
is given in Table 1.4. 
Studies of successful entrants to UK and Irish clinical psychology 
programmes have reached a number of important conclusions (Clare, 
1995; O’Shea & Byrne, 2011a; Phillips et al., 2004; Scior et al., 2007). 
With regard to the academic domain, candidates with better secondary 
school 
results, 
higher undergraduate grades, master’s and PhD 
degrees, more favourable academic references and greater research 
achievements and publications are more likely to be admitted to clinical 
psychology programmes. Those with first class undergraduate degrees 
and master’s degrees are admitted to clinical programmes at a younger 
age. In the clinical domain, candidates who have acquired basic clinical 
skills by working in a variety of assistant psychologist or research 
assistant posts, and have more favourable clinical references, are more 
likely to obtain a clinical psychology programme training place. 
TABLE 1.4 
Building your profile for admission to clinical psychology training 
Academic and 
Honours undergraduate degree in psychology 
research 
Postgraduate degree in area relevant to clinical psychology 
competence 
Short courses relevant to clinical psychology 
Other qualifications relevant to clinical psychology 
Experience doing clinical research 
Theses, publications and presentations 
Clinical © 
Relevant clinical experience 
competence 
~ 
Basic clinical skills 
13 

14 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Academic qualifications 
Academic suitability for doctoral programmes in clinical psychology is 
assessed by taking account of performance in high school and on 
undergraduate 
degree programmes; 
completion 
of postgraduate 
degrees in psychology, short courses relevant to clinical psychology, 
and other non-psychological qualifications; and research achievements 
and publications. 
Undergraduate degree 
While a 2.1 honours degree is the minimum academic requirement for 
entry to a clinical psychology programme, many successful candidates 
exceed this minimum standard. Some have first class honours under- 
graduate degrees. Many have master’s degrees. Some have PhDs. In 
planning your strategy, provided it does not tax your personal resources 
too much and leave little time and energy for relevant clinical experi- 
ence, it’s a reasonable strategy to aim for a first class honours under- 
graduate degree. However, if things do not go well for you in your 
undergraduate programme and you get a 2.2, this does not prevent you 
from entering the profession. Some clinical psychology programmes will 
accept applications from candidates with a 2.2 honours degree or higher 
diploma in psychology provided they also have a master’s or PhD 
degree. 
Master's programmes 
There are a number of types of master’s degree in psychology that 
enhance chances of gaining a place on a clinical psychology pro- 
gramme. These include master’s by research on a Clinical topic, mas- 
ter’s in applied psychology (with a clinical emphasis), master’s in 
neuropsychology or neuroscience, master’s in developmental psychol- 
ogy, master’s in health psychology, master’s in counselling psychology, 
master’s in psychotherapy or counselling and master’s in applied 
behaviour analysis. All master’s programmes that include advanced 
research and statistics coursework and a minor or major thesis con- 
ducted on a clinical topic enhance your profile because they give you 
advanced research skills and may give you clinical interviewing skills if 
you collect interview data from people with psychological problems for 
your thesis. 
Master’s programmes in applied psychology (that include course- 
work on psychopathology and related topics), neuropsychology or 
neuroscience, health psychology, disability, and developmental psy- 
chology are a useful preparation for clinical psychology because they 
provide a grounding in academic areas relevant to the practice of clini- 
cal psychology. Insofar as neuropsychology programmes include skills 
training in administering and interpreting psychological tests, they are 
an academic route to acquiring relevant clinical experience. Master’s 
programmes 
in psychotherapy, counselling and applied behaviour 
analysis may also help you acquire reievant clinical experience and basic 
Clinical skills if they include placements of supervised clinical practice. 

1 * WHAT 
IS CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
From this, it is clear that there is no single best master’s programme 
to opt for as a stepping stone to obtaining a place on a clinical psychology 
programme. You will maximize your chances of gaining a place if you 
take account of your overall profile (including academic and clinical 
suitability) when choosing a master’s programme. For example, if you 
have acquired a lot of relevant clinical experience, but limited research 
experience, then it might improve your profile to opt for a master’s 
programme with a strong academic and research orientation rather 
than a Clinical practice orientation. 
PhDs 
PhDs in psychology can enhance chances of admission to a clinical 
psychology programme, especially if the research is conducted on a 
clinical topic, involves interviewing or assessing people with psycho- 
logical problems, and if the work is conducted within a health service 
setting. All of these factors make the process of conducting a PhD a 
relevant clinical experience. At UCD my colleagues and | have super- 
vised PhD candidates who did their theses in psycho-oncology, the psy- 
chology of sex-offenders, neuropsychology and the psychology of 
eating disorders. All obtained places on clinical psychology programmes 
on the grounds that their PhD research provided them with both rele- 
vant clinical experience and research skills. If you want to undertake a 
PhD as a stepping stone to getting onto a clinical psychology training 
programme, make sure at the outset that your research project will 
involve significant contact with people with psychological problems, and 
be conducted within a public health service context, or a context that 
has much in common with the public health service. PhDs conducted in 
university laboratories with non-clinical participants or animals are not a 
useful preparation for clinical psychology training. 
Short courses 
Diploma and certificate courses, CPD short courses and workshops 
and attendance at psychology conferences that facilitate the develop- 
ment of clinical skills for understanding, assessing and treating psycho- 
logical problems are taken into account by many selection panels in 
judging academic suitability for clinical psychology programmes. If you 
want to enhance your chances of getting a place on a clinical psychol- 
ogy programme, consider taking a diploma or certificate course in basic 
assessment or counselling skills and regularly attend CPD short courses 
and conferences to develop your clinical skills. Such courses are adver- 
tised in the BPsS magazine, The Psychologist, and the PsSI magazine, 
The Irish Psychologist. 
Non-psychology qualifications 
For mature students who have come to psychology (possibly through 
the higher diploma in psychology route) after a career in nursing, 
counselling, social work, occupational therapy, speech and language 
therapy or teaching, some selection panels will take account of your 
prior qualifications in assessing your suitability for clinical psychology 
15 

16 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
training. In filling out your application form, be sure to include these prior 
relevant qualifications and to state the academic and clinical skills you 
acquired from them relevant to engaging in clinical psychology training. 
Research competence 
One aspect of academic suitability for a clinical psychology programme 
is research competence. In rating research competence, selection 
panels take account of research and statistics skills; participation in 
clinical research projects; publication of research presentations, reports 
and articles; and relevant qualifications such as diplomas or certificates 
in specific research methods, statistics or data analysis. Research 
competence may be assessed by taking account of the highest research 
thesis completed (e.g. undergraduate thesis, master’s thesis or PhD), 
involvement in other research projects (e.g. conducting clinical audits or 
working as a research assistant on a big project), and the number of 
conference presentations, research reports and academic publications. 
To enhance your chances of being rated well for research competence, 
present the results of your undergraduate and postgraduate theses, 
and any other research projects in which you have been involved at 
academic conferences, and publish them as reports or academic journal 
articles. List these presentations and publications in your application 
form chronologically in the style used in BPsS, PsSI or American 
Psychological Association (APA) journals. 
Relevant clinical experience 
Relevant experience includes part-time or full-time, voluntary or paid 
clinical or research work, involving interaction with patients, clients or 
service users in health service settings. The sorts of work experience 
that count as relevant experience are discussed in Knight (2002) and 
Williams (2001). Working as an assistant psychologist in a clinical psy- 
chology service, a psychology research assistant on a major clinical 
project, or conducting a master’s or PhD postgraduate research degree 
that involves extensive interaction with people with psychological prob- 
lems are all types of relevant experience frequently reported by suc- 
cessful applicants to clinical psychology programmes (O’Shea & Byrne, 
2011a, 2011b; Phillips et al., 2004; Scior et al., 2007). Work as a thera- 
pist within the IAPT (Improving Access to Psychological Therapies) pro- 
gramme in the UK, a clinical associate in applied psychology (or 
associate psychologist) in the UK, or a psychometrist in the US is a very 
good way to acquire relevant clinical experience. The weblink for IAPT 
is given at the end of the chapter. 
Other ways to acquire relevant clinical experience are to work as a 
care worker (with children, older adults or people with disabilities), a 
nursing assistant, a psychiatric day centre assistant, a support worker 
for people with mental health problems or disabilities, an applied behav- 
ioural analysis (ABA) tutor with children with autism spectrum disorders, 
a special educational needs assistant for children with psychological 
problems, a volunteer with a development agency that offers health or 

1 * WHAT 
IS CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
educational services in underdeveloped countries, a children’s summer 
camp counsellor, or a mental health helpline worker. Work that is super- 
vised by a clinical psychologist and is conducted within a psychology 
service or within a public health service multidisciplinary team is often 
judged by selection panels to prepare people better for clinical psychol- 
ogy training than work conducted in other settings. 
Some UK programmes require applicants to have gained their 
relevant experience within the NHS. Check if this is a requirement for 
your preferred courses, and plan your relevant experience to take 
account of this requirement. If relevant experience is not supervised by 
a clinical psychologist, then it will enhance your chances of getting a 
place on a clinical programme if you arrange regular supervision from 
a clinical psychologist who will give you a reference when you apply for 
a place on a clinical psychology programme and comment on the clinical 
skills you have acquired during your relevant experience. 
Relevant experience is an entry requirement for clinical psychology 
training programmes because it familiarizes candidates with the sorts of 
setting in which clinical psychologists work, their roles, the types of 
people with whom they work and also because it equips candidates with 
basic clinical skills. These include skills for interacting with clients with 
psychological problems, and skills for working in a psychology service 
or on a multidisciplinary team in a health service organization. During 
relevant clinical experience you may gain interviewing skills; skills for 
administering and interpreting psychological tests; skills for engaging 
clients in therapy; specific therapeutic procedures for treating clients 
with particular psychological problems such as anxiety, depression, 
autism, or ADHD; teamwork skills; report writing skills and so forth. 
Clinical suitability is assessed by clinical psychology course selection 
panels with reference to the way in which candidates have made use of 
the opportunities available to them to engage in relevant clinical 
experiences. This means that candidates with more experience are not 
always rated as more suitable. The key issue is how candidates have 
used the opportunities available to them. For example, young candidates 
who have had less time to acquire relevant experience than older 
candidates, but who have used the time available to them during their 
undergraduate and postgraduate years to maximize their clinical skills, 
may be rated as more suitable than older candidates who have used 
the time available to them to acquire relevant clinical experience less 
efficiently. 
From the foregoing, it is clear that it is never too early to start acquiring 
relevant experience. If you have not already done so, now is a good 
time to start. When filling out an application form for clinical psychology 
training it is vital to list both the relevant clinical experience jobs you 
have done and the skills you have acquired while doing those jobs. 
Finding relevant clinical experience is challenging. Some jobs are 
advertised 
in the Psychologist and Irish Psychologist. Others are 
advertised in national newspapers such as the Guardian or the /rish 
Times. The Psyclick website (listed at the end of the chapter) contains 
links to many websites where ‘relevant experience jobs’ may be 
17 

18 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
advertised. A good source of information on relevant experience for 
Irish candidates is the assistant psychologist Ireland Google group 
(listed at the end of the chapter). Many people get relevant clinical 
experience by sending their CVs to clinical psychologists or managers 
of relevant agencies. If you do this, make it clear that you wish to acquire 
relevant experience to increase your suitability for clinical psychology 
training and are available for voluntary or paid work, and are prepared 
to be flexible and fit in with the overall needs of the service. The key 
thing is to convey that you are prepared to make a contribution to the 
service in return for the opportunity to acquire relevant experience. 
The process of acquiring psychology assistant or research assistant 
posts, or other good relevant experience positions, is highly competitive. 
Your chances of being successful in job competitions for relevant 
experience will be enhanced if you have a master’s degree, so it may 
speed up your acquisition of relevant experience if you obtain a master’s 
degree as soon as possible after your primary degree. 
There is a danger of viewing the process of obtaining a portfolio of 
academic, research and clinical requirements to get onto a Clinical 
psychology programme as having value only insofar as it makes you 
eligible for selection onto a clinical course. This may not be the most 
useful way to think about it. A postgraduate on the UCD clinical 
psychology programme who gave feedback on this chapter remarked, 
‘| wonder also if it is worth discouraging people who want to get onto 
clinical programmes from thinking of clinical experience like a means to 
an end, and encourage them to conceptualize it as part of the process 
of getting on training, yes, but also as a valuable journey!’ 
The application process 
To get a place on a clinical psychology programme it is essential to 
manage the application process well. This includes completing the 
application form and submitting it prior to application deadlines; arrang- 
ing references; attending interviews; engaging in assessment exer- 
cises; accepting negative feedback; and reapplying if you do not get a 
place first time round. 
Application forms 
Begin the application process well in advance of application deadlines. 
This will give you time to refine your application, obtain supporting 
documents and invite referees to write your references. The clearing 
house deadline, which is posted on the clearing house website, is 
usually at the end of November or in early December. For Irish courses, 
deadlines are posted on college websites, but they are usually in the 
winter months (December—February). Relevant web addresses are 
given at the end of this chapter. Download application forms and write 
answers to questions in the application form in a Word document. Read 
and edit your answers until you have produced your best draft. Ask a 
recent successful applicant to a clinical psychology course for feedback 

1 * WHAT 
IS CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
on this draft, and use their comments to refine your application. Then 
submit your final ‘polished version’ through the electronic application 
process or in hardcopy, as directed in the application guidelines. 
When completing application forms give concise accurate informa- 
tion about your secondary school exam results, university degree 
results, other relevant qualifications, publications and details of relevant 
clinical and research experience jobs. For master’s degrees give the 
type of master’s degree (by thesis only, applied psychology, health 
psychology, etc.) and your mark (e.g. 70%). This is important to include 
if the degree was awarded on a pass/fail basis, since some selection 
panels will take high marks on a master’s degree into account in judging 
suitability. If the master’s degree included a placement of supervised 
Clinical practice, note this on the form (e.g. MSc, Counselling Psychology, 
65%, containing a 100 hour placement of supervised clinical practice). 
When listing theses, reports, presentations and publications, use the 
format in BPsS, PsSI or APA academic journals. For relevant clinical or 
research experiences, give the name of the job, the employer, and the 
main duties, the dates of employment, the number of hours per week, 
and whether the job was voluntary or paid. Keep these descriptions 
concise. 
Most application forms include a section where there is an opportunity 
to indicate other relevant life experiences such as world travel or past 
career (for mature applicants); to reflect on the clinical and personal 
skills you have acquired from graduate degrees, relevant clinical and 
research experiences and other life experiences; and to make a 
personal statement about your own evaluation of your suitability for 
clinical psychology training. There are usually word limits for these 
sections, so it is useful to draft, edit and redraft these statements a few 
times until you get them right. One way to go about this is to list the skills 
you have developed, and for each skill state how your qualifications and 
experiences have helped you develop it. Another approach to state the 
skills that each of your main qualifications or experiences helped you 
develop. In writing a personal statement it is important to show why you 
consider that your skills and personal qualities make you ready to train 
as a Clinical psychologist in the public health services. To write a credible 
statement of this type, it is important to convey that you know about the 
roles clinical psychologists fulfil within the UK National Health Service 
(NHS) or the Irish Health Service Executive (HSE). 
Supporting documents 
When planning your application strategy, leave lots of time to obtain 
supporting documents that must accompany your application. If your 
primary degree is from a non-UK university and you apply to UK courses 
through the clearing house, you will be required to submit a letter from 
the BPS indicating that your degree confers graduate basis for 
membership. If you are applying to Irish universities you may be asked 
to submit university transcripts for your primary degree, so you will need 
to request these from your alma mater. 
19 

20 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Arranging references 
The clearing house and most clinical psychology courses require one 
academic reference and one reference from a clinical psychologist or 
clinical manager who supervised your relevant clinical experience. Invite 
referees who know you fairly well; are familiar with your work and so can 
accurately comment on your skills, personal qualities and suitability for 
clinical psychology training; and are willing to write a reference by the 
deadline date. As a courtesy, when inviting referees to write you a refer- 
ence, send them an up-to-date copy of your CV. Unless there are no 
other options, do not invite colleagues to be referees if they have close 
personal connections to you (e.g. family members or business partners). 
Short listing 
Clinical psychology courses establish selection panels to shortlist 
applicants for interview. These panels typically include a group of staff 
with a range of academic and clinical expertise. Panels read and rate 
large numbers of application forms during the short-listing process; 
make collective judgements about the suitability of candidates for 
clinical psychology training; and select the most suitable for interview. 
While applying for clinical psychology training is stressful for applicants, 
short listing is very demanding for selection panel members, and this is 
worth keeping in mind when writing your application. The easier you 
make it for selection panel members to read and rate your application, 
the better. Our experience at UCD last year gives an idea of how 
demanding short listing is. Each member of our panel read and rated 
over 160 applications. This took a number of days. They rated responses 
to all questions on application forms using objective criteria, and then 
summarized these into an overall score reflecting academic and clinical 
suitability. In an all-day pane! meeting, ratings of panel members were 
aggregated, rank ordered, and approximately 40 applicants were 
selected and invited to interviews. 
Some courses are experimenting with using writing assignments to 
assist with the short-listing process. For example, the UK Lancaster 
course has published a report on its use of written assignments in short 
listing and shown that these assignments predict academic performance 
on clinical psychology programmes (Hemmings & Simpson, 2008). 
Lancaster's written task was adapted from one designed by the 
University of Surrey, and applicants were invited to complete the task 
on a computer. The task involved reading five abstracts, synthesising 
them into a 250-word summary that answered a specific question, 
answering a number of short statistical and methodological questions 
about the studies described in the abstracts, and completing the 
assignment within an hour. Applicants’ answers were rated for writing 
skills, critical thinking skills and methodology skills. If you apply for 
courses with these types of short-listing tasks, it may be useful to speak 
to successful applicants about them and practise similar sorts of task 
before completing the actual short-listing task. 

1 * WHAT 
IS CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
21 
Interviews 
There is considerable variability in the types of interview and assessment 
exercise used on the 35+ clinical psychology programmes in the UK 
and Ireland (Hemmings & Simpson, 2008; O’Shea & Byrne, 2011b; 
Phillips et al., 2001; Roth & Leiper, 1995). Find out the format and 
duration of the interview and assessment exercises that will be used on 
the courses for which you are shortlisted from their websites, and also 
from 
previous 
successful 
applicants. 
All courses 
have selection 
interviews in which candidates are asked about material relevant to 
their academic and clinical suitability. In some courses there are 
separate academic and clinical interviews, while in others both areas 
are covered in one interview. 
In preparing for these interviews, it is useful to list the main points 
you want to make, and then illustrate each of these points with examples 
from your academic career and relevant clinical experience. The kinds 
of point that it is useful to make are that you know how to do research 
(and can illustrate this by describing one of your research projects), that 
you have basic clinical skills (and can illustrate these by describing 
some clinical work you have done), and that you can work on a team 
(and can illustrate this by describing some of your team work). It is also 
useful to be able to show that you know about the roles of clinical 
psychologists within the public health service and about recent relevant 
policy documents. You can find these on the NHS or HSE websites, 
which are listed at the end of the chapter. 
It may also be worth mentioning that you have interests and hobbies 
that allow you to maintain a degree of work—leisure balance in your life, 
and that if you are offered a place on a course you intend to continue 
these interests and hobbies to help you manage stress. 
Most candidates find it helpful to rehearse their interviews with 
previously successful applicants. When rehearsing for interviews, aim 
to make your points and illustrate them with relevant examples in a 
succinct way. It is also useful to prepare an opening statement that 
gives your interviewers an overview of your career to date, and a closing 
statement that summarizes the key points you made in your interview. 
In doing this preparation and rehearsal, do not assume that your 
interviewers will remember all of the detail in your application form. Most 
interviewers on selection panels are on ‘information overload’ having 
read 150+ applications during short listing and then interviewed a 
number of candidates. 
It becomes difficult for panel members to 
remember ‘who did what’. Your task is to make your points and illustrate 
them with examples from your experience in a clear, engaging and 
memorable way. 
Selection interviews are stressful. Stress reduces our capacity to 
focus on the concerns of others. It narrows our attention so that we tend 
to focus on our own well-being, our own survival in the face of threat, 
and our primary ‘emotional concerns’. In selection interviews common 
emotional concerns are ‘I hope I’m doing OK here’, ‘I really want a place 
on the programme’, ‘I'll be disappointed if | don’t get on’, ‘I hope I’m not 

22 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
making a mess of this’, and so forth. This stress-induced focus on the 
self is compounded by exposure to ‘pop-psychology’ advice to use self- 
focused stress management techniques during interviews. For example, 
some pop-psychologists advise that you periodically ask yourself ‘How 
am | doing?’, tell yourself mentally that you are doing OK, tell yourself to 
stay calm, take deep breaths, relax your muscles, etc. There are two 
problems with this. First, it is a waste of your cognitive capacity. In 
selection interviews you should be using all your cognitive capacity to 
listen to questions, give clear answers and make your points. It is a 
waste of cognitive capacity to engage in an inner dialogue. When people 
‘go blank’ in an interview it is usually because they have overloaded 
their cognitive capacity by trying simultaneously to engage in the 
interview and engage in an inner dialogue. Second, when candidates 
engage in inner dialogues during interviews and tell themselves to calm 
down etc., to interviewers they appear to be disengaged from the 
interview process. For these reasons, it is best not to use any of these 
strategies. 
The most efficient interview stress management strategy is to focus 
on addressing the interviewing panel’s agenda. In selection interviews 
there are two parallel agendas. Your ‘emotional agenda’ is that you 
want to get a place on a training programme because it’s what you’ve 
always wanted, because it’s what you deserve after all your hard work, 
and because you would be very disappointed if you didn’t get a place. 
The panel’s agenda is different. They are not overly concerned about 
what you always wanted, what you deserve or how disappointed you 
will be if you don’t get a place. They want to know if you have the 
qualifications, skills and potential to be a really good clinical psychology 
trainee, compared to other applicants, or whether you will be the sort of 
trainee who ‘doesn’t have what it takes to get the job done and go the 
distance’. 
If this is their agenda, then a very useful approach is to put your own 
agenda to one side, and prioritize the panel’s agenda during your 
interview preparation and during the interview itself. That is, in preparing 
all the points you want to make, and in making your points in the 
interview, frame what you say in terms of the panel’s agenda, not your 
own ‘emotional agenda’. This is very difficult to do when the possibility 
of failure is so high. Under stress we all tend to prioritize our own 
agendas rather than those of others. However, if you prepare with the 
panel's agenda in mind, then in the interview you will be better able to 
show the panel how your qualifications and relevant experiences have 
given you the skills and personal qualities necessary for training as a 
clinical psychologist. 
You should try to show the panel, through the way you talk about 
your past achievements, that in the future, if you get a place on the 
course you will be the sort of trainee who will work hard, be reliable, do 
good academic work, do rigorous research in a clinically sensitive way, 
work with clients in a respectful way that is informed by psychological 
science, and fit in with course staff and clinical teams. If you prepare for 
your interview with the panel's agenda in mind, then in the interview 

1 * WHAT 
IS CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
23 
itself you will be more likely to show the panel that you have the profile 
and potential to be a good clinical psychology trainee. 
When you attend a selection 
interview, 
listen carefully to the 
questions you are asked. Answer these specific questions, and then 
expand your answers to include relevant points that you have prepared 
prior to the interview. You will probably be asked about the clinical and 
research experiences and skills you have developed, and you will have 
prepared points you want to make in these areas, so building them into 
your answers will not be too challenging. You may also be asked 
hypothetical ‘problem solving’ or ‘competency testing’ questions during 
the interview, for which you are unlikely to have a prepared answer. In 
these questions the panel may ask you how you would manage a 
specific clinical or research problem. Listen to these questions very 
carefully. Reflect for a moment or two, and then give your answer in a 
step-by-step manner, so the panel can hear how you reason, make 
decisions and solve problems. Panels ask these sorts of question 
because they are interested in how you think and make judgements, not 
because they want to see if you can come up with the right answer. 
Towards the end of the interview, you may be asked if there is 
anything you would like to add or ask. The most useful thing to do at this 
point is to mentally go down your checklist of prepared points you 
wanted to make in the interview, make any points you have not already 
made, and briefly summarize how you think your qualifications and 
relevant experiences have given you the basic academic, research and 
clinical skills required to undertake professional training in clinical 
psychology. 
Some courses include various individual and group assessment 
exercises and psychological tests (Hemmings & Simpson, 2008; 
O’Shea & Byrne, 2011b; Phillips et al., 2001; Roth & Leiper, 1995). For 
example, to assess capacity for teamwork, some course selection 
panels invite groups of applicants to work as teams and solve specific 
problems. To assess basic clinical 
skills, some courses observe 
candidates conducting role-play interviews. To assess academic writing 
skills, some panels ask applicants to read an article and write an 
abstract, or to write an essay. To assess critical thinking skills, some 
courses ask applicants to read academic material and then answer a 
series of questions. To assess clinical judgement, some courses invite 
candidates to read case vignettes and answer questions about them. 
For the assessment of oral presentation skills, candidates may be 
invited to make a preliminary presentation of their career to date and 
indicate how this has prepared them for clinical psychology training. 
Personality and aptitude tests are used by some courses, usually to 
identify candidates with positive traits and rule out candidates with traits 
that would make them unsuitable for clinical psychology training. It’s 
useful to get formal information on selection procedures from the 
courses for which you are applying and also to talk to previously 
successful applicants about their experiences of engaging in these 
procedures so that you will have a clear idea about what to expect. 
Practising writing abstracts, essays, giving presentations, interviewing 

24 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
and answering questions on academic material or case vignettes may 
improve your performance during the assessment tasks mentioned 
above. 
Reapplying 
Only 20-30% of candidates get places on clinical psychology courses, 
and a proportion of these are people who have been unsuccessful in 
previous years. O’Shea and Byrne (2011) in an Irish study of the 10 
year period 2000-2009 found that the average successful applicant had 
previously made about three unsuccessful applications, and the range 
was 0-22! If you are not offered a place in a course, this does not 
necessarily mean that you will be judged to be unsuitable if you reapply. 
Rather, failure to be selected one year means that you were not as 
suitable as the candidates selected in that particular year. Enhance 
your portfolio of qualifications and relevant 
clinical and research 
experiences over the next year, and reapply. As your portfolio expands 
it becomes more likely that your application will be ranked highly 
enough, in comparison with other applicants, to be selected. 
Professional society membership 
If your career plan is to become a clinical psychologist and practise in 
the UK or Ireland, then join the BPsS and/or the PsSI sooner rather than 
later. Website addresses are given at the end of the chapter. The 
appointments sections of their monthly publications (the Psychologist 
and the Irish Psychologist) contain advertisements for psychology 
assistant and research assistant posts that may count as relevant clini- 
cal experience in your application for clinical psychology programmes. 
These publications will also contain articles on topics relevant to clinical 
psychology and help you develop an understanding of current profes- 
sional issues. Some selection panels for clinical psychology training 
programmes rate candidates favourably if they have BPsS or PsSl 
membership, so you should mention your membership status on clinical 
psychology programme application forms. 
Both the BPsS and the PsSI have Divisions of Clinical Psychology. It 
is useful to become an affiliate member of the clinical division of the 
BPsS because it publishes a monthly journal — Clinical Psychology 
Forum — that contains articles and information on the profession of 
clinical psychology and current issues of concern to the profession 
within the UK. 
Training abroad 
Apart from the UK and Ireland, there are well-developed doctoral clinical 
psychology training programmes in other English speaking countries 
including the US, Canada, South Africa and Australia. These may be of 
interest to you if decide to train abroad. If you return to the UK or Ireland 
to work as a psychologist you will be required to submit your clinical 

1 
* WHAT 
1S CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
25 
psychology qualification to the BPsS or PsSI for evaluation. If itis judged 
to be similar to a UK or Irish qualification you will receive a statement of 
equivalence. In some instances you may be required to complete an 
extra placement or some extra coursework or research to bring your 
qualification into line with UK and Irish standards. For example, when | 
moved to the UK from Canada (where | did a PhD in clinical psychology), 
to bring my qualification into line with its standards the BPsS required 
me to complete an intellectual disability placement in the NHS. 
In 2010 in the US there were 232 clinical psychology training pro- 
grammes accredited by the APA. Norcross et al. (2010) surveyed these 
programmes and what follows is based on this survey. In the US there 
are two main types of clinical psychology doctoral training programmes: 
the scientist-practitioner PhD, which places a strong emphasis on 
research, and the practitioner-scholar PsyD, which places greater 
emphasis on clinical practice. Both types of programme are of about 
4 years’ duration and include academic coursework and clinical practi- 
cums. However, on PhD programmes candidates are required to con- 
duct a major research project and present it as a doctoral thesis, 
whereas on PsyD programmes postgraduates conduct a less extensive 
research project or a systematic literature review. Candidates must 
complete a one-year clinical internship and both national and state reg- 
istration exams to become a registered practitioner in the US after grad- 
uating from a doctoral programme in clinical psychology. Most US 
clinical psychology training programmes focus on a much narrower 
range of problems and populations than UK or Irish training pro- 
grammes. The broadest programmes focus on both child and adult 
mental health, but rarely on intellectual disability and older adulthood in 
the way that UK and Irish programmes do. Plante’s (2009) Contemporary 
Clinical Psychology is a good undergraduate introduction to clinical psy- 
chology from a US perspective. 
In Norcross et al.’s study, the mean undergraduate psychology 
degree grade point average for admission to US programmes was 3.6 
and only 21% of entrants had master’s degrees. Along with undergrad- 
uate psychology degree grades, the Graduate Record Examination 
(GRE) results are used to select people onto US clinical psychology 
programmes. There is a general GRE aptitude test and a specific GRE 
test in psychology. GREs can be taken anywhere in the world. The web 
address for the GRE is given at the end of the chapter and it contains 
information on the tests and test centres. Most people practise for the 
GRE general and psychology tests by taking preparation courses and 
using practice test books. Some of the most widely used preparation 
and practice test books are produced by Kaplan (2010a, 2010b), Barron 
(2009a, 2009b) and Princeton Review (2010a, 2010b). These are re- 
issued every year, so the editions | have cited may be out of date when 
you read this. Web addresses for these three GRE preparation book 
publishers are given at the end of the chapter. 
In Norcross et al.’s study, 17% of applicants to US doctoral pro- 
grammes obtained places, and 57% of these were given full financial 
support by the courses that accepted them. They had their fees paid and 

26 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
were given a fellowship or teaching/research assistantship. Norcross et 
al. found that admission to university-based PhD clinical psychology pro- 
grammes was far more competitive than admission to PsyD clinical psy- 
chology programmes based in non-university professional schools. Also, 
more university-based PhD programmes provided financial support than 
non-university PsyD programmes. Detailed guidance on gaining admis- 
sion to doctoral clinical psychology programmes in the US is given in 
Insider's Guide to Graduate Programs in.Clinical and Counseling 
Psychology (Sayette et al., 2010) and Getting In: A Step-by-Step Plan 
for Gaining Admission to Graduate School in Psychology (American 
Psychological Association, 2007). Canada’s approach to training clinical 
psychologists is similar to that of the US, although its courses are accred- 
ited by the Canadian Psychological Association. Hunsley and Lee’s 
(2009) Introduction to Clinical Psychology is a useful undergraduate 
overview of clinical psychology from a Canadian perspective. 
In an Australian national survey Pachana et al. (2006) identified 34 
universities or colleges that provided clinical psychology training. There 
were 30 master’s programmes, 24 professional doctoral programmes 
similar to the US PsyD practitioner-scholar programmes and 16 PhD 
programmes similar to the US scientist-practitioner programmes. The 
admission requirement for these programmes was a 2.1 honours 
degree in psychology. One of the main differences between Australia 
and other jurisdictions is the relative lack of funding to support post- 
graduates during training. Page and Stritzke’s (2006) Clinical Psychology 
for Trainees gives a good account of clinical psychology practice from 
an Australian perspective. In Australia, New Zealand and much of 
Europe, clinical psychologists can practise with master’s or diploma 
level qualifications rather than a doctorate, so their doctoral programmes 
are not required to meet doctoral training standards set by accrediting 
bodies. Having said that, there are many exceptional doctoral clinical 
psychology training programmes in these jurisdictions. 
Choosing courses 
When deciding which courses to apply to, or which offers to accept if 
you are lucky enough to be offered places on more than one course, it’s 
useful to base your decisions on your own clinical, academic and 
research criteria. 
Select courses that provide training with a research or clinical empha- 
sis that suits you. Some courses are strongly clinically oriented. Others 
are strongly research-oriented. Still others take a balanced approach, 
with equal emphasis on clinical and research competence. 
Choose a course that trains postgraduates in a clinical approach that 
fits with your preferences. Some courses train postgraduates mainly in 
cognitive behaviour therapy. Others adopt psychodynamic, systemic or 
humanistic approaches (which are described in Chapter 9), while others 
encourage the use of multiple models. For example, at UCD we train 
postgraduates to adopt a systemic approach when working with 
children, adolescents and people with intellectual disabilities. In the field 

1 
* WHAT 
IS CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
27 
of adult mental health we teach basic cognitive behaviour therapy skills 
and basic psychodynamic therapy skills. 
Choose courses where staff have research programmes that are of 
interest to you, so that you can conduct your doctoral thesis under their 
supervision. In applying for courses with a strong research orientation, 
particularly in the US, it is useful to correspond with potential research 
supervisors before you apply, indicating your interest in their work and 
your wish to work under their supervision. 
If, while planning and 
conducting your undergraduate research thesis, you correspond with 
an academic who is an expert on your topic to ask them for recent 
articles they have written or materials they have developed, they may 
look favourably on your application if you apply to their department for 
postgraduate clinical psychology training. 
Clinical psychology and related professions 
Clinical psychology can be distinguished from other types of applied 
psychology, notably counselling psychology, educational psychology, 
health psychology and forensic psychology. There is a significant over- 
lap between the clinical practices and scientific foundations of these 
other applied psychology specialties. Practitioners in all of these spe- 
cialties assess and treat clients; engage in research and evaluation; 
and conduct consultancy, supervision, administration and manage- 
ment. To train in any of these specialties, an honours undergraduate 
degree in psychology is a prerequisite. What distinguishes these spe- 
cialties is (1) the extent to which they are embedded within national 
public service organizations, (2) the establishment of professional doc- 
toral level training as the norm, (3) the practices they emphasize, (4) the 
populations they work with, and (5) the organizational contexts within 
which they are grounded. 
Clinical psychology differs from other applied psychology specialties 
insofar as it is strongly embedded within the public health service in 
both the UK and Ireland. There are well-established partnerships 
between universities and public health services, supported by funding 
systems. Just as ‘registrar’ is an established grade within medicine, 
‘trainee clinical psychologist’ is an established paid professional career 
grade within clinical psychology. In contrast, national funding systems 
for other applied psychology specialties have not been developed. 
In both Ireland and the UK, the 3 year professional doctorate has 
been established as the required professional qualification in clinical 
psychology for far longer than in other applied psychology specialties. 
In other specialties, some universities still offer terminal master’s level 
programmes and some professionals practise with master’s level quali- 
fications. 
Clinical psychologists work with a very wide range of populations 
with diverse problems (described earlier in the chapter) and in the UK 
and Ireland are employed predominantly within the public health 
services. Other types of applied psychologist work with a narrower 
range of populations, and some work outside the public health service. 

28 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
What follows is a thumbnail sketch of the other applied psychology 
specialties. 
Educational psychology addresses learning problems, and social 
and emotional problems encountered by young people in educational 
settings. There is a strong emphasis within the profession on assess- 
ment of children’s problems, recommending the provision of additional 
resources and developing programmes that teachers and parents can 
implement to deal with these difficulties. In. the UK educational psy- 
chologists are employed by local education authorities, and in Ireland 
they are employed by the National Educational Psychology Service 
(NEPS). Educational psychologists work in schools, colleges, nurseries 
and special units. In North America educational psychology is referred 
to as school psychology. . 
Counselling psychology clseas a strong emphasis on psychother- 
apeutic processes in effecting change in people facing a range of nor- 
mal life challenges as well as psychological disorders. The profession 
places a premium on the use of process-oriented supervision and self- 
reflective practices in training. Some counselling psychologists are 
employed in public health services. Others work in private companies 
and private practice. 
Health psychology focuses on the application of psychology to help 
people change their lifestyles and prevent physical health problems. It 
is also concerned with treating psychological adjustment difficulties 
associated with health problems, medical conditions, chronic pain and 
disabilities. Health psychologists work in hospitals, universities and 
health research settings. In North America, health psychology is some- 
times referred to as behavioural medicine, and health psychology 
applied to children is referred to as paediatric psychology. 
Forensic psychology is concerned with applying psychology to 
criminal investigation, understanding psychological risk and protective 
factors associated with criminal behaviour, and the assessment and 
treatment of offending behaviour from a psychological perspective. In 
the UK forensic psychologists are mainly employed within the prison 
service. In Ireland a process for registering forensic psychologists has 
not been established, and the majority of psychologists working within 
Irish prisons are clinical or counselling psychologists. 
Clinical psychologists may also be distinguished from the grades 
‘clinical associate in applied psychology’ (or ‘associate psychologist’) in 
the UK and ‘psychometrist’ in the US and Canada. These grades are 
below the level of a qualified clinical psychologist and above that of 
psychology assistant. Duties of practitioners in these grades are similar 
though more circumscribed than those of a qualified clinical psychologist. 
Typically a master’s degree in applied psychology is required for posts 
at these grades. Employment in these grades counts as relevant 
experience when making an application for a clinical psychology degree. 
Clinical psychology may also be distinguished from other mental 
health professions including psychiatry, psychotherapy and counselling. 
Psychiatry is a medical specialty concerned with the assessment 
and treatment of psychological disorders using a range of methods 

1 * WHAT 
IS CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
29 
including physical or pharmacological treatments on one hand and 
psychological treatments on the other. To practise as a consultant 
psychiatrist, 
a medical degree and specialist postgraduate training in 
psychiatry are required. Psychiatry and psychiatry training are strongly 
embedded within public health services around the world. 
Psychotherapy is a contractual process in which trained profession- 
als with expert knowledge of their discipline interact with clients to help 
them resolve psychological problems. There are many different schools 
of psychotherapy (e.g. psychoanalytic, cognitive-behavioural, humanis- 
tic and systemic). There are also many training routes for becoming a 
registered psychotherapist. Most involve acquiring a primary degree in 
a health profession (e.g. psychology, social work, nursing or medicine) 
and then completing a postgraduate professional psychotherapy train- 
ing programme. In the UK and Ireland the many diverse psychotherapy 
associations are united under the umbrellas of the UK Council for 
Psychotherapy and the Irish Council for Psychotherapy. Psychotherapy 
as an independent profession is not as well embedded within the public 
health service as clinical psychology, and there are far fewer jobs with 
the title ‘psychotherapist’. However, many clinical psychologists spend 
a significant portion of their time in public health service jobs engaging 
clients in psychotherapy. 
Counselling is similar to psychotherapy but training programmes 
usually focus on specific problems or client groups, for example drug 
and alcohol 
abuse, 
or career guidance. 
Psychotherapy 
training 
programmes cover a broader range of problems and client groups, but 
usually focus on a specific therapeutic approach, for example systemic, 
psychodynamic, humanistic, or cognitive behaviour therapy. In many 
instances, training for counselling is not as long or as extensive as that 
for psychotherapy. 
Controversies 
The history of clinical psychology in the UK, Ireland, the US, continental 
Europe, Australia and New Zealand is marked by controversy over the 
appropriate model for training clinical psychologists, the level to which 
they should be trained, and the roles they should adopt when qualified 
(Benjamin, 2005; Cheshire & Pilgrim, 2004; Hall & Llewelyn, 2006; Lunt, 
2008; Pachana et al., 2008; Sammons et al., 2003). There has been 
controversy over whether the research-oriented scientist-practitioner, 
the practice-oriented practitioner-scholar, or the experientially oriented 
reflective-practitioner should be the core model for training. Currently 
the weight of opinion in the UK, Ireland and the US leans towards the 
scientist-practitioner model as the dominant approach. There has been 
controversy over whether registered clinical psychologists should be 
trained to the diploma or master’s level, or to the doctorate level. 
Currently in the UK, Ireland and the US, doctoral level training has 
become the norm. However, in the UK and Ireland this is a relatively 
recent development, and in continental Europe and the antipodes 
master’s and diploma level training models are prevalent. 

30 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
There has been controversy over whether clinical psychologists 
should engage in assessment only, or assessment and treatment. 
Historically clinical psychologists’ roles mainly involved psychometric 
assessment. In the latter half of the last century this changed, and 
psychological therapy became a central part of psychologists’ roles. 
More recently, there has been controversy over whether clinical psy- 
chologists should have the right to prescribe psychotropic medication, 
with strong arguments on both sides. Currently in some US jurisdictions 
clinical psychologists have acquired prescribing rights, but this trend 
has not had a major impact in the UK or Ireland. 
There is agreement among clinical psychologists that service-users 
should contribute to clinical psychology training and service develop- 
ment, but divergent opinions about how best to facilitate their involve- 
ment. Clinical psychology has traditionally focused on psychological 
disorders and disability. The positive psychology movement has chal- 
lenged this and proposed that the focus of our work shift from deficits to 
strengths and resilience (Carr, 2011). 
Pros and cons of selecting clinical 
psychology as a career 
The down side 
On the down side, it can take 8—10 years to become a qualified clinical 
psychologist after graduating from secondary school. This time includes 
3-4 years completing an honours undergraduate programme; 1-3 
years obtaining relevant clinical experience (including a relevant mas- 
ters degree in some cases); and 3 years completing a professional 
doctorate in clinical psychology. Another major problem is the competi- 
tion for places on clinical psychology doctoral programmes. In the UK 
and Ireland during the period 2005-2010, only 20-30% of applicants 
secured places. So the chances of getting a place on a programme are 
approximately between 1 in 3 and 1 in 5. A third drawback to choosing 
clinical psychology as a career is that doctoral programmes are excep- 
tionally demanding. When you are training as a clinical psychologist, 
there is limited room for much else in your life. A final problem with 
clinical psychology as a career is that for qualified practitioners, issues 
to do with staffing, resources, waiting lists, administrative procedures, 
interprofessional rivalry and so forth can be stressful. Dealing with these 
organizational and administrative issues within the public health service 
over an extended time period in both the UK and Ireland can be very 
challenging, and can wear you down. 
Positive features 
There are many pluses to clinical psychology as a career. In the UK and 
Ireland, the public health service sponsors candidates with primary 
degrees in psychology on doctoral programmes to train as clinical 
psychologists, paying them a salary at the trainee clinical psychologist 

1 * WHAT 
IS CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
31 
grade. (There is a loose parallel here with medicine, where candidates 
with primary degrees in medicine are employed as non-consultant 
hospital doctors during their specialist training in psychiatry, paediatrics 
and other fields of medicine.) In the UK and Ireland there are many job 
opportunities for clinical psychologists, and good career development 
prospects. 
Clinical psychologists have the opportunity to make a real difference 
to a lot of people’s lives. Over a career of 35-40 years a clinical 
psychologist may directly help (at a minimum) 1000 clients, and may 
indirectly help a lot more. 
Clinical psychology is an exceptionally interesting job. The role of the 
Clinical psychologist is complex, involving direct and indirect clinical 
work, consultation, training and supervision, research, administration 
and management. Over the course of a career there are opportunities 
to work in many different services with different client groups, and to 
progress from junior to senior career grades. For example, in my own 
career | have worked in addiction services, child and adolescent mental 
health, paediatric psychology, child protection, disability services, adult 
mental health and specialist family therapy services. | have worked in 
the public health service in Canada, the UK and Ireland; in private 
practice; and in universities. Finally, it is worth mentioning that clinical 
psychologists are reasonably well paid, although | have met very few 
clinical psychologists who were ‘in it for the money’. 
Summary 
Clinical psychology is both a health care profession and a 
health-related scientific discipline. 
The clinical psychologist’s role has been conceptualized as 
that of a scientist-practitioner and a practitioner-scholar. 
Clinical psychologists’ jobs typically involve direct work with cli- 
ents, indirect work, administration or management, research, 
and continuing professional development. Clinical psycholo- 
gists provide services to a wide range of people with diverse 
difficulties in an array of different work settings. 
In the UK and Ireland professional clinical psychology train- 
ing programmes are 3 year doctorates run by partnerships 
involving universities and public health service units. These 
programmes include course work, clinical placements and 
research. In the UK and Ireland there are about 35 clinical psy- 
chology programmes. Between 2005 and 2010 about 20-30% 
of applicants got places on these courses. Minimum entry 
requirements for clinical psychology training in the UK and 
Ireland are a 2.1 honours degree in psychology and about 
a year’s relevant clinical experience. Because entry to pro- 
grammes is very competitive, successful applicants typically 
exceed these minimum requirements. 

32 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Academic suitability for doctoral programmes in clinical psy- 
chology is assessed by taking account of performance in high 
school and on undergraduate degree programmes; completing 
postgraduate degrees in psychology, short courses relevant to 
clinical psychology, and other non-psychological qualifications; 
and research achievements. Clinical suitability is assessed with 
reference to the way in which candidates have made use of the 
opportunities available to them to engage in relevant clinical 
experiences and to acquire basic clinical skills. Finding relevant 
clinical experience is challenging and requires creativity and 
persistence in opportunity searching and professional network- 
ing. Getting a place on a clinical psychology programme 
involves completing the application form and submitting it prior 
to application deadlines; arranging references; attending inter- 
views; completing assessment exercises; accepting negative 
feedback if unsuccessful and reapplying. If your career plan is 
to become a clinical psychologist and practise in the UK or 
Ireland, join the BPsS and/or the PsS! sooner rather than later, 
since their publications will keep you abreast of professional 
developments and relevant experience opportunities. Apart 
from the UK and Ireland, there are well-developed doctoral clin- 
ical psychology training programmes in other English speaking 
countries including the US, Canada and Australia. 
Clinical psychology may be distinguished from other types 
of applied psychology, notably counselling psychology, educa- 
tional psychology, health psychology, and forensic psychology. 
Clinical psychology may also be distinguished from other men- 
tal health professions including psychiatry, psychotherapy and 
counselling. There are pros and cons to choosing clinical psy- 
chology as a career. Training can take up to 10 years, pro- 
gramme entry is highly competitive, and working in the public 
health service can be stressful. However, for qualified psychol- 
ogists there are many job opportunities, good career develop- 
ment prospects and the job is intrinsically very satisfying. 
Questions 
What is clinical psychology? 
How are clinical psychologists trained? 
If you wished to train as a clinical psychologist, what steps would 
you like to take to increase your chances of getting a place on a 
professional training programme in clinical psychology? 
How does clinical psychology differ from other applied specialties, 
such as educational, counseling, health and forensic psychology, 
and from other professions such as psychiatry or psychotherapy? 
What are the advantages and disadvantages of choosing clinical 
psychology as a career? 

1 * WHAT 
1S CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY? 
33 
e 
What is the most important thing you have learned from studying 
this chapter? 
FURTHER READING 
Beinart, H., Kennedy, P. & Llewelyn, S. (2009). Clinical psychology in 
_ 
practice. London: British Psychological Society—Blackwell. 
Bennett, P. (2011). Abnormal and clinical psychology: An introductory 
textbook (third edition). Maidenhead: Open University Press. 
Davey, G. (2008). Clinical psychology. London: Hodder Education 
Knight, A. (2002). How to become a clinical psychologist: Getting a foot 
in the door. London: Routledge. 
Major clinical psychology journals 
Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 
British Journal of Clinical Psychology 
Clinical Psychology Review 
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 
WEBSITES 
Sites for relevant experience and general information 
Assistant Psychologists Ireland Google group: 
ap_ireland@googlegroups.com 
Psyclick website: 
www.psyclick.org.uk/ 
Sites for applying for clinical psychology courses 
Clearing House for Postgraduate Courses in Clinical Psychology: 
www.leeds.ac.uk/chpccp 
Hull University (which is not a member of the UK clearing house because 
the undergraduate psychology degree and postgraduate clinical degree 
programmes are integrated): 
wwwz.hull.ac.uk 
National University of Ireland Galway: 
www.nuigalway.ie 
Queen's University Belfast: 
www.qub.ac.uk 
Trinity College Dublin: 
www.tcd.ie 
University College Dublin: 
www.ucd.ie 
University of Limerick: 
www.ul.ie 

34 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Public health services 
e 
Health Service Executive (Ireland): 
www.hse.ie 
e 
Improving Access to Psychological Therapies: 
www. iapt.nhs.uk 
e 
National Health Service (UK): 
www.nhs.uk 
Psychological societies and professional associations 
e 
American Psychological Association: 
www.apa.org 
e 
American Psychological Association, Division 12, Society of Clinical 
Psychology: 
www.div12.org 
e 
Australian Clinical Psychology Association: 
www.acpa.org.au 
e 
Australian Psychological Society: 
www.psychology.org.au 
e 
British Psychological Society: 
www.bps.org.uk 
e 
British Psychological Society Division of Clinical Psychology: 
www.bps.org.uk/dcp 
e 
Canadian Psychological Association: 
www.cpa.ca 
e 
European Federation of Psychologists’ Associations (EFPA): 
www.efpa.eu 
e 
International Union of Psychological Science (IUPsyS): 
Wwww.iupsys.org 
e 
Irish Council for Psychotherapy: 
www.psychotherapy-ireland.com 
e 
New Zealand Psychological Society: 
www.psychology.org.nz 
e 
Psychological Society of Ireland: 
www.psihq.ie 
e 
UK Council for Psychotherapy: 
www.psychotherapy.org.uk 
Graduate Record Exam (GRE) 
e 
Barron’s GRE preparation: 
http://barronstestprep.com/gre 
e 
Graduate record exam: 
www.ets.org/gre 
e 
Kaplan GRE preparation: 
www.kaptest.com 
« 
Princeton Review GRE preparation: 
www.princetonreview.com/grad/gre-test-preparation.aspx 

Childhood behaviour 
disorders 
Learning objectives 
After studying this chapter you will be able to: 
e 
list some of the main psychological disorders that 
occur in childhood 
give an account of the main clinical features of 
ADHD, oppositional defiant disorder and conduct 
disorder 
summarize the epidemiology of disruptive behaviour 
disorders 
outline the main biological and psychological 
theories of disruptive behaviour disorders 
name the main evidence-based approaches to 
assessment and treatment of disruptive behaviour 
disorders 
give a considered view on some of the main 
controversies surrounding the clinical psychology of 
childhood disorders. 
Introduction 
A wide variety of psychological problems may occur in childhood. These 
include problems that compromise children’s capacities to learn and 
communicate such as intellectual disability, language delay, specific 

36 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
learning disabilities, and pervasive developmental disorders including 
autism spectrum disorders. Problems developing bowel and bladder 
control, and difficulties with feeding, sleeping and waking routines may 
also occur in childhood. Children and adolescents may develop neuro- 
psychological problems and adjustment difficulties secondary to condi- 
tions such as epilepsy or head injury. All of these difficulties are of 
concern to clinical psychologists (Carr, 2006a). However, in addition to 
these difficulties, two broad classes of conditions have been a focus for 
clinical psychologists who work with children and adolescents. These 
are disruptive behaviour disorders (such as attention deficit hyperactiv- 
ity disorder (ADHD), oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder) 
and emotional disorders (such as anxiety and depression). Disruptive 
behaviour disorders 
are characterized 
principally by externalizing 
behaviour problems such as rule-breaking, defiance and aggression. In 
contrast, internalizing behaviour problems such as social withdrawal, 
tearfulness and avoidance are the main features of emotional disor- 
ders. Factor analyses of common childhood behaviour problems con- 
sistently identify internalizing and externalizing behaviour problems as 
the 
two 
main 
dimensions 
of childhood 
behavioural 
difficulties 
(Achenbach, 2009). 
In Chapters 5 and 6 the emotional disorders — anxiety and depression 
— in children, adolescents and adults will be addressed. The central 
focus of the present chapter will be disruptive behaviour disorders. The 
diagnostic criteria for ADHD, oppositional defiant disorder and conduct 
disorder are given in Tables 2.1 and 2.2. It is noteworthy that all three of 
these conditions entail behaviour that is troublesome for others as well 
as for the child. In this chapter case examples of ADHD and conduct 
disorder will be given, along with an outline of the clinical features, 
epidemiology and theoretical explanations for these problems. Some 
comments will also be made on their assessment and treatment. 
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, attention deficit disorder, hyper- 
kinetic disorder, hyperkinesis, minimal brain damage and minimal brain 
dysfunction are some of the terms used for a syndrome characterized 
by persistent overactivity, impulsivity and difficulties in sustaining atten- 
tion (Barkley, 2005). Children with this profile were first described in 
modern medical literature by George Still in 1902. In this chapter prefer- 
ence will be given to the widely used term — attention deficit hyperactiv- 
ity disorder or ADHD. 
Case example of ADHD 
Timmy, aged 6, was referred for assessment because his teachers 
found him unmanageable. He was unable to sit still in school and con- 
centrate on his schoolwork. He left his chair frequently and ran around 
the classroom shouting. This was distracting for his teachers and class- 
mates. Even with individual tuition he could not apply himself to his 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
37 
school work. He also had difficulties getting along with other children. 
They disliked him because he disrupted their games. He rarely waited 
for his turn and did not obey the rules. At home he was consistently 
disobedient and, according to his father, ran ‘like a motorboat’ from the 
time he got up until bedtime. He often climbed on furniture and routinely 
shouted rather than talked. 
Family history 
Timmy came from a well functioning family. His parents had a very 
stable and satisfying marriage and ran a successful business together. 
Their daughter, Amanda, was a well-adjusted and academically able 
8-year-old. The parents were careful not to favour the daughter over her 
brother or to unduly punish Timmy for his constant disruption of his 
sister's activities. However, there was a growing tension between each 
of the parents and Timmy. While they were undoubtedly committed to 
him, they were also continually suppressing their growing irritation with 
his frenetic activity, disobedience, shouting and school problems. Within 
the wider family there were few resources that the parents could draw 
on to help them cope with Timmy. The grandparents, aunts and uncles 
lived abroad and so could not provide regular support for the parents. 
Furthermore, they were bewildered by Timmy’s condition, found it very 
unpleasant and had gradually reduced their contact with Timmy's 
nuclear family since his birth. 
Psychometric assessment and child interview 
Psychometric evaluation showed that Timmy’s overall IQ was within the 
normal range but he was highly distractible and had literacy and 
numeracy skills that were significantly below his overall ability level. 
Timmy perceived himself to be a failure. He believed that he could not 
do anything right at home or at school and he was sad that the other 
children did not want to play with him. He believed that his teacher 
disliked him and doubted his parents’ love for him. 
Developmental history 
There were a number of noteworthy features in Timmy's developmental 
history. He had suffered anoxia at birth and febrile convulsions in 
infancy. He had also had episodes of projectile vomiting. His high 
activity level and demandingness had been present from birth. He 
displayed a difficult temperament, showing little regularity in feeding or 
sleeping; intense negative emotions to new stimuli; and was slow to 
soothe following intense display of negative emotion. 
Formulation 
Timmy was a 6-year-old boy with home- and school-based problems of 
hyperactivity, impulsivity and distractibility of sufficient severity to 
warrant a diagnosis of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. The 
problems were longstanding, and there was no discrete factor that 
precipitated his condition. However, his entry into the school system 
precipitated the referral. Possible predisposing factors included anoxia 

38 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Anoxia at birth 
Febrile convulsions 
Difficult temperament 
PRECIPITATING 
MAINTAINING 
PROTECTIVE 
FACTORS 
: pian “mn 
FACTORS 
eferral 
precipitate 
. 
Academic failure 
by the ae te to 
Family stability 
Low self-esteem 
school 
Parental and school 
commitment 
Conflict with teacher, 
peers and parents 
Lack of support from 
extended family 
Figure 2.1 Formulation of a case of ADHD 
at birth, subtle neurological damage due to febrile convulsions in 
infancy, and a difficult temperament. 
In Timmy’s case, ADHD had led to academic attainment difficulties, 
low self-esteem, conflict with his school teacher, peer relationship prob- 
lems and tension within the family. This wider constellation of difficulties 
maintained and exacerbated his hyperactivity, impulsivity and distracti- 
bility. The absence of an extended family support system for the parents 
to help them deal with his difficulties was a possible maintaining factor. 
Important protective factors in this case were the commitment of Timmy’s 
parents and teachers to resolving the problem and the stability of 
Timmy’s nuclear family. This formulation is diagrammed in Figure 2.1. 
Treatment 
Treatment in this case involved both psychosocial and pharmacological 
intervention. The psychosocial intervention included parent and teacher 
education about ADHD, behavioural parent training, self-instructional 
training for the child, a classroom-based behavioural programme and 
provision of periodic relief care/holidays with specially trained foster 
parents. Timmy was also given stimulant therapy, specifically a twice- 
daily dose of methylphenidate (Ritalin). These interventions led to a 
significant improvement in his disruptive behaviour at home and school, 
his academic performance in school, and the quality of his relationships 
with his parents, teachers and friends. 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
39 
Clinical features 
ADHD has distinct clinical features in the domains of cognition, affect, 
behaviour, physical health and interpersonal adjustment. Timmy, in the 
case example, showed all of these. With respect to cognition, short 
attention span, distractibility and an inability to foresee the consequences 
of action are the main features. There is usually a poor internalization of 
the rules of social conduct, and in some instances low self-esteem may 
be present. With respect to affect, excitability associated with lack of 
impulse control is the dominant emotional state. This may be coupled 
with depressed mood associated with low self-esteem in some cases. 
With ADHD, the cardinal behavioural features are the high rate of 
activity, common comorbid aggressive antisocial behaviour, excessive 
risk-taking and poor school performance associated with inattention. 
With respect to physical health in ADHD, in some instances food 
allergies may be present. Injuries or medical complications associated 
with antisocial behaviour such as fighting and drug abuse may also 
occur. Relationship difficulties with parents, teachers and peers are the 
principal interpersonal adjustment problems. 
Difficulties with turn-taking in games due to impulsivity make children 
with ADHD poor playmates. The failure of children with ADHD to inter- 
nalize rules of social conduct at home and to meet parental expectations 
for appropriate social and academic behaviour leads to conflictual 
parent-child relationships. In school, youngsters with ADHD pose class- 
room management problems for teachers and these children invariably 
have problems in benefiting from routine teaching and instructional 
methods. For these reasons, their relationships with teachers tend to be 
conflictual. 
Currently the World 
Health Organization’s (1992) International 
Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) criteria for hyperkinetic disorder, 
which are widely used in Europe, are stricter than those for ADHD in the 
American Psychiatric Association’s (2000) Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual (DSM-IV-TR), which are widely used in North America. Both 
sets of criteria are given in Table 2.1. The ICD criteria stipulate that the 
actual symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity must be 
present in two or more settings such as home and school for a positive 
diagnosis to be made. In contrast, the more lenient DSM criteria specify 
that only impairment in functioning arising from the symptoms, rather 
than the actual symptoms or inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity, 
must be present in two or more settings for a positive diagnosis. 
Epidemiology 
In a review of 15 international epidemiological studies, Costello et al. 
(2004) found that the prevalence of ADHD ranged from 0.3% to 11.3%, 
with a median prevalence rate of 2.7%. The variability in rates may be 
due to the stringency of the diagnostic criteria applied and the demo- 
graphic characteristics of the populations studied. Using stringent ICD- 
10 hyperkinetic disorder criteria demanding cross-situational stability of 

40 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
TABLE 2.1 
Diagnostic criteria for attention and hyperactivity syndromes in DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10 
DSM-IV-TR: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
ICD-10: Hyperkinetic disorder 
A. Either 1 or 2 
The cardinal features are impaired 
1. Six or more of the following symptoms of inattention have 
attention and overactivity. Both are 
persisted for at least 6 months to a degree that is maladaptive 
necessary for the diagnosis and 
and inconsistent with developmental level. 
should be evident in more than one 
inattention 
situation (e.g. home or school). 
a. Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless 
Impaired attention is manifested by 
mistakes in schoolwork, work or other activities 
prematurely breaking off from tasks 
b. Often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play activities | and leaving activities unfinished. The 
c. Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly 
children change frequently from one 
d. Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish 
activity to another, seemingly losing 
schoolwork, chores or work duties 
. 
interest in one task because they 
e. Often has difficulty organizing tasks and activities 
become diverted to another. These 
f. Often avoids or dislikes tasks that require sustained mental effort 
deficits in persistence and attention 
g. Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities 
should be diagnosed only if they are 
h. Is often easily distracted by extraneous stimuli 
excessive for the child’s age and IQ. 
i. Is often forgetful in daily activities 
Overactivity implies excessive 
restlessness, especially in situations 
requiring relative calm. It may, 
depending on the situation, involve 
the child running and jumping 
2. Six or more of the following symptoms of hyperactivity— 
impulsivity have persisted for at least 6 months to a degree that 
is maladaptive and inconsistent with developmental level. 
Hyperactivity 
around, getting up from a seat when 
a. Often fidgets with hands or feet or squirms in seat 
he or she was supposed to remain 
b. Often leaves seat in classroom or in other situations in which 
seated, excessive talkativeness and 
remaining seated is expected 
noisiness, or fidgeting and wriggling. 
c. Often runs about or climbs excessively in situations in which itis | 
The standard for judgement should 
inappropriate 
be that the activity is excessive in the 
d. Often has difficulty playing or engaging in leisure activities 
context of what is expected in the 
quietly 
situation and by comparison with 
e. ls often on the go or acts as if driven by a motor 
other children of the same age and 
f. Often talks excessively 
IQ. This behavioural feature is most 
impulsivity 
evident in structured, organized 
situations that require a high degree 
g. Often blurts out answer before questions have been completed 
; 
of behavioural self-control. 
h. Often has difficulty awaiting turn 
i, Often interrupts or intrudes on others 
The characteristic behaviour 
problems should be of early onset 
B. Some of these symptoms were present before the age of 
(before the age of 6 years) and long 
7 years 
duration. 
Associated features include 
disinhibition in social relationships, 
recklessness in situations involving 
some danger, impulsive flouting of 
social rules, learning disorders, and 
C. Some impairment from the symptoms is present in two or more 
settings (e.g. home and school) 
D, Clinically significant impairment in social, academic or 
occupational functioning 
motor clumsiness. 
E. Not due to another disorder 
Specify: 
Hyperkinetic disorder with 
Specify: 
disturbance of activity and attention 
Combined type if inattention and overactivity-impulsivity are 
when antisocial features of conduct 
present; 
disorder are absent. 
Inattentive type if overactivity is absent; 
Hyperkinetic conduct disorder when 
Hyperactive—impulsive type if inattentiveness is absent 
criteria for both conduct disorder and 
hyperkinetic disorder are met. 
Note; Adapted from DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) and ICD-10 (WHO, 1992). 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
4 
symptoms, a prevalence rate of 1% was obtained in a UK national epi- 
demiological study (Meltzer et al., 2000). 
The prevalence of ADHD varies with gender and age, and the occur- 
rence of comorbid conditions is common (Brown, 2009; Carr, 2006a). 
ADHD is more prevalent in boys than in girls, and in preadolescents 
than in late adolescents. Comorbidity for conduct disorder and ADHD is 
about 20% in community populations and possibly double this figure in 
clinic populations. Comorbidity for emotional disorders, such as anxiety 
or depression, and ADHD is about 10% in community populations. In 
clinical populations the comorbidity rate may be twice this figure. 
Virtually all children with ADHD have attainment problems. However, 
comorbid severe specific learning difficulties have been estimated to 
occur in 10-25% of cases. A proportion of children with ADHD have 
comorbid developmental language delays, elimination problems and 
multiple tics or Tourette’s disorder, although reliable epidemiological 
data are not available. 
About a third of children with ADHD have a good prognosis, about a 
third have a moderate prognosis and a third have a poor prognosis 
(Faraone et al., 2006; Hinshaw, 1994). For two thirds of cases, the 
primary problems of inattention, impulsivity and hyperactivity persist 
into late adolescence and for some of these the primary symptoms 
persist into adulthood. Roughly a third develop significant antisocial 
behaviour problems in adolescence, including conduct disorder and 
substance abuse, and for most of this subgroup these problems persist 
into adulthood, leading to criminality. Occupational adjustment problems 
and suicide attempts occur in a small but significant minority of cases. 
Etiological theories 
Biological, cognitive-behavioural and family systems theories have 
been developed to explain the aetiology of ADHD. 
Biological theories 
Biological theories that focus on the role of genetic factors, structural 
brain abnormalities, neurotransmitter dysregulation, dietary factors and 
hypo-arousal have guided much research on the aetiology of ADHD. 
Genetics 
The genetic hypothesis proposes that ADHD symptomatology or a pre- 
disposition to hyperactivity is inherited by children who develop the con- 
dition. In support of this hypothesis, twin, adoption and family studies all 
show that rates of ADHD are higher in the biological relatives of children 
with ADHD than of those without the disorder (Taylor, 2008; Thapar & 
Scourfield, 2002; Thapar & Stergiakouli, 2008). Twin studies show that 
ADHD is 80% heritable, making it one of the most heritable psychologi- 
cal disorders. Twenty percent of the variance in ADHD symptomatology 
may be accounted for by environmental factors. The nature and extent 
of the contribution made by genetic and environmental factors varies 

42 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
from case to case. Extreme levels of the temperamental characteristic 
of overactivity, which is normally distributed within the population and 
polygenetically determined, probably interacts with environmental fac- 
tors (either intrauterine or psychosocial) to give rise to the clinical syn- 
drome of ADHD. 
It may be that in some cases, temperamentally 
overactive children sustain a prenatal or early childhood neurological 
insult and go on to develop ADHD, whereas others with an overactive 
temperament develop the syndrome following participation in ongoing 
non-optimal parent-child interactions. 
Molecular genetic studies have found an association between ADHD 
and the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) and the dopamine D4 
receptor gene (DRD4). The search for these genes was informed by 
evidence for dysregulation of the dopamine system in the prefrontal 
region of the brain, associated with executive function in children with 
ADHD. For a small subgroup of children with ADHD, the syndrome 
appears to be caused by a genetic condition resulting in a generalized 
resistance to thyroid hormone (Hauser et al., 1993). 
Organic deficits 
Early work on ADHD was premised on the hypothesis that the syndrome 
reflected an organic deficit: probably some form of minimal brain 
damage (Strauss & Lehtinen, 1947). In support of this hypothesis, a 
number of factors that might be associated with brain damage or 
dysfunction during the prenatal or perinatal periods and in early 
childhood have been found to be more prevalent among youngsters 
with ADHD than normal controls. These include prenatal difficulties; 
maternal stress during pregnancy; maternal nicotine, alcohol, cocaine 
and anticonvulsant use during pregnancy; low foetal heart rate during 
delivery; small head circumference at birth; low birth weight; minor 
physical abnormalities; a high rate of diseases of infancy; lead poisoning 
and early neurological insult or severe head injury (Barkley, 2005; 
Taylor, 2008; Taylor & Rogers, 2005). It is important to point out that 
these factors which may be associated with, or contribute to, the 
development of an organic deficit are not unique to ADHD and also 
occur in youngsters with other disorders. Therefore they probably 
interact with other factors in contributing to the development of ADHD. 
Neuroimaging studies have shown that ADHD is associated with a 
range of structural and functional neuroanatomical abnormalities (Shaw, 
2010). The best established of these is lobar volume loss of around 
3-4%, and abnormalities of the frontostriatal circuitry which underpins 
executive function (Makris et al., 2009). The frontostriatal circuitry of 
children with ADHD is less efficient than that of normal children and this 
may account for their executive function deficits, such as difficulties with 
planning and following through on tasks (mentioned below under 
psychological theories). 
Neuroimaging studies have also found abnormalities in the cerebel- 
lum, which may underpin deficits in temporal information processing 
such as learning ‘what to expect when’, and in the parietal lobes, which 
may affect the capacity to attend to one stimulus without being dis- 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
43 
tracted by another (Cherkasova & Hechtman, 2009). Ongoing research 
continues to identify other neural mechanisms associated with ADHD. 
Not all cases of ADHD show all abnormalities. It is likely that the symp- 
tom patterns of different subgroups of cases are associated with differ- 
ent neurophysiological abnormalities. 
Neurotransmitter dysregulation 
In 1937 Charles Bradley reported that Benzedrine — a stimulant — had a 
calming effect on the behaviour of hyperactive children. Subsequent 
research showed that methylphenidate, which is also a stimulant, and 
atomoxetine, a non-stimulant selective noradrenalin reuptake inhibitor, 
had similar affects (Taylor, 2008). Neurotransmitter dysregulation 
hypotheses have been proposed to explain the effects of these drugs 
on ADHD. These hypotheses attribute the symptoms of ADHD to abnor- 
malities in neurotransmitter functioning at the synapses affected by 
medications that ameliorate the symptomatology of ADHD. Results of 
research in this field have converged on the view that a dysregulation of 
the dopaminergic system in the ventral tegmental areas of the brain and 
noradrenergic and adrenergic systems in the locus coeruleus may be 
present in ADHD (Solanto, 1998). Dexamphetamine and methylpheni- 
date appear to improve functioning in people with ADHD by increasing 
extracellular dopamine, while atomoxetine has beneficial effects by 
increasing extracellular noradrenaline levels (Pliszka, 2007). 
Controlled trials show that approximately 70% of children with ADHD 
respond to these medications (Hinshaw et al., 2007). Medicated children 
with ADHD show a reduction in symptomatology and an improvement in 
both academic and social functioning, although positive effects dissipate 
when medication ceases, 
if psychological interventions to improve 
symptom control have not been provided concurrently with medication. 
One of the most remarkable findings of the Multimodal Treatment study 
of ADHD (MTA) — the largest ever long-term controlled trial of stimulant 
medication for ADHD, involving over 500 cases — is that stimulant 
medication ceased to have a therapeutic effect after 3 years (Swanson 
& Volkow, 2009). It also led to a reduction in height gain of about 2 cm, 
and a reduction in weight gain of about 2 kg. Furthermore, it did not 
prevent adolescent substance misuse as expected. The MTA trial 
showed that tolerance to medication used to treat ADHD occurs and 
this medication has negative side-effects. These findings underline the 
importance 
of using medication 
to reduce ADHD symptoms 
to 
manageable levels for a time-limited period, while children and their 
parents engage in psychological interventions to develop skills to 
manage symptoms through psychological means. 
Diet 
The dietary hypothesis attributes the symptoms of ADHD to children’s 
reaction to certain features of their daily diet. Originally Feingold (1975) 
argued that artificial food additives such as colourants accounted for a 
substantial proportion of ADHD symptomatology. However, controlled 
trials of additive-free diets did not support his position. Egger et al. 

44 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
(1985) refined Feingold’s original allergy theory and argued that particu- 
lar children with ADHD may have unique allergy profiles and if their diet 
is modified so as to exclude the precise substances to which they are 
allergic, then their activity and attention. problems may improve. 
Carefully controlled dietary studies have supported Egger’s theory, 
showing that children with ADHD and food allergies can benefit from 
placement on a ‘few foods’ diet (Jacobson & Schardt, 1999; Stevenson, 
2010). Results of controlled trials show that removal of food colours 
from the diet can have beneficial effects on the behaviour of children 
with and without ADHD, but evidence for the value of omega-3 supple- 
mentation in reducing hyperactivity is inconsistent (Stevenson, 2010). 
Hypo-arousal 
The hypo-arousal hypothesis explains hyperactivity and inattention as a 
failure to be sufficiently aroused by signal stimuli to attend to them and 
regulate activity levels. Psychophysiological studies in which arousal is 
assessed by electroencephalograph (EEG), skin conductance and heart 
rate recordings indicate that ADHD children show reduced psycho- 
physiological responsiveness to novel stimuli with signal value (Rowe 
et al., 2005). The use of vivid stimuli in academic settings and highly 
salient and immediate reinforcers is implicated by the hypo-arousal 
hypothesis. Reward systems and operant programmes conforming to 
these specifications have been found to have significant short-term 
effects (Hinshaw et al., 2007). EEG neurofeedback to increase cortical 
arousal has been shown in preliminary trials to improve ADHD symp- 
toms (Sherlin et al., 2010). 
Cognitive-behavioural approaches 
A number of theories that highlight the importance of deficits in specific 
cognitive or behavioural processes as the central factor underlying 
ADHD symptomatology have been proposed. Four of these will be 
mentioned below. All attempt to show how the overall syndrome of 
inattention, overactivity and impulsivity may be accounted for by a 
single underlying core deficit, be it one of the three core symptoms of 
ADHD or some other cognitive or behavioural process. 
Inattention 
The attentional deficit hypothesis proposes that problems with sustain- 
ing attention on a single task and screening out other distracting stimuli 
is the core difficulty that underpins the other symptoms of impulsivity 
and overactivity in ADHD (e.g. Douglas, 1983). That is, youngsters with 
ADHD at the outset of a task requiring attention will perform at a level 
equivalent to normal children but, over time, will show more errors that 
are directly attributable to the inability to sustain attention. This problem 
with sustaining attention leads them to change the focus of their atten- 
tion frequently and is manifested at a behavioural level as excessive 
impulsivity and overactivity. On certain laboratory tasks children with 
ADHD show a gradual deterioration in sustained attention, as predicted 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
45 
by the inattention hypothesis. However, contrary to the inattention 
hypothesis, on other tasks they show immediate selective attention, like 
children without ADHD, and they also display overactivity while asleep 
(Barkley, 2003). These findings suggest that a deficit in the capacity for 
sustained attention alone cannot fully account for the ADHD syndrome. 
Hyperactivity 
The hyperactivity hypothesis argues that a problem with inhibiting motor 
activity is the core deficit that underpins the ADHD syndrome and can 
account for inattention and impulsivity (e.g. Schachar, 1991). There is a 
large body of evidence which shows that hyperactivity is unique as a 
symptom to children with ADHD compared to children with other 
psychological problems, and that hyperactivity as a construct correlates 
with many academic indices of attentional problems (Barkley, 2003). 
Impulsivity 
The impulsivity hypothesis proposes that a core problem in inhibiting 
cognitive and behavioural responses to specific stimuli leads to poor 
performance on tasks apparently requiring good attentional abilities and 
also to tasks requiring careful regulation of behaviour. Thus the central 
problem in ADHD, according to this hypothesis, is with cognitive and 
behavioural impulsivity (e.g., Nigg, 2001). According to this theory, with 
academic tasks requiring high levels of sustained attention, children 
with ADHD have problems using systematic cognitive problem-solving 
strategies because they are cognitively impulsive. Also, in both aca- 
demic and social situations, children with ADHD engage in careless 
work practices in school and engage in socially inappropriate behaviour 
with peers, parents and teachers because they are behaviourally impul- 
sive. There is some evidence to show that while children with ADHD 
may know and understand problem-solving skills and social skills, they 
fail to use them appropriately in academic and social situations (Barkley, 
2003). 
Executive function 
Russell Barkley (2003, 2005) argues that the symptoms of ADHD 
(impulsivity, overactivity and inattention) reflect a central deficit in the 
core executive function of behavioural inhibition that is neurodevelop- 
mental (rather than social) in origin. Children with deficits in behavioural 
inhibition cannot delay gratification, so as to reap better rewards later. 
This core deficit in behavioural inhibition is associated with, and rein- 
forced by, secondary deficits in four other executive functions: (1) non- 
verbal working memory, (2) verbal working memory (or internalization of 
speech), (3) self-regulation of affect, arousal and motivation, and (4) 
verbal and behavioural creativity and fluency (or internalization of play). 
With poor verbal and non-verbal working memory, ADHD children can- 
not hold a picture of events in the mind, or obey a set of self-directed 
instructions so as to delay gratification or sustain planned sequences of 
goal-directed behaviour. With poor self-regulation of affect, arousal and 
motivation, ADHD children have difficulty in preventing strong emotional 

46 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
experiences and motives from interfering with planned goal-directed 
behaviour. With poor verbal and behavioural creativity and fluency, 
ADHD children have difficulty in developing, rehearsing and implement- 
ing creative plans to achieve novel goals. 
The four secondary executive function deficits, according to Barkley, 
reflect failures to internalize and privatize functions that in early devel- 
opment were external features of the child’s interactions with care- 
givers. In normal development the emergence of these four executive 
functions reflects a shift in the source of control of behaviour from exter- 
nal events to mental representations of events; from control by others to 
control by the self; and from immediate to delayed gratification. This 
complex and elaborate executive function hypothesis has to some 
degree supplanted earlier simpler psychological theories and is partially 
supported by a growing body of empirical evidence (Barkley, 2003, 
2005; Nigg, 2005). 
To compensate for deficits in attention, regulation of motor activity, 
impulsivity and executive function, various skills training programmes 
have been developed, largely within the cognitive-behavioural tradition. 
Self-instructional training for managing academic tasks and social skills 
training to manage relationship problems (particularly those involving 
peers) are the main types of training provided within these programmes. 
Because of the negligible impact that such programmes had when con- 
ducted in isolation, they are now offered as one element of a multimodal 
package involving stimulant medication, family intervention and school 
intervention (Hinshaw et al., 2007). Compensatory problem-solving and 
social skills training programmes can have optimum effect when offered 
after a consistent home- and school-based contingency management 
programme has been established and stimulant treatment is in progress. 
Systemic theory 
Family systems theories have focused largely on the role of the family 
system or the wider social context in the aetiology and maintenance of 
ADHD. Parental psychological problems such as depression, aggression 
or alcohol and substance misuse; exposure to severe marital discord or 
domestic violence; extreme abuse and neglect in infancy; and coercive 
parent—child interactions in childhood and adolescence have all been 
found to have associations with ADHD (Deault, 2010; Johnston & Mash, 
2001; Taylor, 2008). With respect to the wider social system, the follow- 
ing factors have been found to be associated with ADHD: institutional 
upbringing, low socio-economic status, peer relationship problems, and 
relationship problems with school staff (Barclay, 2005; Taylor, 2008). 
A problem with much of the research on psychosocial factors in the 
aetiology and maintenance of ADHD is the fact that in many cases 
comorbid conduct disorders are present and the risk factors that are 
identified, which bear a close resemblance to those identified for 
conduct disorders, may primarily be associated with the aetiology of 
conduct problems rather than ADHD. A second difficulty is untangling 
the causal chain, establishing which family and relationship difficulties 

2+ CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
47 
precede the development of ADHD and are predisposing factors, and 
distinguishing these from relationship difficulties that evolve in response 
to ADHD and possibly maintain or exacerbate the condition. Results of 
longitudinal studies and family intervention studies suggest that chronic 
exposure to extremely adverse institutional or family environments early 
in life may heighten the risk of developing ADHD, and for children with 
predominantly 
biologically determined ADHD, improved 
parenting 
practices can affect the course of the disorder (Taylor, 2008). 
_Family-based 
interventions 
and multisystemic 
intervention 
pro- 
grammes involving the child’s wider social network have evolved from 
family systems theories of ADHD. These programmes focus on improv- 
ing parenting skills and enhancing the child’s relationships with mem- 
bers of the family and the wider network. Such programmes have been 
shown to have positive short-term effects on both symptomatology and 
social adjustment (Anastopoulos et al., 2005; Barkley et al., 1992; 
Young & Amarasinghe, 2010). 
Assessment 
Assessment and treatment of ADHD is usually carried out by multidisci- 
plinary teams which include clinical psychologists, and colleagues from 
other disciplines such as psychiatry or paediatrics. Children with ADHD 
require assessment of their behaviour, abilities, and family and school 
situations. The revised Conners’ Rating Scales (CRS-R, Conners, 
1997) are widely used to assess ADHD behaviour. Conners’ parent, 
teacher and self-report rating scales each contain almost 100 items and 
yield a range of scores on scales that assess aspects of ADHD and 
related difficulties. Computer scoring systems are available and norma- 
tive data are used to interpret scores. To establish 
a DSM-IV-TR or 
ICD-10 diagnosis, a structured interview for parents and children may 
be administered, such as the attention and activity module of the 
Development and Well-Being Assessment (DAWBA, Goodman et al., 
2000). Abilities may be assessed with intelligence tests such as the 
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC-IV, Wechsler, 2004a) 
for school-aged children and the Wechsler Preschool and Primary 
Scale of Intelligence (WPPSI-III, 2004b) for preschoolers. These tests 
yield full-scale IQs as well as scores for specific abilities that throw light 
on cognitive strengths and weaknesses. 
Attainments may be assessed with tests such as the Wechsler 
Individual Achievement Test (WIAT-II, Wechsler, 2005), which assess 
reading, numerical and language attainments. 
Family and school 
situations may be assessed by conducting interviews with parents and 
school teachers about the young person’s behaviour in these contexts. 
Assessment information is integrated into a formulation that is used for 
treatment planning as illustrated in the case study that opened the 
chapter. This should link predisposing, precipitating and maintaining 
factors to. the child’s presenting problems and specify protective factors 
that may be drawn on during treatment. A general clinical formulation 
model for ADHD is given in Figure 2.2. 

48 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Any factor that impairs developing control of attention and activity 
Personal vulnerabilities — Genetic vulnerability, prenatal & perinatal stresses, difficult 
temperament, executive function deficits 
Family factors — Disorganization, parental maladjustment, parenting problems 
Educational factors — Language delay, learning disability, school failure, lack of 
educational resources 
Social factors — Institutional upbringing, low SES 
MAINTAINING 
PROTECTIVE 
FACTORS 
’ Personal 
vulnerabilities — 
PRECIPITATING 
FACTORS 
FACTORS 
Personal strengths 
Transition to 
and achievements 
including secondary 
pre-school or 
low self-esteem 
Family factors 
Educational factors 
school may 
Family support 
precipitate 
School support 
referral 
Peer support 
Peer group conflict 
: 
or rejection by peers 
Engagement in 
treatment 
Failure to engage in 
treatment 
Figure 2.2 General formulation model for ADHD 
Treatment 
There is a growing consensus within the field that single factor theories 
are unlikely to be able to explain the complex and heterogeneous 
population of youngsters who qualify for a diagnosis of ADHD (Barkley, 
2005). It is probable that a variety of biological and psychosocial factors 
interact in complex ways to give rise to the syndrome and that problems 
with a number of psychological processes particularly those involved in 
regulating both cognitive and motor responses underpin symptomatology. 
The symptomatology is probably partially maintained and exacerbated by 
problematic relationships within the family, the peer group and the school. 
In view of this integrative formulation, it is not surprising that multi- 
modal treatment packages that include behavioural parent training, self- 
instructional and social skills training and school-based contingency 
management combined with stimulant therapy have been found to be 
most effective. International best practice guidelines recommend that 
multimodal programmes involving stimulant medication and behaviour- 
ally oriented family, school and individual psychological interventions 
should be offered to children with ADHD (American Academy of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 2007a; American Academy of Paediatrics, 
2001; Consensus Development Panel, 2000; Kutcher et al., 2004, 
NICE, 2008a). 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
49 
With behavioural parent training, parents are coached in how to 
consistently reinforce socially appropriate behaviour and extinguish 
inappropriate behaviour. School-based contingency management pro- 
grammes extend this type of approach into the child’s classroom envi- 
ronment. In self-instructional training, children with ADHD are coached 
in the use of self-instructions to regulate the way in which they deploy 
their attention and control their impulses. With stimulant therapy, chil- 
dren receive regular doses of methylphenidate which is available in a 
form that is taken twice or three times a day, or as a slow-release prep- 
aration taken only once a day. Psychological interventions collectively 
contribute to normalizing ADHD behaviour, largely by improving parent- 
ing practices and enhancing the way children with ADHD interact with 
their families and social networks, and pharmacological interventions 
reduce symptom intensity and so make it easier for parents and chil- 
dren to make these changes. However, as mentioned earlier, stimulant 
treatment loses its effectiveness after 3 years, so it is important that 
this 3 year window of opportunity be used to help children and parents 
develop ways to manage ADHD symptoms. Two promising innova- 
tions in child-focused psychological treatments of ADHD are the use of 
computer-based programmes to train children to enhance the function- 
ing of working memory, and neurofeedback in which children modify the 
frequency, amplitude or other characteristics of their electroencephalo- 
gram (EEG) brain-wave patterns (Toplak et al., 2008). 
Conduct disorder and oppositional 
defiant disorder 
Conduct disorder refers to a pattern of persistent, serious, aggressive 
and destructive rule-breaking behaviour at home and within the wider 
community, while oppositional defiant disorder refers to a persistent 
pattern of oppositional and hostile behaviour confined to the home con- 
text (American Psychiatric Association, 2000a; World Health Organ- 
ization, 1992). Diagnostic criteria for these two conditions are given in 
Table 2.2. Conduct problems constitute a third to a half of all clinic refer- 
rals, and chronic conduct problems are the single most costly disorder 
of adolescence for three reasons (Kazdin, 1995; Moffitt & Scott, 2008; 
Scott, 2009). 
First, they are remarkably unresponsive to traditional individual 
approaches to treatment. Positive outcome rates for routine treatments 
range from 20% to 40%. Second, about 60% of adolescents with con- 
duct problems have a poor prognosis. Adolescents with chronic con- 
duct disorder turn to adult criminality and develop antisocial personality 
disorders, alcohol-related problems and a variety of psychological diffi- 
culties. They also have more problems with health, educational attain- 
ment, occupational adjustment, marital stability and social integration. 
The third reason for the high cost of conduct problems is the fact that 
they are intergenerationally transmitted. Adults with a history of conduct 
disorder rear children with a high prevalence of conduct difficulties. 

50 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN 
TABLE 2.2 
INTRODUCTION 
Diagnostic criteria for oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder in DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10 
DSM-IV-TR 
Oppositional defiant disorder 
A. A pattern of negativistic, hostile and defiant behaviour 
lasting at least 6 months, during which four or more of 
the following are present: 
1. Often loses temper 
2. Often argues with adults 
3. Often actively defies or refuses to comply with adults’ 
requests or rules 
4. Often deliberately annoys people 
5. Often blames others for his or her mistakes or 
misbehaviour 
. 
6. Is often touchy or easily annoyed by others 
7. |s often angry or resentful 
8. Is often spiteful or vindictive 
. The disturbance in behaviour causes clinically 
significant impairment in social, academic or 
occupational functioning 
C. The behaviours do not occur exclusively during the 
course of a psychotic or a mood disorder 
D. Criteria are not met for conduct disorder or antisocial 
personality disorder. 
Conduct disorder 
A. A repetitive and persistent pattern of behaviour in which 
the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate 
societal norms or rules are violated, as manifested by 
the presence of three or more of the following criteria 
in the past 12 months with at least one criterion present 
in the past 6 months. 
Aggression to people and animals 
NOL 
. Often bullies, threatens or intimidates others 
. Often initiates physical fights 
. Has used a weapon that can cause serious physical 
harm to others 
. Has been physically cruel to people 
. Has been physically cruel to animals 
. Has stolen while confronting a victim 
. Has forced someone into sexual activity 
— 
ICD-10 
The essential feature of this disorder is a 
pattern of persistently negativistic, hostile, 
defiant, provocative and disruptive behaviour 
which is clearly outside the normal range of 
behaviour for a child of the same age in the 
same sociocultural context and which does 
not include the more serious violations of the 
rights of others associated with conduct 
disorder. 
Children with this disorder tend frequently and 
actively to defy adult requests or rules and 
deliberately to annoy other people. Usually 
they tend to be angry, resentful, and easily 
annoyed by other people whom they blame 
for their own mistakes and difficulties. They 
generally have a low frustration tolerance and 
readily lose their temper. Typically their 
defiance has a provocative quality, so that 
they initiate confrontations and generally 
exhibit excessive levels of rudeness, 
uncooperativeness and resistance to 
authority. 
Frequently this behaviour is most evident in 
interactions with adults or peers whom the 
child knows well, and signs of the disorder 
may not be present during clinical interview. 
The key distinction from other types of 
conduct disorder is the absence of behaviour 
that violates the law and the basic rights of 
others such as theft, cruelty, bullying, assault 
and destructiveness. 
Conduct disorders are characterized by a 
repetitive and persistent pattern of dissocial, 
aggressive, or defiant conduct. Such 
behaviour, when at its most extreme for the 
individual should amount to major violations of 
age-appropriate social expectations, and is 
therefore more severe than ordinary childish 
mischief or adolescent rebelliousness. 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
51 
DSM-IV-TR 
Destruction of property 
8. Has deliberately engaged in firesetting 
9. Has deliberately destroyed others’ property 
Deceitfulness or theft 
10. Has broken into someone's house, building or car 
11. Often lies to obtain goods or favours or avoid 
obligations 
12. Has stolen items without confronting the victim 
Serious violation of rules 
13. Often stays out late at night despite parental 
prohibitions (before 13 years of age) 
14. Has run away from home overnight at least twice while 
living in parental home or once without returning for a 
lengthy period 
15. Is often truant from school before the age of 13 
B. The disturbance in behaviour causes clinically 
significant impairment in social, academic or 
occupational functioning. 
C. In those over 18 years, the criteria for antisocial 
personality disorder are not met. 
Specify childhood-onset (prior to 10 years) or adolescent 
onset. 
Specify severity (mild, moderate or severe) 
ICD-10 
Examples of the behaviours on which the 
diagnosis is based include the following: 
excessive levels of fighting or bullying; cruelty 
to animals or other people; severe 
destructiveness to property; firesetting; 
stealing; repeated lying; truancy from school 
and running away from home; unusually 
frequent and severe temper tantrums; defiant 
provocative behaviour; and persistent and 
severe disobedience. Any one of these 
categories, if marked, is sufficient for the 
diagnosis, but isolated dissocial acts are not. 
Exclusion criteria include serious underlying 
conditions such as schizophrenia, 
hyperkinetic disorder or depression. 
The diagnosis is not made unless the duration 
of the behaviour is 6 months or longer. 
Specify: 
CD confined to family context where the 
symptoms are confined to the home. 
Unsocialized CD where there is a pervasive 
abnormality in peer relationships. 
Socialized CD where the individual is well 
integrated into a peer group. 
Note: Adapted from DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) and ICD-10 (WHO, 1992). 
Case example of conduct disorder 
Bill, aged 11, was referred by his social worker for treatment following 
an incident in which he had assaulted neighbours by climbing up onto 
the roof of his house and throwing rocks and stones at them. He also 
had a number of other problems according to the school headmaster, 
including academic underachievement, difficulty in maintaining friend- 
ships at school and repeated school absence. He smoked, occasionally 
drank alcohol, and stole money and goods from neighbours. His prob- 
lems were longstanding but had intensified in the 6 months preceding 
the referral. At that time his father, Paul, was imprisoned for raping a 
young girl in the small rural village where the family lived. 
Family history 
Bill was one of five boys who lived with his mother, Rita, at the time of 
the referral. The family lived in relatively chaotic circumstances. Prior to 
Paul’s imprisonment, the children’s defiance and rule-breaking, particu- 
larly Bill’s, was kept in check by their fear of physical punishment from 
their father. Since his imprisonment, there were few house rules and 
these were implemented inconsistently by Rita, so all of the children 
had conduct problems but Bill’s were by far the worst. 

52 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Rita had developed intense coercive patterns of interaction with Bill 
and John (the second eldest). That is, she and the children engaged in 
escalating arguments, from which she typically withdrew when her sons 
became overly verbally or physically aggressive towards her. This 
coercive process of escalation and withdrawal led to Rita and her sons 
experiencing relief. The outcome of this was that the next time they 
engaged in conflict, they were likely to be even more abusive and 
aggressive to each other, since their expectations were that escalation 
would lead to withdrawal and relief. 
In addition to the parent-child interaction difficulties, there were no 
routines to ensure that bills were paid, food was bought, washing was 
done, homework completed 
or regular meal and sleeping times 
observed. Rita supported the family with welfare payments and money 
earned illegally from farm-work. Despite the family chaos, she was very 
attached to her children and would sometimes take them to work with 
her rather than send them to school because she liked their company, 
and because they helped her to earn more money. 
At the preliminary interview, Rita said that ‘her nerves were in tatters’. 
She was 
attending 
a psychiatrist 
intermittently 
for treatment 
of 
depression with medication. She had a longstanding history of conduct 
and mood regulation problems, beginning early in adolescence. 
In 
particular she had had conflictual relationships with her mother and 
father, which were characterized by coercive cycles of interaction, 
similar to those in which she engaged with her sons. In school she had 
academic difficulties and peer relationship problems. 
Rita had been ostracized by her own family when she married Paul, 
whom her parents saw as an unsuitable partner for her, since he had a 
number of convictions for theft and assault. Paul’s family never accepted 
Rita, because they thought she had ‘ideas above her station’. Rita’s and 
Paul’s parents were in regular conflict, and each family blamed the other 
for the chaotic situation in which Paul and Rita had found themselves. 
Rita was also ostracized by the village community in which she lived. 
The community blamed her for driving her husband to commit rape. 
Paul, the father, also had longstanding difficulties. His conduct 
problems began in middle childhood. He was the eldest of four brothers, 
all of whom developed conduct problems, but his were by far the most 
severe. He had a history of becoming involved in aggressive exchanges 
that often escalated to violence. He and his mother had become involved 
in coercive patterns of interaction from his earliest years. He developed 
similar coercive patterns of interaction at school with his teachers, at 
work with various foremen and also in his relationship with Rita. He had 
a distant and detached relationship with his father. 
Developmental history 
From Bill’s developmental history, it was clear that he was a child with a 
difficult temperament who did not develop sleeping and feeding routines 
easily and responded intensely and negatively to new situations. His 
language development had been delayed and he showed academic 
difficulties since his first years in school. On the positive side, Bill had a 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
53 
strong sense of family loyalty to his brothers and parents and did not 
want to see the family split up. 
Psychometric assessment 
From the Child Behaviour Checklists (CBCLs) completed by Rita, it was 
clear that Bill and his three brothers had clinically significant conduct 
problems and Bill's were by far the most extreme. A similar pattern 
emerged from behaviour checklists completed by the boys’ teachers. A 
psychometric evaluation of Bill’s abilities and attainments showed that 
he was of normal intelligence, but his attainments in reading, spelling 
and arithmetic fell below the 10th percentile. From his subtest profile on 
the psychometric instruments, it was concluded that the discrepancy 
between his attainment and abilities was accounted for by a specific 
learning disability — dyslexia. 
School report 
The headmaster at the school that Bill and his brothers attended 
confirmed that Bill had academic, conduct and attainment problems, but 
was committed to educating the boys and managing their conduct and 
attendance problems in a constructive way. The headmaster had a 
reputation (of which he was very proud) for being particularly skilled in 
managing children with behaviour problems. 
Formulation 
Bill was an 11-year-old boy with a persistent and broad pattern of con- 
duct problems both within and outside the home, consistent with a diag- 
nosis of conduct disorder. Bill's conduct problems had an insidious 
onset, beginning with wilfulness in early childhood and escalating as he 
developed. Thus there was no discrete precipitating factor to account 
for the onset of Bill’s conduct disorder. However, the father’s imprison- 
ment 6 months prior the referral led to an intensification of Bill’s conduct 
problems and precipitated the referral. Factors that predisposed Bill to 
develop conduct problems included a difficult temperament, a develop- 
mental language delay, dyslexia, exposure to paternal criminality, 
maternal depression and a disorganized family environment. The con- 
duct problems were maintained at the time of the referral by engage- 
ment in coercive patterns of interaction with his mother and teachers; 
regular absences from school; rejection of Bill by peers at school; and 
isolation of his family by the extended family and the community. 
Protective factors in the case included the mother’s wish to retain cus- 
tody of the children rather than have them taken into foster care; Bill and 
his siblings’ sense of family loyalty; and the school’s commitment to 
retaining and dealing with Bill and his brothers rather than expelling 
them for truancy and misconduct. This formulation is diagrammed in 
Figure 2.3. 
Treatment 
The treatment plan in this case involved a multisystemic intervention 
programme. The mother was trained in behavioural parenting skills. A 

54 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Difficult temperament 
Language delay 
Family disorganization 
Paternal criminality 
Maternal depression 
MAINTAINING 
FACTORS 
PROTECTIVE 
FACTORS 
Mother’s motivation 
PRECIPITATING 
FACTOR 
Father’s imprisonment 
Coercive cycle with 
mother and teachers 
Children’s family 
loyalty 
School’s 
commitment 
School absence 
Rejection by peers 
Conduct Disorder 
Family 
isolation 
: 
Dyslexia 
Figure 2.3 Formulation of a case of conduct disorder 
series of meetings between the teacher, the mother and the social 
worker were convened to develop and implement a plan for regular 
school attendance. Occasional relief foster care was arranged for Bill 
and John (the second eldest) to reduce the stress on Rita. Social skills 
training was provided for Bill to help him deal with peer relationship 
problems. 
There was some improvement in Bill’s conduct problems, school 
attendance and academic performance. However, Bill continued to 
have residual conduct and academic problems throughout his adoles- 
cence. Coercive cycles of interaction between Bill and Rita, and family 
isolation and lack of support continued to be major factors maintaining 
Bill’s difficulties, Rita required periodic crisis intervention and social 
work support throughout Bill’s teenage years. Periodically, with social 
work assistance, Bill was placed for brief periods in voluntary care at 
Rita’s request. 
Clinical features 
From Table 2.2 it may be seen that a distinction is made between oppo- 
sitional defiant disorder and conduct disorder, with the former reflecting 
a less pervasive disturbance than the latter. In a proportion of cases 
oppositional defiant disorder is a developmental precursor of conduct 
disorder (Moffitt & Scott, 2008; Scott, 2009). The main behavioural fea- 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
55 
ture of conduct disorder is a pervasive and persistent pattern of anti- 
social behaviour that extends beyond the family to the school and 
community; involves serious violations of rules; and is characterized by 
defiance of authority, aggression, destructiveness, deceitfulness and 
cruelty. Youngsters with conduct disorder show a limited internalization 
of social rules and norms and a hostile attributional bias. That is, the 
youngster interprets ambiguous social situations as threatening and 
responds with aggressive retaliative behaviour. Anger and irritability are 
the predominant mood states. 
Problematic relationships with significant members of the child’s net- 
work typify children with conduct disorder. Negative relationships with 
parents and teachers typically revolve around the youngster’s defiant 
behaviour. Negative relationships with peers typically centre on aggres- 
sion and bullying, which is guided by the hostile attributional bias with 
which conduct disordered youngsters construe many of their peer rela- 
tionships. There may also be problematic relationships with members of 
the wider community if theft or vandalism has occurred. Multiagency 
involvement with juvenile justice or social work agencies is common. 
Also, because conduct disorder is associated with family disorganiza- 
tion, child abuse and neglect, parental criminality and parental psycho- 
logical adjustment difficulties, professionals from child protection, adult 
mental health and justice systems may be involved. 
Disruptive behaviour disorders follow three main developmental 
trajectories: life-course-persistent, adolescent limited, and childhood 
limited (Moffitt & Scott, 2008; Pardini et al., 2010). For about half of all 
children with childhood behavioural problems, their difficulties are 
limited to childhood or adolescence. The other half follow a life-course- 
persistent pathway and grow up to have antisocial personality disorders. 
The adolescent limited pathway is associated with deviant peer group 
membership. The life-course-persistent pathway is associated with a 
greater number of risk factors. Three classes of risk factors increase the 
probability that conduct problems in childhood or adolescence will 
escalate into later life difficulties. These are personal characteristics, 
parenting practices and family organization problems (McMahon et al., 
2010; Moffitt & Scott, 2008; Scott, 2009). 
Early onset, callous unemotional traits (absence of guilt, lack of 
empathy, shallow affect, and lack of concern about performance), diffi- 
cult temperament, aggressiveness, impulsivity, inattention and educa- 
tional difficulties are the main personal characteristics of children and 
adolescents that place them at risk for long-term conduct problems. 
Ineffective monitoring and supervision of youngsters, providing incon- 
sistent consequences for rule violations, and failing to provide reinforce- 
ment for prosocial behaviour are the main problematic parenting 
practices that place children and adolescents at risk for the develop- 
ment of long-term antisocial behaviour patterns. The family organiza- 
tion problems associated with persistence of conduct problems into 
adulthood are parental conflict and violence, a high level of life stres- 
sors, a low level of social support, and parental psychological adjust- 
ment problems such as depression or substance abuse. 

56 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Epidemiology 
In a review of 12 international epidemiological studies, Costello et al. 
(2004) found that the prevalence of conduct disorder ranged from 1.1% 
to 10.6%, with a median prevalence rate of 3.7%. The range for opposi- 
tional defiant disorder was 1.3-7.4% and the median prevalence rate 
also 3.7%. The variability in rates may be due to the diagnostic criteria 
applied (DSM or ICD) and the demographic characteristics of the popu- 
lations studied. Using ICD criteria, a prevalence rate of 5.3% was 
obtained in a UK national epidemiological study (Meltzer et al., 2000). 
The prevalence of conduct disorder varies with gender and age, and the 
occurrence of comorbid conditions is common (Carr, 2006a). Conduct 
disorder is more prevalent in boys than in girls, with male/female ratios 
varying from 2:1 to 4:1. It is also more prevalent in adolescents than in 
children. The comorbidity rate for conduct disorder and ADHD in com- 
munity populations is 23%. The comorbidity rates for conduct disorder 
and emotional disorders in community populations are 17% for major 
depression and 15% for anxiety disorders. 
Etiological theories 
Biological, psychodynamic, cognitive-behavioural and social systems 
theories have been proposed to explain the development of conduct 
problems and to inform their treatment. Since the distinction between 
oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder is a relatively recent 
development, most theories in this area have been developed with 
specific reference to conduct disorder but have obvious implications for 
oppositional defiant disorder, which is a developmental precursor of 
conduct disorder in many cases. 
Biological theories 
Biological theories have focused on the roles of genetic factors, 
neurobiological deficits, neurotransmitter dysregulation, neuroendocrine 
factors, arousal levels, temperament and neuropsychological deficits in 
the aetiology of conduct problems. 
Genetics 
There are many lines of research that focus on genetic and constitutional 
aspects of children with conduct disorder, and these are guided by the 
hypothesis that biological factors underpin antisocial behaviour. The 
predominance of males among youngsters with conduct disorders and 
the finding from a review of over 100 twin and adoption studies that 
antisocial behaviour is about 50% heritable point to a role for genetically 
transmitted constitutional factors in the aetiology of conduct disorders 
(Moffitt, 2005). 
Current neuroscientific studies of conduct disorder aim to link specific 
genes with specific structural and functional brain abnormalities. At 
present a number of genes are being investigated. One of the most 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
57 
promising lines of research in this area has established a link between 
the monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) gene and conduct disorder in boys 
at risk of antisocial behaviour as a result of exposure to physical child 
abuse. In a meta-analysis of a séries of studies, Kim-Cohen et al. (2006) 
found 
that physically abused 
children 
with the MAOA genotype 
conferring low levels of the MAOA enzyme, developed conduct disorder 
more often than abused children with a high-activity MAOA genotype. 
MAOA plays a key role regulating aggressive behaviour by selectively 
breaking down a number of neurotransmitters including serotonin, 
which has been found to be abnormally low in antisocial individuals. 
The MAOA gene has earned the nickname ‘warrior gene’ because of its 
link with aggression (McDermott et al., 2009). While specific genes, 
such as the MAOA gene, may contribute to the risk of antisocial 
behaviour, their contributions are probably quite small compared with 
the larger polygenetic effects of collections of genes on personal 
attributes such as temperament, executive function and verbal ability, 
all of which have strong associations with conduct disorder. 
Neurobiological deficits 
Neurobiological theories propose that antisocial, immoral and aggres- 
sive behaviour, typical of people with life-course-persistent disruptive 
behaviour disorders, is subserved by structural and functional brain 
abnormalities. In a wide-ranging review of evidence drawn mainly from 
studies of antisocial adults with histories of childhood conduct disorder, 
Raine and Yang (2006) concluded that antisocial behaviour is associ- 
ated with structural and functional abnormalities of a number of brain 
regions including the prefrontal cortex, which subserves executive func- 
tion and judgement, and the limbic system (including the amygdala, 
hippocampus and cingulate), which subserves 
learned emotional 
responses, particularly fear conditioning. People with antisocial person- 
ality disorder and psychopathy (who as children had disruptive behav- 
iour disorders) have significantly reduced prefrontal lobe grey matter, 
reduced amygdala and hippocampus volume, and reduced activity in 
these areas compared with normal people. These abnormalities may be 
due to genetic factors or prenatal, perinatal or early childhood adversity 
(Moffitt, 2005; Taylor & Rogers, 2005). 
Neurotransmitter dysregulation 
Neurotransmitter dysregulation hypotheses propose that low levels of 
serotonin lead to aggression against others in the case of disruptive 
behaviour disorders (or the self in the case of depression) by enhancing 
sensitivity to stimuli that elicit aggression and reducing sensitivity to 
cues that signal punishment (Spoont, 1992). Studies of adults show that 
antisocial behaviour is associated with low levels of serotonin, but in 
studies of children the results are more mixed (van Goozen et al., 2007). 
However, medications that target serotonin, such as the selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors, do not modify aggression or antisocial 
behaviour in children or adults. 

58 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Neuroendocrine hypothesis 
The hypothesis that antisocial behaviour is caused by androgens such 
as testosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is premised on 
the fact that higher rates of both occur in males, and in animal studies a 
strong correlation has been found between aggression and testosterone 
levels. Research on adults has established a link between testosterone 
and violent crime, but studies of children and adolescents have yielded 
mixed results. In contrast, there is some evidence for higher levels of 
DHEA in children and adolescents with conduct disorder (van Goozen 
et al., 2007). 
Hypo-arousal 
In the most sophisticated version of the hypo-arousal hypothesis, Van 
Goozen et al. (2007, 2008) proposed that people who show marked 
aggression and antisocial behaviour do so because their stress res- 
ponse systems are underreactive, a neurobiological vulnerability that 
may arise from genetic factors or early adversity. This underreactivity 
accounts for fearless rule-breaking behaviour and risky sensation- 
seeking behaviour typical of young people with conduct disorder. In a 
previous version of this hypothesis, Raine (1996) proposed that because 
of their fearlessness, children with conduct disorder are insensitive to 
the negative consequences of antisocial behaviour, and so have diffi- 
culty learning and internalizing societal rules. Zuckerman (2007) argued 
that their low arousal levels lead them to become easily bored and they 
address this by engaging in risky, sensation-seeking behaviour. The 
hypo-arousal hypothesis is supported by a large body of evidence which 
shows that antisocial children and adults show low resting heart rate, 
skin conductance and cortisol levels, which are indices of hypoactivity 
within the autonomic nervous system and the hypothalamic-pituitary— 
adrenal (HPA) axis (Van Goozen et al., 2007, 2008). 
There is also growing evidence that both genetic factors and adverse 
prenatal and early life environments may contribute to the development 
of underreactive stress response systems. The heritability of antisocial 
behaviour is well established (as noted above), and future research 
may indicate a mechanism that links specific genes to the stress 
response system. With regard to the prenatal environment, maternal 
smoking, drug and alcohol use, psychopathology and poor diet during 
pregnancy all compromise normal development of the central nervous 
system and may possibly compromise the development of the stress 
response system (Huizink et al., 2004). Stressful parenting environments 
in the early years associated with parental psychopathology, harsh, 
critical parenting, child abuse and neglect and domestic violence may 
adversely affect brain development and lead to an adaptive down- 
regulating of the stress response system to avoid the negative effects of 
chronic hyper-arousal (Dawson et al., 2000; Susman, 2006). 
Treatment of conduct disorder based on the hypo-arousal hypoth- 
esis involves the use of highly structured and intensive learning situ- 
ations to facilitate the internalization of social rules. The positive and 
negative reinforcers used must be highly valued and delivered immedi- 
ately following responses. All rule infractions must lead to immediate 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
59 
withdrawal of desired stimuli. Rule-following should be immediately and 
intensely rewarded on a variable interval schedule, since this leads to 
learning that is maximally resistant to extinction. These treatment impli- 
: 
cations of arousal theory have been incorporated into the design of 
. 
an 
residential token economies for delinquent adolescents, behavioural 
P 
parent training programmes, school-based behavioural programmes 
and treatment foster care (Carr, 2009a). 
Temperament 
The temperament hypothesis proposes that difficult temperament is a 
risk factor for disruptive behaviour disorders. Children with difficult 
temperaments, 
which 
are predominantly 
inherited, 
have 
difficulty 
establishing regular routines for eating, toileting and sleeping; tend to 
avoid new situations; and responded to change with intense negative 
emotions. Their temperamental style tends to elicit negative reactions 
from their parents, teachers and peers, to which they respond with 
defiance, aggression and other antisocial behaviour. The temperament 
hypothesis has been supported by many studies including Chess and 
Thomas’s (1995) original New York longitudinal study (De Pauw & 
Mervielde, 2010). 
There may appear to be an inconsistency between the hypo-arousal 
hypothesis and the temperament hypothesis, with the former proposing 
that antisocial behaviour is associated with low arousal and the latter 
with difficult temperament, possibly associated with high arousal in new 
situations. It may be that low arousal and difficult temperament are 
separate routes to antisocial behaviour or to different types of antisocial 
behaviour, with low arousal being associated with callous unemotional 
psychopathy and difficult temperament associated with aggressive 
behaviour. Lorber (2004) found support for this position in a meta- 
analysis of studies of heart rate and skin conductance resting levels and 
reactivity to various stimuli. All forms of antisocial behaviour were 
associated with low resting arousal levels, but individuals with aggressive 
conduct problems showed high reactivity, wnereas those with callous 
unemotional psychopathic traits did not. 
Neuropsychological deficits 
The neuropsychological deficits hypothesis proposes that deficits in 
executive function and verbal reasoning underpin self-regulation diffi- 
culties that contribute to conduct problems. Executive function deficits 
limit the capacity to plan and follow through on prosocial courses of 
action, and so give rise to disruptive behaviour disorders. Children with 
verbal reasoning deficits may have difficulty remembering instructions, 
developing private speech to facilitate self-control, and using verbal 
strategies rather than aggression to resolve conflicts. 
Executive function and verbal reasoning deficits may also account for 
academic underachievement typical of young people with conduct disor- 
ders, and this underachievement may lead to frustration and consequent 
aggressive behaviour. This position is supported by a substantial body of 
evidence that documents verbal reasoning and executive function defi- 
cits in children and teenagers with conduct problems, by studies that 

60 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
confirm a strong association between reading difficulties and conduct 
problems, and by studies which show that unsocialized conduct prob- 
lems are associated with self-regulation problems (Moffitt & Scott, 2008; 
Nigg & Huang-Pollock, 2003; Teichner & Golden, 2000). Remedial inter- 
ventions that facilitate the development of language and academic skills 
are the principal types of treatment deriving from this theory. 
Psychodynamic theories 
Classical 
psychoanalytic 
theory points to superego 
deficits 
and 
attachment theory to the role of insecure attachment in the development 
of conduct problems. 
Psychoanalytic perspectives 
Within psychoanalysis it is assumed that societal rules and expecta- 
tions are internalized through identification with the parent of the same 
gender. This internalization is referred to as the superego. Aichorn 
(1935) argued that antisocial behaviour occurs because of impover- 
ished superego functioning. The problems with superego functioning 
were thought to arise from either overindulgent parenting on one hand 
or punitive and neglectful parenting on the other. With overindulgent 
parenting, the child internalizes lax standards and so feels no guilt when 
breaking rules or behaving immorally. In such cases any apparently 
moral behaviour is a manipulative attempt to gratify some desire. With 
punitive or neglectful parenting, the child splits the experience of the 
parent into the good caring parent and the bad punitive/neglectful par- 
ent and internalizes both of these aspects of the parent quite separately 
with little integration. In dealing with parents, peers and authority fig- 
ures, the child may be guided by either the internalization of the good 
parent or the internalization of the bad parent. Typically at any point in 
time such youngsters can clearly identify those members of their net- 
work who fall into the good and bad categories. They behave morally 
towards those for whom they experience a positive transference and 
view as good, and immorally to those towards whom they have a nega- 
tive transference and view as bad. 
Individual psychoanalytic psychotherapy has been used in the 
treatment of children and adolescents with conduct problems (e.g., 
Kernberg & Chazan, 1991). However, there are limits to the effectiveness 
of psychoanalytically based treatment for those with disruptive behaviour 
disorders (Fonagy & Target, 1994; Winkelmann et al., 2005). For 
example, in a naturalistic study, Fonagy and Target (1994) found that 
children with oppositional defiant disorder responded better than 
children with conduct disorder or ADHD. 
Attachment 
Bowlby (1944) pointed out that children who were separated from their 
primary caregivers for extended periods of time during their first months 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
61 
of life failed to develop secure attachments and so, in later life, did not 
have internal working models for secure trusting relationships. He 
referred to such children as displaying affectionless psychopathy. Since 
moral behaviour is premised on functional internal working models of 
how to conduct oneself in trusting relationships, such children behave 
immorally. 
Later studies of children reared in intact families have established a 
link between attachment insecurity and behaviour problems (e.g., Moss 
et al., 2006). Treatment according to this position should aim to provide 
the child with a secure-attachment relationship or corrective emotional 
experience which will lead to the development of appropriate internal 
working models. These in turn will provide a basis for moral action. 
More secure attachment relationships may be facilitated within families 
of young people with disruptive behaviour disorders through parent 
training (Forgatch & Patterson, 2010; Webster-Stratton & Reid, 2010), 
family therapy (Carr, 2006b), multisystemic therapy (Henggeler & 
Schaeffer, 2010) and treatment foster care (Smith & Chamberlain, 
2010), all of which are described later in this chapter. 
Cognitive-behavioural theories 
A range of theories of conduct problems have been developed within 
the broad 
cognitive 
behavioural 
tradition. 
Problems 
with 
social 
information processing and social skills deficits are the principal factors 
highlighted in cognitive theories. Social learning theories highlight the 
importance of modelling, and behavioural theories focus on the role of 
reinforcement contingencies in the maintenance of conduct problems. 
Social information processing 
Dodge and colleagues proposed that children with conduct disorders 
process social information in a different way to other children (Crick & 
Dodge, 1994). In ambiguous social situations their cognition is charac- 
terized by a hostile attributional bias. That is, children with conduct dis- 
orders attribute hostile intentions to others in social situations where the 
intentions of others are ambiguous. The aggressive behaviour of chil- 
dren with conduct disorders in such situations is, therefore, intended to 
be retaliatory. The aggression is viewed as unjustified by those against 
whom it is directed, and this leads to impaired relationships with peers 
and others in their social networks. The reactions of others to such 
apparently unjustified aggression provide confirmation for the aggres- 
sive child that others have hostile intentions, which justifies further retal- 
iatory aggression. This social information procession theory of conduct 
disorder has been supported by extensive research (Dodge et al., 
2006). 
Dodge has embedded his social information processing theory within 
a more general model of the development of aggressive behaviour, in 
which he proposes that social information processing patterns are the 
proximal mechanism through which aggressive behaviour occurs 

62 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
(Dodge, 2011; Dodge & Pettit, 2003). However, these patterns are sub- 
served by neural and psychophysiological processes and are acquired 
through genetic and environmental processes, especially in negative 
interaction with parents, teachers and peers, 
Social skills deficits 
The social skills deficit hypothesis is that conduct disorders involve 
inappropriate social behaviours, such as aggression or defiance, which 
have developed to compensate for social skills deficits. Research 
conducted to test this hypothesis has highlighted the social skills deficits 
of children with conduct disorders, and the value of training in social 
problem-solving in reducing antisocial behaviour (Losel & Beelmann, 
2005). This position proposes that antisocial children lack the skills to 
generate alternative solutions to social problems such as dealing with 
an apparently hostile peer. They also lack the skills to implement 
solutions to social problems such as these, for example using humour 
or shared interests to reduce hostility. 
Within the cognitive-behavioural tradition, group-based social skills 
programmes have been developed that aim to train youngsters in the 
social problem-solving skills they lack. 
A growing body of evidence 
shows that social problem-solving skills can reduce antisocial behaviour 
when offered alone (Lochman et al., 2010) or combined with parent 
training and other systemic interventions (Kazdin, 2010). 
Modelling 
Bandura and Walters (1959) proposed that aggression, characteristic of 
children and adolescents with conduct disorders, is learned through a 
process of imitation or modelling. Children subjected to harsh, critical 
parenting, neglect or physical abuse, or who witness domestic violence, 
become aggressive through a process of imitation. This position is sup- 
ported by a large body of evidence, particularly that which points to the 
intrafamilial transmission 
of aggressive behaviour associated with 
harsh, inconsistent parenting, child abuse and neglect, and exposure to 
domestic violence (Moffitt & Scott, 2008; Taylor & Rogers, 2005). 
According to modelling theory, treatment should aim to help parents, 
through parent training or family therapy, to model appropriate behav- 
iour for their children (Carr, 2006a; Forgatch & Patterson, 2010; 
Webster-Stratton & Reid, 2010) or provide alternative models of appro- 
priate behaviour in a residential or treatment foster care setting (Smith 
& Chamberlain, 2010). 
Coercive family process 
Patterson and his group proposed that children with conduct disorders 
learn their antisocial behaviours from involvement in coercive patterns 
of interaction with their parents, and these behaviours are then exhib- 
ited in school and community contexts (Forgatch & Patterson, 2010; 
Patterson, 1982). Marital discord, parental psychopathology, a variety 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
63 
of social and economic stressors and social isolation all contribute to 
the parents’ use of a coercive parenting style. This style has three main 
features. 
First, parents have few positive interactions with their children. 
Second, they punish children frequently, inconsistently and ineffectively. 
Third, the parents of children with conduct problems negatively reinforce 
antisocial behaviour by confronting or punishing the child briefly and 
then withdrawing the confrontation 
or punishment when the child 
escalates the antisocial behaviour, so that the child learns that escalation 
leads to parental withdrawal. By middle childhood children exposed to 
this parenting style have developed an aggressive relational style which 
leads to rejection by non-deviant peers. Such children, who often have 
comorbid specific learning difficulties, typically develop conflictual rela- 
tionships with teachers and consequent attainment problems. 
In adolescence, rejection by non-deviant peers and academic failure 
make socializing with a deviant, delinquent peer group an attractive 
option. Patterson’s group have shown that this developmental trajectory 
is common among youngsters who first present with oppositional defiant 
disorder. The delinquency of adolescence is a staging post on the route 
to adult antisocial personality disorder, criminality, drug abuse and 
conflictual, violent and unstable marital and parental roles for more than 
half of all youngsters with conduct disorder (Farrington, 1995). Therapy 
for families with preadolescent children based on this model aims to 
help parents and children break coercive patterns of interaction and 
build positive relationships, but most importantly it helps parents develop 
skills for effectively disciplining their children. There is considerable 
evidence for the effectiveness of this type of behavioural parent training 
(Forgatch & Patterson, 2010). 
Systems theory 
Systems theories highlight the role of family systems and broader social 
systems in the aetiology and maintenance of conduct problems. 
Family systems approaches 
Within the family therapy tradition, a number of assumptions have been 
influential in offering a framework for understanding how conduct 
disorders are maintained by patterns of family interaction and how they 
may be resolved by intervening 
in these patterns (Carr, 2006b). 
According to family systems theory, families with youngsters who have 
conduct problems are more disorganized than other families. Rules, 
roles and routines are unclear, and parental supervision of children is 
deficient. Communication is problematic, unclear and confusing. There 
is also an absence of systematic family problem-solving skills. 
The members of these families are more emotionally disengaged 
from each other in comparison with other families, and parent-child 
relationships may be lacking in warmth and empathy. In addition, 
families with youngsters who display conduct problems have difficulties 
maintaining 
clear, unambiguous 
intergenerational 
hierarchies and 

64 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
negotiating life-cycle transitions. With respect to ambiguous hierarchies, 
conduct problems are maintained if parents do not both agree on a 
basic set of rules of conduct for their children which they consistently 
enforce, with clear consequences for rule. violations. With respect to 
lifecycle transitions, conduct problems are more likely to occur at 
transitional points in the life cycle, when there are changes in routines 
and a build-up of stress, such as starting primary school, moving to 
secondary school and entering adolescence, or leaving secondary 
school and entering adulthood. 
Available evidence supports many of these assumptions of family 
system theory. Families of young people with disruptive behaviour dis- 
orders are more likely to be characterized by disorganization; harsh, 
critical and inconsistent parenting; lack of parental warmth; physical 
child abuse and neglect; parental criminality and psychopathology; 
marital discord; domestic violence; and many life stresses, notably pov- 
erty (Crosnoe & Cavanagh, 2010; Moffitt & Scott, 2008). Family therapy 
addresses disruptive behaviour disorders by helping families become 
more coherently organized, with better relationships, communication, 
problem solving, and fair, consistent parenting. There is good evidence 
for the effectiveness of family therapy in reducing adolescent antisocial 
behaviour (Carr, 2009b). 
Sociological perspectives 
A variety of sociological theories have posited a causal link between 
deviant antisocial behaviour and aspects of the wider socio-cultural 
context within which such behaviour occurs. Anomie theory is a 
commonly cited exemplar of this body of theories (Cloward & Ohlin, 
1960). According 
to anomie theory, 
theft and related 
antisocial 
behaviours such as mugging and lying are illegitimate means used by 
members of a socially disadvantaged delinquent subculture to achieve 
material goals valued by mainstream culture. Anomie is the state of 
lawlessness and normlessness that characterizes such subcultures. In 
support of this position, there is good evidence for a link between 
antisocial behaviour and poverty (Moffitt & Scott, 2008), and that 
membership of deviant peer groups can facilitate antisocial behaviour 
(Dishion & Dodge, 2005). Treatment premised on this theory must 
provide delinquents and their peer groups with legitimate means to 
< 
achieve societal goals. Remedial academic programmes, vocational 
training programmes, and treatment 
foster care are the main treatment 
approaches implicated by this theory. There is good evidence for the 
efficacy of treatment foster care (Smith & Chamberlain, 2010), and 
some evidence for the value of academic and vocational programmes 
in the rehabilitation of juvenile delinquents (Lipsey, 2009). 
Multisystemic ecological theory 
This position, proposed by Henggeler, entails the view that multiple sys- 
tems (including the individual, the family, the school and the community) 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
65 
are involved in the genesis and maintenance of conduct problems, and 
consequently effective treatment must target multiple systems rather 
than any single system (Henggeler & Schaeffer, 2010). Bronfenbrenner’s 
model of ecologically nested systems is the foundation for this theory 
(Bronfenbrenner & Morris, 2006). Conduct disorders, it is argued, are 
maintained by multiple factors in these multiple ecologically nested sys- 
tems. Important individual factors include difficult temperament, early 
separation experiences, hostile attributional bias, poor social skills, diffi- 
culties learning prosocial behaviour from experience, and academic 
learning difficulties. Family factors include family disorganization, ambig- 
uous family hierarchies, parent-child attachment difficulties, parenting 
and discipline problems, marital discord and difficulty negotiating family 
life-cycle transitions. School factors include patterns of interaction that 
maintain school-based discipline problems, attainment difficulties and 
lack of educational resources. Community factors include involvement 
with deviant peers, drug abuse and involvement in poorly co-ordinated 
_multiagency networks, _ 
Henggeler developed multisystemic therapy (MST) based on this 
ecological conceptualization of disruptive behaviour disorders. MST is a 
comprehensive empirically supported programme for antisocial young 
people and their families. For each case, treatment is individually tai- 
lored and based on a multisystem ecological assessment. Treatment 
packages include family therapy to reduce family disorganization, 
school-based interventions to deal with interactional patterns that main- 
tain school-based conduct problems and underachievement, individual 
and group cognitive and social skills training, and peer-group-based 
interventions to enhance prosocial peer relationships and reduce 
involvement in deviant peer groups. Evidence from a series of trials 
supports the effectiveness of this approach (Henggeler & Schaeffer, 
2010). 
Assessment 
Assessment and treatment of children with conduct disorders is usually 
carried out by multidisciplinary teams which include clinical psychologists 
and colleagues from other disciplines such as social work and psychiatry. 
Children’s conduct problems require an assessment of their behaviour, 
abilities, and family and school situations. The Achenbach System of 
Empirically Based Assessment (ASEBA, Achenbach & Rescorla, 2000, 
2001) and the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ, Goodman, 
2001) are widely used to assess conduct problems. 
ASEBA parent, teacher and self-report rating scales contain over 
100 items and yield a total problem score, scores for internalizing and 
externalizing behaviour problems, and scores in various problem areas 
including conduct problems. There are versions for school-aged children 
and preschoolers. 
Computer scoring systems are available and 
normative data are used to interpret scores. SDQ parent, teacher and 
self-report rating scales contain only 25 items and yield a total problem 
score, as well as scores for various problem areas, including conduct 

66 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
problems. There are also SDQ norms to facilitate interpretation. The 
brevity of the SDQ makes it very acceptable to parents and teachers. 
To establish a DSM-IV-TR or ICD-10 diagnosis of oppositional 
defiant disorder or conduct disorder, a structured interview for parents 
and children may be administered, such as the troublesome behaviour 
module of the Development and Well-Being Assessment (DAWBA, 
Goodman et al., 2000). Abilities and achievements of children with 
conduct problems, as well as their family and school situations, are 
assessed in the same way as those of children with ADHD, mentioned 
earlier. Assessment information is integrated into a formulation that is 
used for treatment planning as illustrated in the case study of conduct 
disorder described earlier. This should link predisposing, precipitating 
and maintaining factors to the young person’s behavioural problems 
and specify protective factors that may be drawn on during treatment. A 
general clinical formulation model for conduct disorder and oppositional 
defiant disorder is given in Figure 2.4. 
Intervention 
The material covered earlier in this chapter makes it clear that conduct 
problems are complex. Personal genetic, neurobiological and psycho- 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Any factor that impairs internalization of social norms 
Personal factors — Genetic vulnerability, prenatal and perinatal stresses, difficult 
temperament, impulsivity, risk-taking, hostile attributional bias 
Family factors — Disorganization, parental maladjustment and parenting problems 
(e.g. coercive style) 
Educational factors - Language delay, learning disability, school failure, lack of 
educational resources, and lack of career opportunities 
Deviant peer-group membership, low SES and community supportive of crime 
MAINTAINING FACTORS 
Personal factors 
PRECIPITATING 
Family factors 
FACTORS 
Life transitions 
Educational factors 
& stresses that 
Deviant peer group 
fyrthor-lenpale 
membership 
Ppraning 
Low SES, and high crime 
community 
; 
Conduct Disorder 
Failure to engage in 
Oppositional 
treatment 
Defiant Disorder 
PROTECTIVE FACTORS 
Personal strengths and 
achievements 
Family stability and 
support 
School support 
Prosocial peer group 
membership 
Community support 
Engagement in treatment 
Figure 2.4 General formulation model for conduct disorder and oppositional defiant disorder 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
67 
logical characteristics of children and adolescents, and psychosocial 
factors within the family and the wider system, may predispose young- 
Sters to develop conduct problems. Once these develop, they may 
remain confined to the home in the case of oppositional defiant disorder 
or spread to the community in the case of conduct disorder. The degree 
to which conduct problems escalate depends on the degree to which 
there are problem-maintaining factors within the individual, family, 
school and peer group. Despite their complexity, conduct problems are 
not completely refractory to treatment. Available evidence from empiri- 
cal studies permits treatments of choice to be identified for preadoles- 
cent behaviour problems and more pervasive difficulties in adolescence. 
For circumscribed conduct problems, typical of children with oppo- 
sitional defiant disorder, behavioural parent training is currently the 
treatment for which there is greatest empirical support. In a meta- 
analysis of over 70 studies, McCart et al. (2006) found that for children 
under 12, parent training programmes were significantly more effective 
than child-focused programmes. Behavioural parent training involves 
coaching parents to target and reinforce their children’s prosocial 
behaviour while extinguishing their antisocial behaviour (Forgatch & 
Patterson, 2010; Webster-Stratton & Reid, 2010). 
For pervasive conduct problems, typical of children with conduct 
disorder, family therapy, multisystemic therapy and treatment foster 
care are currently the treatments for which there is greatest empirical 
support 
(Carr, 2009b). 
Family therapy involves 
helping 
parents, 
adolescents and other family members develop patterns of interaction 
that promote prosocial behaviour, better communication and family 
problem-solving, and for conduct problems functional family therapy is 
one of the approaches with a particularly strong evidence base (Sexton 
& Alexander, 2003). Multisystemic therapy extends beyond the family 
and includes intervention in the school and peer group and also at the 
individual level, so that problem-maintaining factors in all of these 
systems are modified (Henggeler & Schaeffer, 2010). Multisystemic 
intervention may also involve addressing parents’ personal difficulties 
such as depression or alcohol problems. 
Where parents’ personal difficulties are too severe to permit them to 
engage effectively in multisystemic treatment, treatment foster care is 
the intervention of choice (Smith & Chamberlain, 2010). Here, the 
conduct disordered youngster is placed with a specially trained foster 
family who work collaboratively with the child’s natural parents in 
implementing a behavioural programme that allows the youngster to 
develop prosocial behaviour and disengage from patterns of antisocial 
behaviour. 
With respect to service development, it may be most efficient to offer 
services for adolescent conduct disorder on a continuum of care (Carr, 
2009a). Less severe cases may be offered family therapy. Moderately 
severe cases and those that do not respond to circumscribed family 
interventions may be offered multisystemic therapy. Extremely severe 
cases and those that are unresponsive to intensive multisystemic 
therapy may be offered treatment foster care. These conclusions are 

68 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
consistent with international best practice guidelines (American Aca- 
demy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 2007b; NICE, 2006a). 
There are many other treatments for conduct disorders besides 
those highlighted in this chapter. Some are empirically untested so we 
do not know if they are effective. Some have been tested and found to 
be ineffective. And most importantly, there are those treatments that 
have been tested and found to be harmful. There is now considerable 
evidence that intervention programmes that bring youngsters with 
conduct disorders together in groups lead to an increase in conduct 
problems (Dishion & Dodge, 2005). This contamination process may 
occur because youngsters reinforce each other’s deviant behaviour and 
share a commitment to a deviant set of values and ideology. The fact 
that interventions that aggregate conduct-disordered youngsters are 
harmful unfortunately has not had a major impact on policies for dealing 
with juvenile delinquents. Many delinquents are assessed and treated 
in group-based residential settings. Such policies exacerbate rather 
than ameliorate conduct problems. 
Controversies 
There are many controversies in the scientific study, assessment and 
treatment of psychological problems in children and adolescents. 
Dimensions or categories 
With regard to scientific study, there is controversy over whether children’s 
abnormal behaviour is best conceptualized in dimensional or categorical 
terms. While the DSM and ICD diagnostic systems are clearly based 
on a categorical conceptualization of children’s psychological difficulties, 
most empirical studies point to the validity of dimensional models. For 
example, factor analytic studies consistently show that common childhood 
difficulties fall on the two dimensions of internalizing and externalizing 
behaviour problems, which are normally distributed within the population 
(Achenbach, 2009). 
Children with diagnoses of oppositional defiant disorder, conduct dis- 
order and ADHD represent a subgroup of cases with extreme external- 
izing behaviour problems, while those with anxiety or depressive 
disorders have extreme internalizing behaviour problems (Carr, 2006a). 
Similarly, children with a diagnosis of intellectual disability fall at the 
lower end of the continuum of intelligence, a trait is normally distributed 
within the population (Carr et al., 2007). The dimensional approach is 
clearly more scientifically valid than a categorical approach, and has the 
potential to be less stigmatizing. On the other hand, categorical diag- 
noses such as ADHD create a focus for pressure groups whose inter- 
ests are served by reifying psychological difficulties as ‘psychiatric 
illnesses’. 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
69 
Are psychological problems really ‘psychiatric ilinesses’? 
This brings us on to the area of assessment, in which there is a 
controversy over whether ADHD, conduct disorder and other DSM and 
ICD diagnoses are ‘real psychiatric illnesses’, invalid fabrications, or 
spurious social constructions (Kutchins & Kirk,1999). Those who argue 
that they are 
invalid 
fabrications 
point to the evidence 
for the 
dimensionality of childhood psychological problems. Those who argue 
that they are spurious social constructions point to the interests that are 
served by defining them as ‘real psychiatric illnesses’. 
Parents, health and educational professionals, the pharmaceutical 
industry and society at large may all, in certain circumstances, derive 
benefits from conceptualizing children’s psychological problems as ‘real 
psychiatric illnesses’. For example, parents or schools may have 
difficulty meeting children’s needs for intellectual stimulation, nurturance 
and clear limit-setting, and so children in their care become aggressive 
and disruptive. In response these parents or educational professionals 
may prefer children in their care to receive a diagnosis of ADHD and a 
prescription for stimulant therapy, rather than exploring ways to better 
meet the children’s needs for intellectual stimulation, nurturance and 
clear limit-setting. In such instances pharmaceutical companies may 
support the diagnosis of ADHD, because they may stand to gain 
financially from offering a pharmacological treatment for behaviour 
problems. 
Should treatment focus on the child or the context? 
This brings us to controversies concerning the treatment of psychological 
problems in children and adolescents. 
If children’s difficulties are 
conceptualized as individual ‘psychiatric illnesses’, there is a risk that 
the predominant focus for treatment will be on the individual child rather 
than on the broader social context within which the child lives. That is, 
the main emphasis 
will be on treating children’s problems with 
medication and individual therapy to modify the ‘illness inside the child’, 
with less emphasis on addressing important risk factors within the 
child’s family, school and wider social context. 
In the cases of oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder 
this is particularly problematic, since the major risk factors that can 
effectively be addressed in treatment are social, through interventions 
such as parent training, family therapy, MST and treatment foster care. 
In the case of ADHD, the strong emphasis on medication is problematic 
because its effects are time limited to about 3 years (Swanson & Volkow, 
2009). Also, stimulant medication may adversely affect growth and 
cardiovascular functioning and lead to a variety of somatic complaints 
including loss of appetite, headaches, insomnia and tics, which occur in 
5—12% of cases (Breggin, 2001; Paykina et al., 2007; Rapport & Moffitt, 
2002). 

70 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Summary 
A wide variety of psychological problems may occur in child- 
hood. This chapter focused on disruptive behaviour disorders, 
which include ADHD, oppositional defiant disorder and con- 
duct disorder. ADHD is characterized by inattention, hyperac- 
tivity and impulsivity. The median prevalence rate for ADHD in 
international epidemiological studies is 2.7%. Comorbid devel- 
opmentai language delays, specific learning difficulties, elimi- 
nation disorders, conduct disorders and emotional disorders 
are quite common. A poor outcome occurs for about a third of 
cases who typically have secondary conduct and academic 
problems. 
ADHD is a one of the most heritable psychological disor- 
ders. Extreme levels of overactivity and executive function 
deficits, which are polygenetically determined, probably inter- 
act with environmental factors (either intrauterine or psychoso- 
cial) to give rise to the clinical syndrome of ADHD. Individuals 
with ADHD show structural and functional neuroanatomical 
abnormalities of the frontostriatal circuitry, which subserves 
executive function, and the cerebellum, which subserves tem- 
poral information processing. They also show a dysregulation 
of the dopamine and noradrenergic and adrenergic systems. 
Adjustment problems shown by youngsters with ADHD are in 
part maintained by problematic relationships within the family, 
school and peer group. Multimodal treatment includes behav- 
ioural parent training, school-based contingency management, 
self-regulation skills training, dietary control where food intoler- 
ance is present, and stimulant therapy. In addition assessment 
and treatment of comorbid problems may be required. 
A distinction is made between oppositional defiant disorder 
and conduct disorder, with the former reflecting a less perva- 
sive disturbance than the latter; the central feature of both is 
antisocial behaviour. The median prevalence rate for both 
oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder in interna- 
tional epidemiological studies is 3.7%. Children with conduct 
problems are a treatment priority because the outcome for 
more than half of these youngsters is very poor in terms of 
criminality and psychological adjustment. In the long term the 
cost to society of unsuccessfully treated conduct problems is 
enormous. 
Comorbidity for conduct disorders and both ADHD and emo- 
tional problems such as anxiety and depression is very high, 
particularly in clinical populations. Three classes of risk factor 
increase the probability that conduct problems in childhood or 
adolescence 
will 
escalate 
into 
later 
life 
difficulties: 

2* CHILDHOOD BEHAVIOUR DISORDERS 
71 
personal biological and psychological characteristics, problem- 
atic parenting practices, and family disorganization. Biological 
theories have focused on the roles of genetic factors, neurobio- 
logical deficits, neurotransmitter dysregulation, neuroendocrine 
factors, arousal levels, temperament, and neuropsychological 
deficits in the aetiology of conduct problems. Classical psycho- 
analytic theory points to superego deficits and attachment 
_ theory points to insecure attachment in the development of 
conduct disorders. Problems with social information processing 
and social skills deficits are the principal factors highlighted in 
cognitive theories of conduct problems. 
Modelling and coercive family processes have been identi- 
fied by social learning theory as central to the development and 
maintenance of conduct difficulties. Systems theories highlight 
the role of characteristics of family systems, broader social 
network systems and societal systems in the aetiology and 
maintenance of conduct problems, with oppositional defiant 
disorders in pre-adolescent children whose problems are con- 
fined to the home, behavioural parent training is the treatment 
of choice. With older children and adolescents who present 
with pervasive conduct problems, family therapy, multisystemic 
therapy and treatment foster care are currently the treatments 
for which there is greatest empirical support, and these may be 
offered on a continuum of care depending on problem severity. 
There is controversy over whether children’s abnormal 
behaviour is best conceptualized in dimensional or categorical 
terms. There is also controversy over whether DSM and ICD 
diagnoses are ‘real psychiatric illnesses’, invalid fabrications or 
spurious social constructions. Finally there is controversy over 
whether children’s psychological problems are most usefully 
conceptualized as individual ‘psychiatric illnesses’ or as aspects 
of the broader social context within which the child lives. 
Questions 
What are the main psychological disorders that occur in childhood? 
What are the main clinical features of ADHD, oppositional defiant 
disorder and conduct disorder? 
How prevalent are the disruptive behaviour disorders? 
What are the main biological and psychological theories of disruptive 
behaviour disorders and the main research findings relevant to 
these theories? 
What are the main evidence-based approaches to the assessment 
and treatment of disruptive behaviour disorders? 
Do you think it’s useful to conceptualize children’s behaviour 
problems as ‘psychiatric illnesses’? 

72 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
FURTHER READING 
Professional 
Carr, A. (2006). Handbook of child and adolescent clinical psychology: A 
contextual approach (second edition). London: Routledge. 
Weisz, J. & Kazdin, A. (2010). Evidence-based psychotherapies for chil- 
dren and adolescents (second edition). New York: Guilford Press. 
Self-help 
Barkley, R. (2000). Taking charge of ADHD: the complete authoritative 
guide for parents (revised edition). New York: Guilford. 
Forehand, R. & Long, N. (1996). Parenting the strong-willed child: The 
clinically proven five week programme for parents of two to six year olds. 
Chicago: Contemporary Books. 
Forgatch, M. & Patterson, G. (1989). Parents and adolescents living to- 
gether. Part 1. The basics. Eugene, OR: Castalia. 
Forgatch, M. & Patterson, G. (1989). Parents and adolescents living to- 
gether. Part 2. Family problem solving. Eugene, OR: Castalia. 
WEBSITES 
AACAP (American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry) prac- 
tice parameters for the treatment of ADHD, conduct disorder and oppo- 
sitional defiant disorder: 
www.aacap.org/cs/root/member_information/practice_information/ 
practice_parameters/practice_parameters 
Achenbach System of Empirically Based Assessment (ASEBA): 
www.aseba.org 
Incredible Years Programme: 
www. incredibleyears.com 
NICE (National Institute for Clinical Excellence) guidelines for treating 
ADHD: 
http://guidance.nice.org.uk/topic/mentalhealthbehavioural 
Parents Plus Programme: 
www.parentsplus.ie 
Parent-Child Interaction Therapy: 
http://pcit.phhp.ufl.edu 
Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ): 
www.sdqinfo.com 

Eating disorders 
After studying this chapter you will be able to: 
e give an account of the main clinical features of 
anorexia and bulimia nervosa 
e summarize the epidemiology of eating disorders 
e 
list the risk factors for eating disorders 
e outline the main biological and psychological 
theories of eating disorders 
Introduction 
Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are the main eating disorders of 
concern 
in clinical 
psychology. They typically 
first occur during 
adolescence. In both conditions there is an overevaluation of body 
shape and weight, with self-worth being judged almost exclusively in 
terms of these personal attributes. With anorexia, the primary feature is 
the maintenance of a very low body weight, whereas with bulimia the 
main feature is a cycle of binge eating and self-induced vomiting or 
other extreme weight control measures including dieting, excessive 
exercise, and laxative use. Diagnostic criteria for these two eating 
disorders are given in Table 3.1. 
Eating disorders are of concern because they are dangerous (Klump 
et al., 2009; Mitchell & Crow, 2010). In chronic cases they lead to many 
Learning objectives 
eure. 
al 
e name the main evidence-based approaches to 
assessment and treatment of eating disorders. 

74 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
TABLE 3.1 
Diagnostic criteria for anorexia and bulimia nervosa 
ICD-10 
DSM-IV-TR 
Anorexia nervosa 
A. Refusal to maintain body weight at or above 
a minimally normal weight for age and 
height (weight loss or failure to gain weight 
in a growth period leading to body weight 
less than 85% of that expected). 
B. Intense fear of gaining weight or becoming 
fat even though underweight. 
C. Disturbance in the way in which one’s body 
weight or shape is experienced, undue 
influence of body weight or shape on self- 
evaluation, or denial of seriousness of the 
current low body weight. 
D. In postmenarcheal females, amenorrhea 
(the absence of at least three consecutive 
menstrual cycies). 
Specify restricting type or binge eating—purging 
type. 
Bulimia nervosa 
A. Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An 
episode of binge eating is characterized by 
both of the following: 
. Eating in a discrete period of time (e.g. 
within a 2 hour period) an amount of food 
that is definitely larger than most people 
would eat during a similar period of time 
and under similar circumstances. 
2. A sense of lack of contro! over eating 
during the episode (e.g. a feeling that one 
cannot stop eating or control what or how 
much one is eating). 
B. Recurrent inappropriate compensatory 
behaviour in order to prevent weight gain, 
such as self-induced vomiting; misuse of 
laxatives, diuretics, enemas, or other 
medications; fasting or excessive exercise. 
C. The binge eating and inappropriate 
compensatory behaviours both occur, on 
average, at least twice a week for 3 months. 
D. Self-evaluation is unduly influenced by body 
shape and weight. 
E. The disturbance does not occur exclusively 
during episodes of anorexia nervosa. 
Specify purging or non-purging type. 
—_= 
For a definitive diagnosis the following are required: 
A. 
B. 
D. 
Body weight is maintained at least 15% below that 
expected (either lost or never achieved) or a 
Quetelet’s body mass index of 17. 5 or less (BMI = 
weight (kg)/(height (m)?). Prepubertal patients may 
show failure to make the expected weight gain during 
the period of growth. 
The weight loss is self-induced by the avoidance of 
fattening foods, self-induced vomiting, self-induced 
purging, excessive exercise, use of appetite 
suppressants or diuretics. 
. There is a body image distortion in the form of a specific 
psychopathology whereby a dread of fatness persists 
as an intrusive, overvalued idea and the patient 
imposes a low weight threshold on himself or herself. 
A widespread endocrine disorder involving the 
hypothalamic-—pituitary—gonadal axis is manifest in 
women as amenorrhea and in men as a loss of sexual 
interest and potency. There may also be elevated 
levels of growth hormone, raised cortisol levels, 
changes in the peripheral metabolism of the thyroid 
hormone and abnormalities of insulin secretion. 
. If the onset is prepubertal, the sequence of pubertal 
events is delayed or arrested (growth ceases; in girls 
breasts do not develop and there is a primary 
amenorrhea; in boys the genitals remain juvenile). 
With recovery, puberty is often completed normally but 
the menarche is late. 
For a definitive diagnosis all of the following are required: 
A. 
B. 
C. 
There is a persistent preoccupation with eating and an 
irresistible craving for food; the patient succumbs to 
episodes of overeating in which large amounts of food 
are consumed in short periods of time. 
The patient attempts to counteract the fattening effects 
of food by one or more of the following: self-induced 
vomiting; purgative abuse; alternating periods of 
starvation; use of drugs such as appetite 
suppressants, thyroid preparations or diuretics. When 
bulimia occurs in diabetic patients they may choose to 
neglect their insulin treatment. 
The psychopathology consists of a morbid dread of 
fatness and the patient sets herself or himself a 
sharply defined weight threshold, well below the 
premorbid weight that constitutes the optimum or 
healthy weight in the opinion of the physician. There is 
often but not always a history of an earlier episode of 
anorexia nervosa, the interval between the two 
disorders ranging from a few months to several years. 
This earlier episode may have been fully expressed or 
may have assumed minor cryptic form with a 
moderate loss of weight and/or a transient phase of 
amenorrhea. 
Note: Adapted from DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) and ICD-10 (WHO, 1992). 

3 * EATING DISORDERS 
75 
medical complications including growth retardation, osteoporosis, gas- 
trointestinal bleeding, dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities and cardiac 
arrest. The mortality rate among women with anorexia is 12 times that 
of the normal population, and eating disorders are associated with a 
raised suicide risk. It is ironic in our western industrial culture, where 
food is plentiful, that self-starvation and a pattern of bingeing and 
purging are major problems affecting teenage girls. 
In this chapter, after considering the classification, epidemiology and 
Clinical features of eating disorders, a variety of theoretical explanations 
concerning their aetiology will be considered along with relevant empir- 
ical evidence. Some comments on assessment and treatment will also 
be made. 
Case study of anorexia nervosa 
Mar, a 14-year-old girl, was referred for treatment because her weight 
had fallen continuously since she was about 12 years old. When 
assessed she was 5 stone 11 pounds (37 kg) in weight and 5 feet 
2 inches (1.57 m) tall. The normal weight range for a 14-year-old girl is 
6 stone 8 pounds to 9 stone. Mar had a body mass index (BMI) of 15, 
which is at the first percentile and significantly below the normal range. 
BMI is an index of thinness which is calculated by dividing weight in 
kilograms by height in metres squared. The normal range for BMI is 
18.5-24.9. Mar had amenorrhea, a highly restrictive eating pattern of 2 
years’ duration and a daily routine involving episodes of intensive 
exercise. She had gone through an episode of self-induced vomiting 
after mealtimes and occasional bingeing for about three months, but 
this had ceased a year previously. 
Presentation 
In the intake interview Mar expressed a fear of becoming fat and said 
she experienced her hips, buttocks, stomach and thighs to be consider- 
ably larger than their actual size. That is, she had a distorted body 
image, believing herself to be markedly larger than her actual size. She 
continually ruminated about food and the number of calories associated 
with each aspect of her diet. Her mood was generally low, and she had 
on occasion experienced suicidal thoughts, but had never had frank 
suicidal intentions. On the Eating Disorder Inventory (Garner, 2005), 
Mar obtained extreme scores on the drive for thinness, body dissatis- 
faction, ineffectiveness, perfectionism, and maturity fear subscales. 
Mar held a range of rigid beliefs about the importance of controlling her 
body shape. 
Developmental history 
Mar’s personal developmental history was within normal limits. Her 
language and cognitive development had been advanced and Mar had 
always been in the top 10% of her class in school for academic subjects. 

76 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Within the family, she was described by her parents, Roddy and Maggie, 
as a model child. Mar had no previous behavioural or emotional 
problems. She had good peer relationships and a circle of about four to 
six good friends in her neighbourhood. The transition to secondary 
school had been uneventful, as had her menarche. 
Mar continued to do as well in secondary school as she had in 
primary school, but towards the end of her first year she became 
despondent about her weight. As a young teenager she was, according 
to her mother, ‘well built’. Mar began dieting shortly before her 13th 
birthday. She believed that she was not fitting in with her friends, who 
by now were going to discos and beginning to take an interest in boys. 
Her mother’s view was that she had been hurt by some critical comments 
made by girls at her school about her weight. 
History of the presenting problem 
What began as normal dieting, which was supported wholeheartedly by 
her parents, gradually became more and more intense around the time 
that Bev, Mar’s older sister, went to college and her younger brother 
Nick began school. Also, at that time there was increased conflict 
between Maggie and Seamus (Bev’s father and Maggie's first husband). 
Most of the arguments were about financing Bev during her time at 
college. Maggie and Seamus had separated when Bev was young, and 
Bev had had little contact with her father since then. However, because 
of the family’s limited financial resources, Maggie had asked Seamus to 
help with supporting Bev through college. It was about this issue that 
the conflict had arisen. Mar was a sensitive girl and worried about the 
effect of this conflict on her mother. 
Shortly after she started dieting, Mar began to lose weight rapidly, 
and changed from being ‘well built’ to being quite slim. After about year 
of dieting (and a year before the intake interview), Roddy, quite by 
accident, had found Mar vomiting behind the toilet block when the family 
were on holiday on a campsite. Maggie and Roddy were shocked by 
this. They had seen programmes about bulimia on TV and knew that 
secretive vomiting was a sign of an eating disorder. Mar said she had a 
stomach upset, and denied that her vomiting was motivated by a fear of 
fatness. 
After the holiday, she was taken to the family doctor by the parents 
for an assessment of her dieting and vomiting problems. The doctor 
said that Mar had a mild eating problem, but provided she stopped 
dieting all would be well. He saw her regularly over the course of the 12: 
months prior to a multidisciplinary assessment. During that period, he 
advised the parents to take a low-key approach and encouraged Mar to 
eat a healthy balanced diet and avoid bingeing and vomiting. He 
impressed on her the dangers of developing an electrolyte imbalance 
and cardiac problems if she persisted with the bulimic pattern. Mar 
stopped the bulimic pattern but continued with dieting. Her weight 
continued to fall drastically and her periods stopped about four months 
before the assessment. 

3 * EATING DISORDERS 
77 
Roddy and Maggie did not know what to do to stop this fanatical 
dieting, so they tried a few different things. Maggie, who loved to cook, 
made increasingly sumptuous meals to try to tempt Mar away from her 
diet. She took a softly-softly approach, never raising her voice and 
never being harsh or punitive. She looked to her mother, Mrs Fox, for 
support and gradually felt more and more guilt. She was convinced that 
the eating problem was a reflection on some mistake she had made as 
a parent, and ruminated about this and the effects on Mar of her conflict 
with Seamus. Roddy left the management of Mar’s eating problem to 
Maggie, although occasionally he tried to convince Mar to eat. These 
conversations usually ended in a heated argument, with Roddy shouting 
at Mar and telling her she was breaking her mother’s heart, and then 
storming out of the room. 
Because Roddy’s attempts to get Mar to eat had been stressful and 
unsuccessful, he had gradually stopped trying to encourage Mar to eat. 
Mealtimes had become a nightmare, according to Roddy. He said he 
now frequently played a round of golf after work and afterwards ate a 
bar-meal at the golf club with his brother Mel. 
Family history 
Mar lived with her mother, Maggie, her father, Roddy, and her younger 
brother, Nick, aged 7. Her older sister, Bev, aged 20, had moved out 
2 years previously to go to college. Roddy’s brother and three sisters 
and Maggie’s two brothers were all married with children, none of whom 
had any significant psychological problems or eating disorders. Maggie’s 
two brothers tended to deny the reality of Mar’s problem or to say it was 
something she would grow out of. Roddy’s brother saw Mar’s behaviour 
as defiance that required strict discipline. Roddy’s sisters thought that it 
was a personal problem and that she might be depressed about 
something. 
Formulation 
Mar was a 14-year-old girl who presented with anorexia nervosa and a 
history of bulimia, the onset of which was precipitated by Mar’s entry into 
adolescence, critical comments made by peers about her weight and 
increased family stress. This stress was associated with her half-sister’s 
move to college, conflict between her mother and her half-sister’s father, 
and her younger brother's entry into primary school. Mar’s personality 
profile and weight-related issues predisposed her to developing ano- 
rexia. She had a history of being ‘well-built’, was dissatisfied with her 
weight and in adolescence had dealt with this initially through dieting and 
later through a bulimic pattern of vomiting when she believed she had 
overeaten. Her attempts at weight control were excessive because of 
her personality profile. She was perfectionistic, but also believed herself 
to be ineffective and so strived excessively to achieve her ideal weight. 
Mar’s restrictive eating was maintained at an interpersonal level by 
the inconsistent way in which her parents managed her refusal to eat a 

78 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
History of being overweight, dissatisfaction with 
weight, dieting and bulimia 
Personality profile (perfectionism and ineffectiveness) 
PRECIPITATING 
FACTORS 
+ 
MAINTAINING 
he Ry seer 
foiy 
PROTECTIVE 
FACTORS 
Peer criticism 
FACTORS 
Restricted eating and 
Family stress 
High intelligence 
the starvation 
Parents’ motivation 
syndrome 
and commitment 
Distorted body 
Su 
rs 
é 
pportive peer 
image, maturity fears 
group 
Parental 
inconsistency in 
management of 
ANOREXIA 
restricted eating 
Figure.3.1 Formulation of a case of anorexia nervosa 
normal diet and maintain a normal body weight. Mar’s anorexia was 
maintained at an intrapsychic level by her distorted body image, maturity 
fears and need for control coupled with a sense of being powerless. It 
was also maintained by the rigid thinking, obsession with food and 
difficulty taking a normal perspective that accompanies the starvation 
process. Important protective factors were the parents’ commitment to 
engaging in family treatment, the availability of Mar’s supportive peer 
group, who wanted her to recover and rejoin them, and Mar’s high 
intelligence. This formulation is diagrammed in Figure 3.1. 
Treatment 
Mar and her family participated in outpatient family therapy for 6 months. 
In the first stage Maggie and Roddy took responsibility for refeeding Mar 
and helping her attain a normal body weight. Once she attained a body 
weight in the normal range, she was encouraged to take control of her 
diet and weight. This was monitored by the therapy team on a weekly 
basis. Provided Mar did not fall below a BMI of 19, her parents agreed not 
to interfere in the self-management of her diet and weight. 
In the middle phase of therapy the focus was on helping the family 
arrange for Mar to develop age-appropriate routines, pastimes and 
responsibilities with increasing autonomy and privacy. Mar rekindled 
her relationships with her friends, developed an interest in creative 

3 * EATING DISORDERS 
79 
writing and began to go to dances and concerts, like a normal teenager. 
The final phase of therapy helped the family anticipate situations where 
relapses might occur and plan ways to manage such situations. Mar 
continued to maintain a normal body weight after treatment, 
but 
remained slim. She was very careful about her diet and exercise, so as 
to avoid becoming overweight. 
Epidemiology, course and outcome 
Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are most common among female 
adolescents and young women (Hoek, 2006; Keel, 2010). About 1-2% 
of the adolescent and young adult female population suffer from eating 
disorders. Anorexia is less common than bulimia. The average preva- 
lence rates for anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa among young 
females are about 0.3-0.5% and 14% respectively. The onset for ano- 
rexia usually occurs in adolescence, and the peak age of onset for 
bulimia is in later adolescence or young adulthood. Community studies 
show that, contrary to earlier data from clinical studies, there is not a 
significant relationship between eating disorders and social class. 
Since 1960 there has been an increase in the incidence of eating 
disorders in the UK and the USA, largely accounted for by increases in 
rates of bulimia rather than anorexia. Since the 1990s in the UK, rates 
of bulimia have begun to decline (Currin et al., 2005). While eating 
disorders may be more common in western industrialised countries, 
there is growing evidence of eating disorders in non-westernised 
cultures. In clinical rather than community populations, anorexia nervosa 
is commonly comorbid with mood and obsessive compulsive disorders, 
while bulimia nervosa is commonly comorbid with drug abuse and 
borderline personality disorder. 
The outcome for eating disorders is poor for a significant minority of 
cases (Steinhausen, 2002; Stice, 2002), but can be improved with early 
intervention 
and 
evidence-based 
treatment 
(American 
Psychiatric 
Association, 2006; NICE, 2004a). For anorexia nervosa about half of all 
cases have a good outcome, a third have moderate outcome and a fifth 
have a poor outcome. At 20-year follow-up, the mortality rate is about 6% 
(with a range of 0-21% across studies). Starvation and suicide are the 
primary causes of death. A poor prognosis is associated with lower 
weight, a more chronic condition, the absence of a clear precipitating 
stressful life event, bulimic symptoms, comorbid obsessive compulsive 
disorder, problematic family relationships, dropping out of treatment and 
lower social class. For bulimia nervosa about half of all cases have a 
good outcome, a quarter have a moderate outcome and the remaining 
quarter have a poor outcome. A poor prognosis in bulimia is associated 
with later onset, a more chronic condition, more frequent bingeing and 
vomiting, greater body dissatisfaction, higher perfectionism, comorbid 
substance abuse, impulsive personality disorders, and lower social class. 
Risk factors identified in an extensive review of longitudinal and 
cross-sectional studies for eating disorders are given in Table 3.2 
(Jacobi et al., 2004). 

80 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
TABLE 3.2 
Risk factors for eating disorders 
Risk factors common to anorexia 
and bulimia nervosa 
Female 
Adolescent 
Genetic factors 
Pregnancy complications 
Child sexual abuse 
Risk factors unique to 
anorexia nervosa 
Preterm birth/Birth trauma 
Infant feeding and sleep 
problems 
High-concern parenting in 
early childhood 
Obsessionality (OCD, 
OCPD) in adolescence 
Perfectionism in 
adolescence 
Risk factors unique to 
bulimia nervosa 
Childhood obesity 
Social phobia in 
adolescence 
Parental criticism 
about weight, high 
expectations and low 
contact in adolescence 
Parental obesity in 
adolescence 
Parental depression, 
drug and alcohol abuse 
Physical neglect in childhood 
Gastrointestinal problems, picky eating and 
in adolescence 
Weight subculture 
(dancer, model, athlete) 
Acculturation 
eating conflicts in childhood 
Childhood anxiety disorder 
Stressful life events in childhood and 
adolescence 
Weight concerns and dieting in adolescence 
Low social support in adolescence 
Low self-esteem 
Ineffectiveness 
Low interoception (difficulty interpreting internal 
gastrointestinal and emotional stimuli) 
Avoidant coping 
Note: Based on C. Jacobi, C. Hayward, M. de Zwaan, H. C. Kraemer, & W. S. Agras (2004). Coming to terms with risk 
factors for eating disorders: Application of risk terminology and suggestions for a general taxonomy. Psychological 
Bulletin, 130, 19-65. 
Clinical features 
Historically anorexia nervosa was first described in modern medical 
literature by Charles Laségue in France in 1873 and by Sir William Gull 
in the UK in 1874, and it was Gull who first used the term ‘anorexia 
nervosa’. Both Laségue and Gull described anorexia as a condition 
characterized by emaciation, an inadequate and unhealthy pattern of 
eating, and an excessive concern with the control of body weight and 
shape. 
Attempts 
at subclassifying 
eating 
disorders 
led 
to the 
establishment of bulimia nervosa as a separate diagnosis from anorexia 
in 1979 by Gerard Russell in the UK. In the classification of eating 
disorders in both DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000) 
and ICD-10 (World Health Organization, 1992), this distinction between 
anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa is a central organizing principle, 
with the former being characterized primarily by weight loss and the 
latter by a cyclical pattern of bingeing and purging. 

3 * EATING DISORDERS 
81 
The distinction, while descriptively useful, does not take full account 
of variations in eating problems seen in clinical practice. Many anorexic 
clients present with bulimic symptoms and many bulimic clients develop 
anorexia. The DSM contains a category — eating disorders not otherwise 
specified — for the many ‘mixed cases’ seen in clinical practice that do 
not meet the criteria for either anorexia or bulimia. 
Eating disorders are characterized by distinctive clinical features in 
the domains of behaviour, 
perception, 
cognition, 
emotion, 
social 
adjustment and physical health (Agras, 2010). At a behavioural level, 
restrictive eating is typical of anorexia. Clients report low calorific intake 
and eating low-calorie foods over a significant time period. They may 
cook for the family but not eat meals they prepare. Clients with anorexia 
present as thin or emaciated. They may wear baggy clothes to conceal 
the extent of their weight loss. 
In contrast, clients with bulimia are typically of normal weight. A cycle 
of restrictive eating, bingeing and compensatory behaviours is typical of 
bulimia. These compensatory behaviours may include vomiting, using 
diuretics and laxatives or excessive exercising. Usually particular types 
of situation that are interpreted as threatening or stressful lead to a 
negative mood state and precipitate bouts of bingeing. Such situations 
include interpersonal conflicts, isolation, and small violations of a strict 
diet such as eating a square of chocolate. Bingeing may also arise from 
alcohol intoxication. 
While bingeing brings immediate relief, it also leads to physical 
discomfort and to guilt for not adhering to a strict diet. Purging relieves 
both guilt and physical discomfort but may also induce shame and fear 
of negative consequences of the binge—purge cycle. Relatives who live 
with bulimic clients may describe specific routines they have developed 
to conceal their vomiting and excessive exercise, for example running 
the shower in the bathroom to mask the sound of them vomiting. In 
addition to abnormal eating patterns, clients with eating disorders — 
especially bulimia — may display a variety of self-destructive behaviours 
including self-injury, suicide attempts and drug abuse. These behaviours 
are often construed as self-punishments for not living up to perfectionistic 
standards or attempts to escape from conflicts associated with self- 
worth and individuation. 
With respect to perception, in most clinical cases of eating disorder 
there is a distortion of body image. The client perceives the body or 
parts of the body such as the stomach, buttocks or thighs to be larger 
than they are. People with eating disorders may also have low 
interoception; that is, difficulty interpreting internal gastrointestinal and 
emotional stimuli. This makes it difficult for them to know when it’s 
appropriate to start and stop eating, and how to interpret their feelings 
and emotions. 
With respect to cognition, there is a preoccupation with food that is a 
consequence of dietary restraint. Low self-esteem and low self-efficacy 
are also common. Thus, many clients with eating disorders view them- 
selves as worthless and powerless, and see achieving a slim body 
shape and low body weight through dietary restraint as the route to an 

82 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
increased sense of control over their lives and increased self-worth. 
This process is often compounded by perfectionist tendencies and a 
wish to attain exceptionally high standards. In bulimia, the repeated fail- 
ure to sustain low-calorie intake leads to further self-criticism, and low 
self-esteem and also strengthens the belief in lack of control. In ano- 
rexia,; starvation 
directly affects cognitive processes. There is an 
increasing rigidity and inflexibility in thinking style and a gradual reduc- 
tion in the capacity to concentrate. In all eating disorders, there may be 
conflict concerning dependence and maturity. On one hand there may 
be a fear of maturity and independence; on the other there may be a 
wish to escape from parental control and the lack of autonomy and pri- 
vacy that this entails. 
With regard to emotional state, clients with eating disorders report an 
intense fear of fatness. In anorexia, low mood may arise from a failure 
to live up to perfectionist standards, and improvements in mood may 
occur when the urge to eat is resisted. In bulimia depressed or irritable 
mood may occur as a result of dietary restraint, or in response to life 
stresses. Such episodes of low mood lead to bingeing, which brings 
temporary relief. However, after binges, low mood may occur as a result 
of the sense of failure that this entails. Suicide attempts occur in up to 
20% of patients with anorexia and 25% of those with bulimia (Franko & 
Keel, 2006). Suicidality in eating disorders is associated with depression, 
substance abuse, and a history of child physical and sexual abuse. 
With respect to interpersonal adjustment, withdrawal from peer 
relationships, deterioration in family relationships, and poor educational 
or vocational performance may all occur as a result of eating problems. 
The health complications of anorexia involve an endocrine disorder 
affecting the hypothalamic—pituitary—gonadal axis. This leads to amen- 
orrhea; starvation symptomatology such as reduced metabolic rate, 
bradycardia, hypotension, hypothermia, and anaemia; lanugo hair on 
the back; delayed gastric emptying; electrolyte abnormalities; renal dys- 
function; and zinc deficiency. In bulimia, erosion of dental enamel may 
occur due to vomiting. Lesions on the back of the dominant hand may 
develop if the hand is used to initiate vomiting. With both anorexia and 
bulimia a particularly serious concern is that the client may develop 
electrolyte abnormalities that may lead to a fatal arrhythmia. 
Aetiological theories 
Under normal circumstances hunger motivates people to eat until they 
have the experience of ‘being full’ and most of the time their weight is 
remarkably stable, as if homostatically governed. When peopie try to 
slim through restrained eating, they experience chronic hunger and 
negative affect, and become preoccupied with food. In response to 
these negative experiences, most people give up dieting and return to 
their usual eating habits and normal body weight. People who develop 
anorexia, however, redouble their efforts to maintain a pattern of 
restrained eating when they experience hunger, negative affect and 
intense food preoccupation. In contrast, people who develop bulimia 

3 * EATING DISORDERS 
83 
engage in bingeing when the negative effects of restrained eating and 
life stresses make them feel bad, and later engage in compensatory 
purging. Biological, psychodynamic, cognitive-behavioural and systemic 
theories have been developed to explain the aetiology, course and 
treatment of eating disorders. 
Biological theories 
Hypotheses have been proposed to explain the role of a number of 
biological factors in the development and course of eating disorders. 
These have focused on genetics, mood dysregulation and starvation- 
related processes. Genetic and mood dysregulation hypotheses posit a 
role for each of these factors in the aetiology of eating disorders, while 
Starvation theories are concerned primarily with the way in which the 
biological sequelae of self-starvation contribute to the maintenance of 
abnormal eating patterns. 
Genetics 
The genetic hypothesis proposes that a biological predisposition to 
eating disorders is genetically transmitted and that individuals with this 
predisposition when exposed 
to certain environmental 
conditions 
develop an eating disorder. Evidence from twin and family studies 
shows unequivocally that genetic predisposing factors contribute mod- 
erately to the aetiology of eating disorders, and that they are 50— 
83% heritable (Klump et al., 2009; Wade, 2010). Positive findings from 
candidate gene studies focusing on serotonin, dopamine and other 
neurotransmitter systems and on genes involved in body weight regula- 
tion have not been substantiated in meta-analyses (Scherag et al., 
2010). 
There is some evidence that appetite and satiety dysregulation 
renders people vulnerable to the development of eating disorders, and 
that this vulnerability may be polygenetically determined (Stice et al., 
1999). Collier and Treasure (2004) propose that genetic factors 
contribute to temperamental dispositions that underpin the development 
of personality traits associated with eating disorders. These may be 
conceptualized as falling along a continuum from restrictive, anorexia- 
like disorders to disinhibited, bulimic-like disorders. The predisposing 
personality traits of perfectionism, harm avoidance and depression may 
place people at risk for developing both restrained, anorexic-like and 
disinhibited, bulimic-like eating disorders. Compulsivity and inflexibility 
may be the personality traits that place people at specific risk for 
developing restricting, anorexia-like disorders. Impulsivity and novelty 
seeking may be the personality traits that place people at specific risk 
for developing disinhibited, bulimia-like eating disorders. The assumption 
in this proposal is that the biological basis for each of these personality 
traits is polygenetically determined, and that through interaction with the 
environment the traits develop and predispose the person to developing 
an eating disorder. 

84 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Mood dysregulation 
It has been proposed that eating disorders are an expression of an 
underlying mood disorder (Végele & Gibson, 2010). Depression is often 
present in the family histories of people with eating disorders, along with 
other mood 
regulation 
difficulties such as substance abuse and 
borderline personality disorder. If anorexia and bulimia are fundamentally 
mood disorders, then a plausible hypothesis is that eating disorders 
arise from a dysregulation of the serotonergic neurotransmitter system 
in those centres of the brain that subserve mood. Considerable evidence 
suggests that abnormalities in the serotonergic neurotransmitter system 
contribute to dysregulation of mood as well as appetite and impulse 
control in eating disorders (Kaye, 2008). 
The neurotransmitter dysregulation hypothesis has led to controlled 
trials of antidepressants for eating disorders, mainly conducted with 
young adults. Both selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and 
tricyclic-antidepressants (TCAs) have been found to lead to short-term 
improvements in bulimia, but have limited impact on anorexia nervosa 
(McElroy et al., 2010; Wilson & Fairburn, 2007). 
Starvation 
The starvation hypothesis proposes that eating disorders follow a chronic 
course because they are partly maintained by biological abnormalities 
and related alterations in psychological functioning caused by starvation. 
Evidence from studies of people with anorexia and bulimia and partici- 
pants in starvation laboratory experiments show that the neuroendocrine 
abnormalities and changes in gastric functioning that arise from experi- 
mentally induced starvation are similar to those observed in patients with 
eating disorders (Frichter & Pirke, 1995; Singh, 2002). More pronounced 
changes occur in anorexia than in bulimia. Starvation-related neuroendo- 
crine changes occur in the hypothalamic—pituitary—-gonadal axis, which 
governs reproductive functioning. They also occur in the hypothalamic— 
pituitary—adrenal axis and the hypothalamic—pituitarythyroid axis, which 
govern mood, appetite, arousal and other vegetative functions. 
In addition, there is evidence that starvation leads to delayed gastric 
emptying and that this reduces hunger perception. Neuroimaging 
studies show that anorexia and bulimia lead to reduced cortical mass, 
with some degree of normalization after recovery (Kaye, 2008). One 
implication of starvation theories is that a distinction should be made 
between re-feeding programmes, which aim to reverse the starvation 
process by helping patients regain weight to render them accessible to 
psychological interventions, and later therapy in which the maintenance 
of normal body weight and eating patterns is the principal goal. This 
distinction is central to effective forms of therapy for anorexia. 
Psychoanalytic theories 
Psychoanalytic explanations of eating disorders focus on the role of 
intrapsychic factors in the genesis and maintenance of self-starvation. 

3 * EATING DISORDERS 
85 
Hilda Bruch (1973, 1978) argued that the psychodynamics 
that 
underpins anorexia arises from early childhood experiences. Accord- 
ing to Bruch, the mothers of anorexic girls adopt a parenting style in 
which parental needs for control and compliance take primacy over 
the child’s needs for self-expression and autonomy. The child has 
difficulty in learning how to interpret need-related internal physiological 
States and in developing a coherent sense of self separate from 
caregivers. 
In adolescence the fear of fatness, obsession with food and guilt for 
eating are part of an attempt to manage a central conflict related to the 
attainment of autonomy and a coherent sense of self. The youngster 
experiences a fear of separation from parents and a fear of being overly 
controlled by the parents; a fear of maturation, sexuality, intimacy and 
independence; and a fear of having little control over the self or body 
size (as a symbol of self). This conflict about autonomy is characterized 
by low self-esteem coupled with perfectionistic strivings to improve the 
self. 
There is ample evidence for distorted body image, low interoception, 
maturity fears, perfectionism, low self-esteem, the use of suppression 
as a coping strategy and low self-directedness among people with 
eating disorders (Aldeo et al., 2010; Cassin & von Ranson, 2005; Jacobi 
& Fittig, 2010; Jacobi et al., 2004). There is also some evidence for 
problematic parent-child relationships as precursors of eating disorders 
(Jacobi & Fittig, 2010; Jacobi et al., 2004; Striegel-Moore & Bulik, 2007). 
Over-concerned parenting in childhood is a risk factor for anorexia. 
Parental criticism about weight, high expectations and low contact with 
parents in adolescence are associated with bulimia. 
Results of a small number of trials suggest that psychodynamic psy- 
chotherapy may be effective as a treatment for eating disorders in 
adults, but not adolescents (Thompson-Brenner et al., 2009). The 
Maudsley group in their controlled trials of psychodynamic psychother- 
apy with young adults, working within the context of Malan’s (1995) 
psychodynamic therapy model, have found that a unique psychody- 
namic focal hypothesis may be formed for each patient and that Bruch’s 
themes typically characterize these focal hypotheses. Psychoanalytic 
psychotherapy, as practised by the Maudsley group, aims to help the 
patient gain insight into the way in which the psychodynamics of past 
relationships with parents underpins the transference—countertransfer- 
ence, the patient-therapist relationship and the relationships that the 
patient has with other significant people in their life. In addition, psycho- 
analytic psychotherapy facilitates the patient’s search for less destruc- 
tive ways to assert autonomy from the parents and to develop a strong 
sense of personal identity. 
Cognitive-behavioural theories 
There are a number of cognitive-behaviour therapy (CBT) approaches 
to understanding and treating eating disorders (Wilson, 2010). A 
particularly well developed model has been proposed by the Oxford 

86 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
group led by Christopher Fairburn (2008). In this transdiagnostic model 
Fairburn proposed that the over-evaluation of shape and weight and 
their control is the core underlying cognitive cause of anorexia, bulimia 
and ‘mixed’ eating disorders. That is, people with eating disorders judge 
their self-worth in terms of their weight and shape and their capacity to 
control these, rather than in terms of the quality of their close 
relationships, their work performance or involvement in their pastimes. 
They hold beliefs such as ‘I am only good if | am thin’ or ‘I can only be 
happy if | control my eating and weigh seven stone’. These belief 
systems motivate people with eating disorders to follow strict diets. 
Those who develop anorexia are highly successful at dieting and 
develop very low body weight. This state gives rise to the starvation 
syndrome which involves a preoccupation with eating, a heightened 
sense of being full, rigid obsessionality and social withdrawal. These 
side-effects of the starvation process strengthen the core beliefs 
associated with over-evaluation of shape and weight. In this way people 
with anorexia become trapped in a vicious cycle whereby their over- 
evaluation of shape and weight is strengthened by the side-effects of 
starvation. 
People who develop bulimia (like those with anorexia) also over- 
evaluate their shape and weight and engage in strict dieting. However, 
periodically, stressful life events lead to episodes of low mood, which 
they cope with by bingeing. This temporarily improves their mood, but 
afterwards they become self-critical for deviating from their strict diet, 
and compensate 
for their bingeing by vomiting, taking laxatives 
or exercising excessively. They then return to the practice of strict 
dieting, motivated by their over-evaluation of shape and weight. This 
continues until another stressful life event causes a drop in mood and a 
repetition of the binge—purge cycle. Fairburn’s model is diagrammed in 
Figure 3.2. 
Fairburn’s (2008) model of CBT progresses through four stages over 
20 sessions. In the first stage the therapist engages with the patient 
though bi-weekly sessions over a period of a month, conducts an assess- 
ment, collaboratively develops a formulation, provides psychoedueatien— 
about eating disorders and the CBT model, arranges regular ‘in session 
weighing’ and arranges for patients to start a pattern of regular eating. In 
the second stage appointments are held weekly, progress is reviewed, 
barriers to progress are identified, and the formulation is refined. In the 
third stage the repetitive cycles of cognition and behaviour that maintain 
the eating disorder are addressed. In the final stage, appointments are 
held fortnightly and the focus is on maintaining gains and planning for 
relapse prevention. Variations on this basic treatment model have been 
developed for patients with severe weight loss or complex personal and 
interpersonal problems, inpatients and younger patients, and for group 
therapy. 
Many controlled trials have shown that about 50% of young 
adult patients with bulimia nervosa benefit from CBT (Wilson, 2010; 
: 
Wilson & Fairburn, 2007). Few trials of CBT with anorexia have been 
(\ 
conducted. 

3° EATING DISORDERS 
87 
Over-evaluation of shape and weight and their control 
Strict dieting 
Non-compensatory weight control behaviour 
Bingeing 
BULIMIA 
Low body weight 
ANOREXIA 
Stress & 
depressed 
mood 
Compensatory 
vomiting or 
laxative use 
Figure 3.2 Fairburn’s cognitive-behavioural model of eating disorders (adapted from C. Fairburn (2008). Cognitive 
behaviour therapy and eating disorders. London: Guilford) 
Systemic theories 
Systemic theories underline the role of contextual factors in the devel- 
opment and treatment of eating disorders. Sociocultural, developmental 
and family systems formulations fall into this broad domain. 
Sociocultural factors 
Sociocultural theories highlight the role of broad cultural factors such as 
the idealization of female thinness specific to particular societies, nota- 
bly those prevalent in western industrialised nations, in predisposing 
individuals to developing eating disorders (Nasser & Katzman, 2003). 
Evidence supporting the sociocultural position allows the following con- 
clusions to be drawn (Levine & Murnen, 2009; Levine & Smolak, 2010). 
Epidemiological studies consistently show that eating disorders exist 
internationally but are more prevalent in western societies where food is 
plentiful, thinness is valued and dieting is promoted. Eating disorders 
are more prevalent among groups under greater social pressure to 
achieve the slim aesthetic ideal, such as dancers, models and athletes. 
Westernization, modernization and exposure to transnational mass 
media advocating the thin ideal are risk factors for eating disorders. The 
prevalence of eating disorders is higher in ethnic groups that move from 
4 culture that does not idealize the thin female form to cultures that do. 

88 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
While these findings point to the importance of sociocultural factors 
in predisposing individuals to developing eating problems, not all dieters 
develop anorexia or bulimia. Precipitating factors such as stressful life 
events and the presence of other individual genetic, neurobiological, 
psychological or family factors (mentioned elsewhere in the chapter and 
listed in Table 3.2) probably contribute to the development of eating 
disorders (Mazzeo & Bulik, 2009). 
Life-cycle transitions and stress 
It has been proposed that a build-up of stresses at particular points in 
the individual and family life cycles may precipitate the onset of an eat- 
ing disorder or prevent the rapid resolution of a potential eating disor- 
der, particularly in cases where biological and psychosocial predisposing 
factors are already present (e.g. Crisp, 1983; Dare, 1985; Serpell & 
Troup, 2003). At an individual level, Crisp (1983) argues that when 
youngsters have particular difficulties dealing with the physical and 
emotional changes that coincide with the transition to adolescence, an 
eating disorder may occur since it allows youngsters to avoid the chal- 
lenges posed by adolescence. At a family level, Dare (1985) proposes 
that the co-occurrence of a number of critical transitional stresses such 
as the onset of puberty in a younger child, an older child leaving home, 
or the loss of a grandparent may place excessive demands on family 
members to develop new roles, routines and support systems. The 
development of an eating disorder provides families with a period of 
respite, where routines, roles and supports appropriate to a previous 
stage of the family life-cycle may continue to be used so that families 
may maintain the status quo rather than negotiating changes appropri- 
ate to the next stage of the life-cycle. Both of these theories are sup- 
ported by evidence for the association between eating disorders and 
stressful life events in adolescence. 
Serpell and Troup (2003) propose that childhood adversity (including 
neglect, sexual abuse and family conflict), helplessness, low self- 
esteem and rigid perfectionism predispose people to developing eating 
disorders. In response to sociocultural pressures for thinness, these 
four factors give rise to four intermediate predisposing factors: (1) 
dietary restraint, (2) low shape and weight-based self-esteem, (3) 
disgust at food and food-related body stimuli and (4) bodily shame. 
When stressful life events that involve managing complex interpersonal 
situations and relationships arise in people who have these vulnerability 
factors, an eating disorder may occur. This complex developmental 
theory is supported by evidence for a number of risk factors listed in 
Table 3.2. 
Family systems approaches 
Family systems theories of anorexia point to a number of organizational 
features that may be predisposing or maintaining factors for eating disor- 
ders (le Grange & Rienecke Hoste, 2010). For example, Minuchin et al. 

3 * EATING DISORDERS 
89 
(1978) characterized the families of teenagers with anorexia as enmeshed 
and rigid, with a strongly overprotective attitude to the child. He also 
argued that there was a lack of conflict resolution and an involvement of 
children in parental conflicts. SelVini Palazzoli (1988) pinpointed the fol- 
lowing features as typical of the anorexic family: an ethic of self-sacrifice, 
limited parental leadership, blame-shifting since everything is done for 
the good of others, unclear communication and secret alliances between 
one parent and the anorexic child, and covert marital dissatisfaction. 
Available empirical evidence indicates that there is not a single 
dysfunctional family constellation (a psychosomatic family) that causes 
anorexia and bulimia (Jacobi et al., 2004). Rather, a variety of patterns 
of family organization are associated with eating disorders. Families of 
youngsters with anorexia tend to be more controlled and organized, 
while families of bulimic adolescents tend to be more chaotic, conflicted 
and critical. These patterns of organization probably reflect families’ 
attempts to cope with eating disorders. 
A group at the Maudsley Hospital in London have developed an 
approach to family therapy for young teenagers with anorexia for which 
there 
is considerable 
empirical 
support. The model, which was 
manualized and popularized by James Lock (Lock et al., 2001), 
underlines the value of the family as a central treatment resource in 
facilitating recovery, rather than as an aetiological facter. The approach 
is premised on the idea that young teenagers with anorexia are 
regressed, and not capable of responsible autonomous eating. Rather 
than being in control of their eating, they are controlled by their eating 
disorder. That is, the starvation syndrome (mentioned in the section on 
CBT above) prevents the young person from recovering. It is because 
of this that parents play a central role in the recovery process. Therapists 
support parents in treating their adolescents as if they were younger 
children by refeeding them until a safe and stable weight has been 
achieved. At this point they may safely transfer responsibility for 
maintaining a healthy diet and weight to the adolescent. 
Lock proposes that most children and teenagers can be treated 
effectively as outpatients, unless their low weight poses significant 
medical risks. Treatment typically spans about 20 sessions and lasts 
from 6 months to a year. In the first stage of therapy the therapist forms 
an alliance with the family, conducts a family assessment, offers 
psychoeducation about the risks associated with anorexia, sets up a 
routine for weighing the patient at the beginning of each session, and 
supports the parents in helping the young person to eat in the therapy 
session. In the second stage the aim is to help the parents gradually 
transfer responsibility for eating responsibly to the adolescent and 
explore the relationship between the anorexia and the adolescent's 
achievement of developmental tasks such as increasing autonomy 
within the family. In the final stage of treatment the emphasis is on 
consolidating the gains the parents and adolescent have made in 
managing the adolescent’s growing autonomy, anticipating how the 
family will manage the adolescent's growing independence, and relapse 
anticipation and prevention. 

90 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Evidence from a series of trials shows that family therapy is effective 
with up to 90% of young adolescents with non-chronic anorexia (le 
Grange & Rienecke Hoste, 2010; Lock et al., 2001). 
Interpersonal therapy 
Interpersonal theory was developed by Harry Stack Sullivan (1953), 
who proposed that psychological problems are maintained by problem- 
atic current life relationships. From this theory interpersonal therapy 
(IPT) was developed as an effective treatment for depression. It was 
then adapted for bulimia in young adults and shown to be an effective 
treatment for this condition (Tanofsky-Kraff & Wilfley, 2010; Wilson & 
Fairburn, 2007). 
In IPT for bulimia, it is. assumed that one or more of four categories 
of interpersonal difficulties maintain the condition. These are: (1) grief 
following bereavement or other losses, (2) role disputes within important 
family or work relationships, (3) role transitions within the family or 
workplace, and (4) interpersonal deficits, such as problems in making 
and maintaining friendships. Interpersonal therapy alleviates bulimia by 
helping clients resolve problems in these areas that maintain their 
pattern of bingeing and purging. 
IPT for bulimia involves three stages and spans 20 sessions 
conducted over a period of 4 to 5 months. In the first stage the client is 
engaged in treatment, current interpersonal problems are identified and 
a treatment contract is established. 
In the middle stage the core 
interpersonal problem that maintains the eating disorder is addressed. 
In the final stage gains made are consolidated and clients are helped to 
prepare to continue the work after termination of therapy. 
Assessment 
Assessment and treatment of eating disorders are usually carried out 
by multidisciplinary teams that include professionals from clinical psy- 
chology, psychiatry, psychiatric nursing, dietetics and other disciplines. 
Assessment covers the client’s physical, nutritional and psychological 
state (Anderson & Murray, 2010; Katzman et al., 2010). With teenagers 
a family assessment is essential. With adults, interviews with involved 
family members are important. 
Psychometric instruments that may be useful in the assessment of 
clients with eating disorder are the Eating Disorder Examination (EDE, 
Fairburn et al., 2008) and the Eating Disorder Inventory (EDI-3, Garner, 
2005). The EDE, which is considered the diagnostic gold standard, is a 
detailed interview that allows DSM diagnoses of eating disorders to be 
made with high reliability. The EDI-3 is a comprehensive self-report psy- 
chological assessment instrument for assessing eating pathology and 
related psychological traits such as perfectionism and ineffectiveness. 
On the basis of the assessment a preliminary formulation may be drawn 
up. This should link predisposing, precipitating and maintaining factors 
to the abnormal eating pattern and specify protective factors that may 
be drawn on during treatment. A general clinical formulation model for 
eating disorders is given in Figure 3.3. 

3 * EATING DISORDERS 
91 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Genetic vulnerability to eating disorders or depression 
Early life adversity and personality traits of low self-esteem, 
helplessness, and perfectionism; and either rigid compulsivity or 
excessive risk-taking 
Sociocultural pressure for thinness & overvaluation of thin body shape, 
low weight and their control 
MAINTAINING 
PROTECTIVE 
FACTORS 
FACTORS 
Restricted eating and 
PRECIPITATING 
Personal strengths 
the starvation 
FACTORS 
and achievements 
syndrome 
Onset of adolescence 
Family stability and 
Bingeing in response 
Perceived negative 
support 
to stress & 
i 
: 
| 
evaluation of weight by 
School support 
compensatory 
others 
si 
purging 
Peer-group support 
Dieting 
Distorted body image 
and maturity fears 
Engagement in 
treatment 
Build-up of stress 
EATING 
DISORDERS 
Figure 3.3 General formulation model for eating disorders 
Inconsistency in 
parental management 
of eating problems 
Treatment refusal 
Intervention 
Intervention 
for eating disorders 
is multidisciplinary. 
It includes 
management of the medical complications of eating disorders (Katzman 
et al., 2010) coupled with psychological intervention. There is strong 
evidence to support the effectiveness of family therapy for young 
teenagers with non-chronic anorexia nervosa and CBT for bulimia in 
young adults, following the models of these interventions outlined earlier 
in the chapter (Hay & Claudino, 2010; le Grange & Rienecke Hoste, 
2010; Wilson, 2010). The use of these treatments for these populations 
is consistent with best practice guidelines (American 
Psychiatric 
Association, 2006; NICE, 2004a). 
In a review of available evidence, Eisler (2005) concluded that after 
treatment, between a half and two-thirds of teenagers with anorexia 
achieve a healthy weight. At 6 months to 6 year follow-up, 60-90% 
have fully recovered and no more than 10-15% are seriously ill. Eisler 
also noted that the negligible relapse rate following family therapy is 
superior to the moderate outcomes for individually oriented therapies. It 
is also far superior to the high relapse rate following inpatient treatment, 
which is 25-30% following first admission, and 55—75% for second and 
further admissions. 
Thompson-Brenner 
et al. (2003) 
conducted 
a meta-analysis 
of 26 studies involving 51 treatment conditions, of which 36 were 

92 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
cognitive-behavioural or behavioural and 15 were some other form of 
therapy. Across 
all treatments, the recovery rate was 40% after 
treatment and 43% at 1 year follow-up. The recovery rate of 45% for 
individual therapy was higher than that of 26% for group therapy. In this 
meta-analysis there were no significant differences in outcome between 
therapies, but more studies of CBT had been conducted than of any 
other form of therapy, so it is the best validated. Of the other forms of 
therapy that have been investigated, interpersonal therapy has been 
shown to be as effective as CBT at 1 year follow-up. 
Controversies 
On of the major controversies within the field is between those who 
advocate a biomedical conceptualization of eating disorders and the 
feminist position (Maine & Bunnell, 2010). The biomedical approach, 
with its focus on genetics and neurobiological aspects of eating disor- 
ders, sees the individual woman as sick or defective, and its primary 
aim is to cure the illness. In contrast, the feminist position construes 
eating disorders as a gendered condition, and the relentless and self- 
destructive pursuit of the thin ideal as a response to sociocultural pres- 
sures generated by a male-dominated society. 
Summary 
Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa typically occur first 
during adolescence, principally among females. About 1-2% 
of the adolescent and young adult female population suffer 
from eating disorders. The average prevalence rates for 
anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa among young females 
are 0.3-0.5% and 14% respectively. In both conditions there 
is an overevaluation of body shape and weight. 
With anorexia, the primary feature is the maintenance of a 
very low body weight; with bulimia a cycle of binge eating and 
purging is the distinctive feature. In most clinical cases of eat- 
ing disorder there is a distortion of body image, depressed or 
irritable mood, and interpersonal adjustment problems. Eating 
disorders entail significant health complications. 
The outcome for eating disorders is poor for a significant 
minority of cases. For anorexia nervosa about half of all cases 
have a good outcome, a third have a moderate outcome and a 
fifth have a poor outcome. At 20-year follow-up, the mortality 
rate is about 6%. For bulimia nervosa about half of all cases 
have a good outcome, a quarter have a moderate outcome and 
the remaining quarter have a poor outcome. 
Biological theories point to the role of genetics, mood dys- 
regulation and starvation-related processes in the aetiology 
and maintenance of eating disorders. Evidence from twin and 

3 * EATING DISORDERS 
93 
family studies show unequivocally that genetic predisposing 
factors contribute moderately to the aetiology of eating disor- 
ders. Eating disorders have been conceptualized as mood dis- 
orders associated 
with dysregulation 
of the seratonergic 
system. Antidepressants have been found to lead to short-term 
improvements in bulimia, but have no impact on anorexia 
nervosa. 
Starvation-related neuroendocrine changes occur in the 
_ 
hypothalamic—pituitary—gonadal axis, which governs reproduc- 
tive functioning, and the hypothalamic-pituitary—adrenal axis 
and hypothalamic-pituitary—-thyroid axis, which govern mood 
and appetite. The starvation syndrome maintains restricted 
eating. Bruch’s psychoanalytic theory proposes that over- 
controlling parenting practices cause eating disorders and the 
related problems of distorted body image, maturity fears, per- 
fectionistic strivings, low self-esteem and low self-efficacy. 
There is some evidence that focal psychodynamic psycho- 
therapy can lead to improvement for adults with anorexia, 
but not adolescents. Fairburn’s transdiagnostic CBT model 
assumes that the over-evaluation of shape and weight and 
their control is the core underlying cognitive cause of anorexia, 
bulimia and ‘mixed’ eating disorders. About 50% of young 
adults with bulimia benefit from individual CBT. Few trials of 
CBT with people of any age with anorexia or with adolescents 
with any eating disorder have been conducted. 
Social and family factors may play a role in the aetiology of 
anorexia. There is no single dysfunctional family constellation 
that causes eating disorders. The Maudsley approach to family 
therapy for adolescent eating disorders underlines the value of 
the family as a central treatment resource in facilitating recov- 
ery, rather than as an aetiological factor. Up to 90% of adoles- 
cents with non-chronic anorexia can benefit from this approach. 
IPT assumes that eating disorders are maintained by inter- 
personal factors, notably grief, role disputes, role transitions 
and interpersonal deficits. IPT alleviates bulimia by helping cli- 
ents resolve problems in these areas that maintain their pattern 
of bingeing and purging. IPT is as effective as CBT, but fewer 
validation studies have been conducted. Assessment and 
treatment of eating disorders is usually carried out by multidis- 
ciplinary teams, with an initial focus on weight restoration for 
anorexia and the development of a normal diet for bulimia. 
Once weight and diet have been normalized, the focus should 
shift to psychotherapy. 
For young adolescents, family therapy is the treatment of 
choice; for adult bulimics, CBT is the best validated treatment. 
There is controversy over whether eating disorders are most 
usefully conceptualized as biologically based medical conditions 
or a gendered response to socio-cultural pressures for thinness. 

94 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Questions 
What are the main clinical features of anorexia nervosa and bulimia 
nervosa? 
How prevalent are eating disorders? 
What are the main biological and psychological theories of eating 
disorders and the main research findings relevant to these theories? 
What are the main evidence-based approaches to assessment and 
treatment of eating disorders? 
What are your views on the controversy concerning the biomedical 
and feminist views of eating disorders? 
FURTHER READING 
Professional 
Agras, W. (2010). The Oxford handbook of eating disorders. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Carr, A. (2006). Handbook of child and adolescent clinical psychology 
(second edition). London: Routledge (Chapter 17). 
Fairburn, C. (2008). Cognitive behaviour therapy and eating disorders. 
London: Guilford. 
Lock, J., Le Grange, D., Agras, W., & Dare, C. (2001). Treatment manual 
for anorexia nervosa: A family based approach. New York: Guilford. 
Self-help 
Fairburn, C. (1995). Overcoming binge eating. London: Guilford. 
Lock, J. J. & Le Grange, D. (2004). Help your teenager beat an eating 
disorder. London: Brunner-Routledge. 
WEBSITES 
Academy for Eating Disorders: 
www.aedweb.org 
APA (American Psychiatric Association) practice guidelines for treating 
eating disorders: 
www.guideline.gov/content.aspx?id=9318 
Beat (Beating Eating Disorders): 
http://www.b-eat.co.uk 
Eating Disorders Resources: 
http://edr.org.uk 
Eating Disorders Treatment: 
http://eating-disorder.com 
NICE (National Institute for Clinical Excellence) guidelines for treating 
eating disorders: 
http://guidance.nice.org.uk/topic/mentalhealthbehavioural 

Drug misuse 
Learning objectives 
After studying this chapter you will be able to: 
distinguish between drug experimentation and 
harmful drug use 
name the main clinical features of drug dependence 
summarize the epidemiology of drug misuse 
list the risk factors for drug misuse 
outline the main biological, psychological and 
integrative theories of drug misuse 
name the main evidence-based approaches to 
assessment and treatment of drug misuse 
give a considered view on the pros and cons of harm 
reduction strategies for addressing drug misuse. 
Introduction 
Habitual drug misuse in adolescence is of particular concern to clinical 
psychologists because it may have a negative long-term effect on the 
adolescent and an intergenerational effect on their children (Crome et 
al., 2004; Heath et al., 2008; Kaminer & Winters, 2011). For the adoles- 
cent, habitual drug misuse may negatively affect mental and physical 
health, criminal and educational status, the establishment of auton- 
omy from the family of origin and the development long-term intimate 

96 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
relationships. The children of teenagers who engage in chronic and 
harmful drug use may suffer from drug-related problems such as foetal 
alcohol syndrome, intrauterine addiction or HIV infection. 
In this chapter, after considering the classification, epidemiology and 
clinical features of drug misuse, a variety of theoretical explanations 
concerning the aetiology and maintenance of these conditions will be 
considered along with relevant empirical evidence. Some comments on 
the assessment and treatment of drug use will be made and relevant 
controversies considered. Cases of drug misuse vary widely in their 
presentation. Below two examples of very different types of case are 
presented. 
A case of harmful polydrug use 
Carl, 18, and Betty, 19, referred themselves for treatment to an inner 
city drug clinic in a public health service. Both were polydrug users and 
had developed physiological dependence to opiates at the time of 
referral. 
History of the presenting problem 
They both had been using drugs since about the age of 10 years, begin- 
ning with cigarettes which they stole from their parents. They were part 
of a peer group involved in experimental drug use. At 12 they both began 
drinking alcohol. They stole beer from Carl’s father and wine from a 
supermarket. They went on to experiment with benzodiazepines which 
they stole from Betty’s mother, who had been prescribed these for anxi- 
ety and sleep problems by the family doctor. They then used cannabis, 
various solvents, and a variety of stimulants including amphetamines. 
They progressed to opiates about a year before they first attended the 
clinic. They had got to the stage where they could no longer finance their 
drug-taking habits and had a series of bad debts. They requested evalu- 
ation for placement on a methadone maintenance programme. 
The couple lived together on welfare in a two-room apartment. They 
had financed their drug habits through theft and prostitution. They were 
part of a group of drug users who lived in Dublin’s inner city. Their whole 
lifestyle centred around getting and using any drugs they could find, but 
mainly opiates. 
Developmental and family history 
Betty and Carl had known each other from childhood. Both had a history 
of academic and conduct problems at school. Their families were part 
of a community and so their parents knew each other and discussed 
Betty and Carl’s relationship. When the young couple began living 
together about 6 months before the referral, their parents disapproved 
of this. However, in both of the families their mothers were very loyal to 
them and occasionally gave them financial assistance when it was clear 
that they were showing withdrawal symptoms and needed a fix. 

4+ DRUG MISUSE 
97 
Carl’s grandfather lived with Carl’s parents. Both he and Carl’s father 
had a serious drink problem for which they had been unsuccessfully 
treated over many years. Carl had four siblings, all of whom had drug 
problems. Betty had three siblings, all but one of whom were using 
drugs. However, Carl and Betty had the most serious drug problems of 
the two families. They were both eldest children. 
Formulation 
Betty and Carl presented with habitual, harmful drug misuse and depen- 
dence. This had evolved gradually out of an earlier pattern of pre- 
adolescent experimental 
drug use, which may be viewed 
as a 
precipitating factor. Both Betty and Carl were predisposed to develop 
substance use problems because of their family role models, their aca- 
demic difficulties, lack of career opportunities and other conduct prob- 
lems. Their drug problems were maintained at a physiological level by 
dependence and the related fear of withdrawal. 
At a psychosocial feveltnéir drug problems were maintained through 
involvement in a subculture and lifestyle that revolved around obtain- 
ing and using drugs to the exclusion of almost all other activities. The 
main protective factor was the couple’s loyalty to each other, and their 
wish in the long term to have children. This formulation is diagrammed 
in Figure 4.1. 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Family role models of 
harmful drug use 
Academic problems 
Conduct problems 
Lack of career 
opportunities 
MAINTAINING 
PRECIPITATING 
PROTECTIVE 
FACTORS 
FACTOR 
FACTORS 
Physiological 
Experimental drug use 
Loyalty to each 
- dependence and fear 
other 
aeieercee, 
Wish to have 
Involvement in drug 
children and a 
using subculture and 
HABITUAL, 
normal family life 
lifestyle 
HARMFUL 
: 
DRUG MISUSE 
Figure 4.1. Formulation of a case of harmful drug use 

98 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Treatment 
The initial treatment plan for Betty and Carl involved detoxification fol- 
lowed by either residential treatment in a therapeutic community or out- 
patient methadone maintenance. Betty and Carl completed detoxification 
and chose to enter the drug-free therapeutic community. However, they 
dropped out and relapsed after about 6 weeks. They returned to the 
inner-city clinic where they both commenced a methadone maintenance 
programme with adjunctive counselling. 
Over a period of a couple of years they engaged in a cycle in which 
they periodically were detoxified, entered the therapeutic community, 
dropped out, relapsed and recommenced methadone maintenance with 
adjunctive counselling. 
A case of early drug experimentation 
Chas, aged 15, was referred for treatment to a private family therapy 
institute when his parents found that he had been smoking cannabis 
with his school friends at a party. He had smoked cannabis a couple of 
dozen times over a 6-month period and had also taken LSD once. His 
drug use occurred within the context of a peer group who were 
experimenting with a range of drugs, and who associated drug use with 
listening to and playing music. 
Developmental history 
Chas’ developmental history was within normal limits. He was a fine 
student in the top stream of his school and had come second in his 
class in the Junior Certificate. He was an able sportsman, an avid chess 
player and musician. He loved to push himself to the limit in all of his 
leisure activities and was clearly a risk taker. He had excellent social 
skills and a wide circle of friends including a girlfriend with whom he had 
being having a relationship for about 4 months. He had particularly 
good relationships with his parents. 
Family history 
Neither of Chas’ parents smoked or drank alcohol, and both were solici- 
tors. They worked long hours, but on a matter of principle would not send 
Chas to boarding school (which was common practice among their 
peers), believing strongly in the importance of family life. There was a 
live-in nanny in their house who cared for Chas and his two younger sis- 
ters, Triona, aged 8, and Briony, aged 10. The parents were guilt-ridden 
when they brought the family for the intake interview. Both were of the 
view that Chas’ drug misuse resulted from a failure to be sufficiently avail- 
able for him during his adolescence due to their heavy work schedules. 
Formulation 
Chas presented with experimental rather than habitual drug use. The 
onset was precipitated by availability of cannabis. Chas was predisposed 

4 * DRUG MISUSE 
99 
to become involved in experimental drug use because of his tendency 
for sensation seeking and risk taking. The drug use was maintained 
through involvement in a drug-using peer group. The principal protective 
factors were Chas’ good premorbid adjustment and the supportiveness 
and stability of his family. 
Treatment 
In a series of family therapy sessions involving Chas and his parents, 
the risks of abusing various types of drug were discussed. Other rec- 
reational channels into which Chas could direct his energy were 
explored. As part of this process, Chas and his father arranged a week- 
end at an adventure sports centre in Donegal together. The parents 
were supported in setting strict limits on drug use while Chas lived in 
their house. In later sessions the focus moved to Chas’ career plans. 
Comparison of cases 
These two cases are very different. The first is a chronic and complex 
case of habitual and harmful polydrug use and opiate dependence while 
the second involves only recreational or experimental use of cannabis. 
They differ along a number of dimensions including the pattern of drug- 
using behaviour, the types of drug used, the impact of the drugs used, 
the overall personal adjustment of the young people and the presence 
of other personal or family-based problems and protective factors. 
Clearly drug misuse itself is not always a unidimensional problem. It 
may occur as part of a wider pattern of life difficulties. The definition and 
classification of drug misuse is therefore a complex challenge. 
Classification, epidemiology, risk factors and 
protective factors 
Within both DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000) and 
ICD-10 (World Health Organization, 1992) a distinction is made between 
drug dependence and harmful drug use. While substance abuse or 
harmful drug use refers to drug taking that leads to significant dis- 
tress, health problems or impairment, drug dependence refers to those 
situations where there is a compulsive pattern of use involving physio- 
logical changes associated with tolerance and withdrawal. Diagnostic 
criteria for both conditions are given in Table 4.1. 
Illegal drug use across the life span is common. In an Irish national 
survey of over 8,000 15-64 year olds conducted in 2002, the lifetime 
prevalence of illegal drug use was 19% (National Advisory Committee 
on Drugs and the Drug and Alcohol Information and Research Unit, 
2004). In a UK national survey of over 9,000 11—-15-year-olds conducted 
in 2001, the lifetime prevalence for illegal drug use was 29% (National 
Centre for Social Research and the National Foundation for Educational 
Research, 2002). In both surveys cannabis was the most commonly 
used drug and prevalence was higher among older male teenagers. 

100 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
TABLE 4.1 
DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10 diagnostic criteria for drug abuse and dependence 
DSM-IV-TR 
ICD-10 
Substance abuse 
Harmful use 
A. A maladaptive pattern of substance use leading 
A pattern of psychoactive substance abuse that is 
to clinically significant impairment or distress as 
causing harm to health. The damage may be physical 
manifested by one or more of the following 
(as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administration 
occurring within a 12-month period: 
of injected drugs) or mental (e.g. episodes of 
1. Recurrent substance abuse resulting in a 
depressive disorder secondary to heavy consumption 
failure to fulfil major obligations at work, 
of alcohol). 
school or home. 
The fact that pattern of use of a particular substance 
2. Recurrent substance abuse in situations in 
is disapproved of by a culture or may have 
led to 
which it is physically hazardous. 
socially negative consequences such as arrest or 
3, Recurrent substance-related le 
lems. | 
marital arguments is not in itself evidence of harmful 
4. Continued substance use despite having 
persistent or recurrent social or interpersonal 
problems caused by or exacerbated by the 
effects of the substance. 
B. The symptoms have never met the criteria for 
substance dependence for this type of 
substance. 
Substance dependence 
Dependence syndrome 
A maladaptive pattern of substance abuse, leading A cluster of physiological, behavioural and cognitive 
to clinically significant impairment or distress, as 
phenomena in which the use of a substance or a 
manifested by three or more of the following 
class of substances takes on a much higher priority 
occurring at any time in the same 12-month 
than other behaviours that once had greater value. 
period: 
Three or more of the following in a 12-month period: 
1. Tolerance defined by either 
(a) A strong desire or sense of compulsion to take the 
(a) aneed for markedly increased amounts of 
substance. 
the substance to achieve intoxication 
(b) Difficulty in controlling substance taking behaviour 
(b) markedly diminished effect with continued 
in terms of onset, termination or levels of use. 
use of the same amount of the substance 
(c) A physiological withdrawal state when substance 
2. Withdrawal as manifested by either of the 
use has ceased or been reduced as evidenced by: 
following: 
the characteristic withdrawal syndrome for the 
(a) the characteristic withdrawal syndrome for 
substance; use of the substance to avoid 
the substance 
withdrawal symptoms. 
(b) the same substance is taken to relieve or 
(c) Evidence of tolerance such that increased doses 
avoid withdrawal symptoms 
of the substance are required in order to achieve 
3. The substance is taken in larger amounts over a 
the effects originally produced by lower doses. 
longer period than was intended. 
(e) Progressive neglect of alternative pleasures or 
4. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful 
interests because of psychoactive substance use, 
efforts to cut down or control substance use. 
increased amount of time necessary to obtain or 
5. A great deal of time is spent in activities 
take the substance or to recover from its effects. 
necessary to obtain the substance, use the 
(f) Persisting with substance use despite clear 
substance or recover from its effects. 
evidence of overtly harmful consequences such as 
6. Important social, occupational or recreational 
harm to the liver through excessive drinking, 
activities are given up or reduced because of 
depressive mood states consequent to periods of 
substance use. 
heavy substance abuse, or drug-related 
7. The substance use is continued despite 
impairment of cognitive functioning. 
knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent 
physical or psychological problem that is likely 
to have been caused or exacerbated by the 
substance. 
SS, 
Note: Adapted from DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) and ICD-10 (WHO, 1992). 

4*- DRUG MISUSE 
Experimentation with drugs in adolescence is common (Chung & 
Martin, 2011; Frischer et al., 2004; Griffin, 2010; Weinberg et al., 2002). 
Major US and UK surveys concur that by 19 years of age approximately 
three quarters of teenagers have drunk alcohol; about half have tried 
cigarettes and cannabis; and about a fifth have tried other street drugs 
such as solvents, stimulants, hallucinogens or opiates. Between 5% 
and 10% of teenagers under 19 have drug problems serious enough to 
require clinical intervention. 
Drug use reaches its peak in the early 20s, and most young adults 
‘mature out’ of substance use as they approach their 30s (Jochman & 
Fromme, 2010). This occurs partly because persistent drug use is 
incompatible with role changes such as employment, marriage and 
parenthood that occur in the 20s. Better outcomes occur in cases 
where there is no comorbid psychopathology; an easy temperament 
and low levels of sensation seeking and impulsivity; good social 
problem-solving skills; positive family and school relationships; a longer 
time in treatment; engagement in post-treatment aftercare; develop- 
ment of negative attitudes to drug use and positive health-oriented val- 
ues; and involvement with non-drug-using peers in the post-treatment 
period (Catalano et al., 2011; Chung & Martin, 2011; Jochman & 
Fromme, 2010). 
About one third of adolescents who use drugs progress to chronic 
drug abuse or dependence (Catalano et al., 2011). Risk factors in 
multiple domains, listed in Table 4.2 are associated with the progression 
from experimental drug use to harmful abuse or dependence. The 
greater the number of risk factors, the higher the probability of developing 
serious drug problems. 
Clinical features 
In clinical practice psychologists take account of significant behavioural, 
physiological, affective, perceptual, cognitive and interpersonal features 
when assessing and treating cases of adolescent drug misuse (Heath 
et al., 2008; Kaminer & Winters, 2011; Scheier, 2010). These are sum- 
marized in Table 4.3. 
Drug misuse is associated with a wide variety of behaviour patterns. 
These patterns may be described in terms of the age of onset, the 
duration and frequency of drug use, and the range and amount of 
substances used. Thus useful distinctions may be made between 
adolescents who began using drugs early or later in their development; 
between those who have recently begun experimenting with drugs and 
those who have a chronic history of drug misuse; between daily users, 
weekend users and occasional users; between those that confine their 
drug misuse to a limited range of substances such as alcohol and 
cannabis and those that use a wide range of substances; and between 
those who use a little and those who use a great deal of drugs. 
Chronic and extensive daily polydrug misuse with an early onset is 
associated with more difficulties than experimental, occasional use of a 
limited number of drugs with a recent onset. The former usually entails 
101 

102 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
TABLE 4.2 
Risk factors for adolescent drug use 
Domain 
Risk factor 
Community 
e Availability of drugs 
Laws and norms favourable to drug use 
Media portrayals of drug use 
Transitions and mobility 
High crime rate, low cohesion and community disorganization 
Extreme economic deprivation 
Parental drug use 
Favourable parental attitudes to drug use 
e Poor parenting skills (lack of rules, consequences and 
supervision of children, and severe or inconsistent 
punishment) 
Family conflict, child abuse and neglect, domestic violence 
Family 
School 
e Academic failure in late primary school 
e Lack of commitment to school 
Peer group 
e Involvement with friends who use drugs 
Self 
Early and persistent antisocial behaviour 
Early onset of drug use 
Favourable attitude to drug use 
Alienation and rebelliousness 
Personality factors (sensation seeking, risk taking, impulsivity 
and low harm-avoidance) 
Note: Adapted from R. F. Catalano, K. P. Haggerty, J. D. Hawkins, & J. Elgin (2011). 
Prevention of substance use and substance use disorders: Role of risk and protective factors. 
In Y. Kaminer & K. C. Winters (Eds.), Clinical manual of adolescent substance abuse 
treatment (pp. 30-31). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. At least two 
longitudinal studies have provided evidence for each risk factor. 
a constricted drug-focused lifestyle and multiple associated physical 
and psychosocial problems, whereas the latter does not. A consistent 
finding is that only a minority of youngsters progress from experimental 
to habitual drug misuse and from the use of a single legal drug to multi- 
ple legal and illegal drugs. However, most polydrug misusers began 
with early use of ‘gateway’ drugs: nicotine, alcohol and cannabis. 
Behavioural patterns of drug misuse evolve within specific contexts. 
Drug-using behaviour often comes to be associated with particular 
locations, times, modes of administering drugs, physiological and 
affective states, control beliefs and social situations. With recreational, 
experimental drug use, weekly oral drug taking at peer-group gatherings 
while in a positive mood state may occur and young people may have 
strong beliefs that they are in control of their drug-taking behaviour. 
With habitual drug use, solitary daily injections to prevent withdrawal 
and alleviate negative mood may occur. This type of drug use may be 
accompanied by strong feelings of being unable to control the frequency 
of drug use or to cut down on the amount taken. 
Negative physiological features of drug use may be grouped into 
those associated with intoxication, those that follow intoxication, those 
associated with withdrawal following the development of dependence, 
and medical complications that arise from drug misuse. Stimulants 

Domain 
Behaviour 
Negative 
physiological 
effects 
Negative 
emotional effects 
Negative 
perceptual effects 
Negative 
cognitive effects 
Negative effects 
on interpersonal 
adjustment 
4* DRUG MISUSE 
TABLE 4.3 
Clinical features of drug use 
Features 
Drug-using behaviour 
e Age of onset 
e Duration and frequency of use 
e Range of substances and amount used 
e Change in pattern over time 
Context of drug-using behaviour 
Solitary or social use 
Locations and times of use 
Modes of administering the drug (oral, nasal or injection) 
Physiological state (when seeking excitement or during withdrawal) 
Affective state (positive or negative) 
Beliefs about ability to control drug use 
Intoxication 
e Physical problems due to hyper-arousal (e.g. arrhythmias or dehydration) 
e Physical problems due to hypo-arousal (e.g. stupor) 
Following intoxication 
e Exhaustion 
e Dehydration 
e Sleep and appetite disturbance 
e Sexual dysfunction 
Withdrawal 
e Nausea, vomiting, muscle aches and discomfort following opioid use 
e Sleep and appetite disturbance following stimulant use 
e Seizures following sedative use 
Long-term medical complications 
e Poisoning and overdose Infections including hepatitis and HIV 
e Liver and kidney damage 
During intoxication 
¢ Fear and anxiety due to unexpected effects of drugs (particularly hallucinogens) 
Following intoxication and during withdrawal 
e Depressed mood 
e Irritability and anger 
e Anxiety 
During intoxication 
 Distressing hallucinations (with hallucinogens and some stimulants) 
Following intoxication 
¢ Brief flashbacks or protracted psychotic states (with hallucinogens and some 
stimulants) 
e Impaired cognitive functioning 
e Declining academic performance 
e Adolescent—parent conflict 
e Adolescent-teacher conflict 
e Induction into drug using peer subculture 
e Social isolation 
e Conflict with juvenile justice system 
e Conflict with heath care system 
103 

104 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
(such as amphetamines and cocaine) and hallucinogens (such as LSD) 
lead to physiological changes associated with increased arousal such 
as tachycardia and blood pressure changes. In cases of extreme 
intoxication cardiac arrhythmias and seizures may occur. On the other 
hand, extreme intoxication following the use of alcohol, sedatives, 
solvents and opioids leads to physiological changes associated with 
reduced arousal such as drowsiness, stupor and coma. Withdrawal 
from dependence-producing stimulants entails significant disruption of 
sleep and increased appetite. Withdrawal from sedatives and alcohol is 
particularly dangerous because, as part of a syndrome of autonomic 
hyperactivity, grand mal seizures may occur. Withdrawal from opioids 
leads to a syndrome characterized by nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and 
muscle aches. 
Re 
There are a wide variety of medical complications associated with 
drug misuse, ranging from injuries sustained while intoxicated, to liver 
or kidney damage due to the toxicity of substances abused, to infections 
including hepatitis and HIV arising from non-sterile injections. With all 
street drugs there is a risk of death by intentional or accidental overdose 
or poisoning due to impurities in the drug. 
A central reason for many forms of drug use is to induce pharmaco- 
logically a pleasant affective state. It is therefore not surprising that for 
many drugs, including alcohol, stintulants, hallucinogens, and opioids, 
elation is a central feature of initial intoxication. With sedatives, in con- 
trast, intoxication leads to apathy. Many polydrug misusers refer to 
drugs by their primary mood-altering characteristics. Thus, a distinction 
is made between uppers and downers, and particular cocktails of drugs 
or sequences of drugs are used to regulate mood in particular ways. 
Negative mood states typically follow intoxication, for most classes of 
drugs. This is particularly true for drugs such as opioids or cocaine that 
lead to tolerance and dependence. The intense negative mood states 
that characterize withdrawal syndromes associated with such addictive 
drugs motivate habitual drug misuse. The health problems, financial 
difficulties and psychosocial adjustment problems that evolve as part of 
habitual drug use may also contribute to frequent and intense negative 
mood states and paradoxically motivate drug users to use more drugs 
to improve their mood state. Negative mood states typically include 
some combination of depression, anxiety and anger. 
At a perceptual level, some types of drugs, but particularly hallucino- 
gens, lead to pronounced abnormalities during intoxication and with- 
drawal. In the current decade, widely used hallucinogens include MDMA 
(known as Ecstasy or E) and LSD (known as acid). The hallucinations 
and perceptual distortions that occur during intoxication are not always 
experienced as pleasant. In some situations they lead to great distress. 
Brief flashbacks or enduring psychotic states that involve hallucinations 
and perceptual distortions may occur following intoxication and these 
invariably are experienced as distressing. 
With respect to cognition, alcohol and most street drugs lead to 
impaired concentration, reasoning and judgement during intoxica- 
tion and withdrawal. Long-term regular drug misuse in many instances 

4+ DRUG MISUSE 
leads to chronic impaired cognitive functioning. The nature, extent and 
reversibility of this impairment vary depending on the pattern of drug 
misuse. With teenagers, the impaired cognitive functioning associated 
with regular drug use may lead to a decline in academic performance. 
Drug use may have a negative impact on interpersonal adjustment. 
Within the family, drug use often leads to conflict or estrangement 
between adolescents and their parents. At school, drug use may lead to 
conflict between the adolescent and teachers both because of declining 
academic performance and because of antisocial behaviour such as 
theft or aggression associated with drug misuse. Young people who 
use drugs within a peer-group situation may become deeply involved in 
a drug-oriented subculture and break ties with peers who do not abuse 
drugs. Some teenagers develop a solitary drug-using pattern and 
become increasingly socially isolated as their drug using progresses. 
Within the wider community, drug-related antisocial behaviour such 
as aggression, theft and selling drugs may bring youngsters into contact 
with the juvenile justice system. Drug-related health problems and drug 
dependency may bring them into contact with the health service. Conflict 
between drug users and health-care 
professionals may arise 
in 
situations where youngsters expect to be offered prescribed drugs 
(such as methadone) as a substitute for street drugs (such as heroin) 
and this does not occur. 
Drug misuse often occurs with comorbid psychological problems 
including conduct disorder, ADHD, specific learning difficulties, mood 
disorders, anxiety disorders, schizophrenia and bulimia. In dual diagno- 
sis cases, the relationship between these comorbid psychological prob- 
lems and drug use is complex (Phillips et al., 2010). Any or all of them 
may precede drug use and contribute in some way to the development 
of drug-using behaviour. In addition, drug use may precipitate or main- 
tain some of these other psychological problems. For example, the use 
of cannabis and hallucinogens may precipitate the onset of schizophre- 
nia. Chronic polydrug misuse may lead to learning difficulties, and 
chronic alcohol use can lead to amnesic syndrome. Amphetamine 
usage may lead to anxiety problems. Drug dependence may lead to 
chronic conduct problems such as assault and theft. Negative drug- 
related experiences such as losses and drug-related accidents may 
lead to mood disorder, which in turn may lead to further drug use. Drug 
use is also an important risk factor for suicide in teenagers. 
Theories 
Some of the more clinically influential explanations for drug misuse will 
be presented below. These have been classified into five categories. 
Biological theories emphasize the role of genetic and physiological 
factors in harmful drug use and the disease-like nature of addiction. 
Intrapsychic deficit theories 
point to the importance 
of personal 
psychological vulnerabilities in the aetiology of drug misuse. Cognitive- 
behavioural theories underline the significance of conditioning and 
other learning processes in the genesis of drug problems. Systemic 
105 

106 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
2 o S 
oO 
ON 
OA 
FB 
WN 
= 
12 
theories propose that drug use is strongly influenced by social factors 
within the family and community. Integrative theories draw on concepts 
from multiple domains to explain problematic drug use and inform 
treatment. 
Biological theories 
Biological formulations are concerned with the disease-like nature of 
drug addiction, the role of genetic and temperamental predisposing 
factors in rendering some adolescents vulnerable to drug misuse, and 
the centrality of neurobiological process to the maintenance of harmful 
drug use and addictive behaviour. 
The disease model 
The self-help organization 
Narcotics Anonymous 
(NA), which 
is 
modelled on Alcoholics Anonymous, takes the view that addiction is a 
disease that can only be managed, not cured (Narcotics Anonymous, 
2008). Within NA it is assumed that this disease is characterized by 
_abnormities of the central nervous system that give rise to uncontrollable 
urges, cravings and loss of control over drug-using behaviour. According 
to NA, complete abstinence and regular attendance at NA self-help 
meetings are essential for managing the disease of addiction. NA self- 
help meetings are convened and attended by other recovering drug 
users. Within these meetings a 12-step programme is pursued. The 12 
steps of Narcotics Anonymous are set out in Table 4.4. 
TABLE 4.4 
The 12 steps of Narcotics Anonymous 
Principle 
We admitted we were powerless over our addiction and that our lives had become unmanageable. 
We came to believe that a power greater than ourselves could restore us to sanity. 
We made a decision to turn our will and our lives over to God as we understood Him. 
We made a searching and moral inventory of ourselves. 
We admitted to God, to ourselves and to other human beings the exact nature of our wrongs. 
_ We were entirely ready to have God remove all these defects of character. 
We humbly asked Him to remove our shortcomings. 
We made a list of all persons we had harmed, and became willing to make amends to them all. 
We made direct amends to such people whenever possible, except when to do so would injure 
them or others. 
We continued to take personal inventory and when we were wrong, promptly admitted it. 
We sought through prayer and meditation to improve our conscious contact with God as we 
understood Him, praying only for knowledge of His will for the power to carry that out. 
Having had a spiritual awakening as a result of these steps, we tried to carry this message to 
addicts, and to practise these principles in all our affairs. 
Note: Adapted from Narcotics Anonymous (2008). Narcotics Anonymous (sixth edition). 
Chatsworth, CA: Narcotics Anonymous World Services (p. 17). 

4*> DRUG MISUSE 
107 
In NA meetings addicts invoke spiritual help to manage their addic- 
tion, and new members are teamed up with a sponsor to whom they can 
turn for support when they are tempted to relapse. The 12-step approach 
was developed in the US in 4935, by Bill Wilson, an alcoholic New York 
stockbroker and Dr Robert Smith, an alcoholic physician. Their approach 
and the international self-help organization — Alcoholics Anonymous — 
that they founded were based on their own experiences of recovery 
using principles of the Oxford Group, a non-denominational Christian 
organization (Jaffe & Kelly, 2011). NA derives from this movement. 
Long-term, regular attendance at NA meetings is incorporated into 
some residential treatment programmes for adolescent drug users and 
is the mainstay of long-term aftercare in many such programmes. The 
Minnesota Model is a widely used example of this practice. It integrates 
the 12-step approach with group and family therapy (Winters et al., 
2000). There is evidence from a few treatment outcome studies for the 
effectiveness of such programmes for adolescents recovering from 
drug dependence. Up to 53% of young people who participate in these 
programmes remain abstinent compared with 27% _.of those who do not 
(Jaffe & Kelly, 2011). 
Evidence for a simple disease model as proposed by NA is lacking. 
Adolescents who use drugs are a heterogeneous group, only one third 
of whom go on to develop harmful drug use (Catalano et al., 2011). 
Multiple social, psychological and biological factors are implicated in the 
aetiology of ongoing harmful drug use within this subgroup. 
There is no__ 
__ evidence for an underlying unitary 
disease process. 
Also, the disease 
model cannot seciakn tie 
tect thea a 
proportion iot 
very severe drug 
users mature out of their addiction in middle age (Jochman & Fromme, 
2010). 
Genetics 
Genetic theories of drug misuse, which propose that vulnerability to 
addiction is inherited, are partly supported by the findings of twin, family 
and adoption studies (Hasin & Katz, 2010). These show that a predis- 
position to drug and alcohol misuse and dependence is moderately 
heritable, particularly in males, but that genetic influences on experi- 
mentation and recreational drug use are less pronounced. Over half of the 
variance in the genetic predisposition to drug, alcohol and nicotine abuse 
is shared, and not drug-specific. 
However, genetic factors do influence individual differences in sensi- 
tivity to, and tolerance for, specific drugs. For example, some males 
are genetically predisposed to developing alcohol problems, and the 
characteristic that is transmitted may be a low physiological and sub- 
~ jective response fo alcohol (Schuckit, 
Temperament 
The temperament hypothesis holds that youngsters who develop drug 
and alcohol problems do so because they have particular temperamental 
characteristics that are partially biologically determined, which predis- 
pose them to developing poor self-control. Thus, they are apt to engage 

108 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
in a range of risky behaviours including drug use. In support of this 
hypothesis, difficult temperament in early childhood, sensation-seeking, 
a low level of harm-avoidance and low self-control in adolescence have 
consistently been related to teenage drug use (Wills & Ainette, 2010). 
Youngsters 
with these temperamental 
characteristics 
engage 
in 
dangerous novel experiences and risky rule-breaking behaviour of 
which drug misuse is just one example. Related risky behaviours include 
driving fast cars or motor bikes, playing high-contact sports, fighting and 
theft. 
Treatment programmes influenced by this position may aim to train 
youngsters in self-control skills so that they can regulate their tendencies 
to pursue novel and dangerous experiences including intoxication. 
Alternatively they may help these adolescents to refocus their energy 
into demanding and risky prosocial leisure or work activities. In some 
cases participation in group residential programmes where youngsters 
are challenged to take risks and master skills such as horse riding, 
sailing or mountain climbing may be effective, although this is still a 
controversial approach to treatment (Becker, 2010). 
There is little evidence for the effectiveness of wilderness or adven- 
ture therapy as a treatment for adolescent drug use. It may be that such 
programmes lead to abstinence while young people are engaged in 
treatment, but the risk of relapse after treatment is high unless the wil- 
derness experience is coupled with evidence-based individual or family 
interventions during and after the wilderness experience. A problem 
with wilderness therapy, common to all group-based approaches, is 
that it runs the risk of contagion effects, whereby groups of adolescent 
drug users on such programmes reinforce each other's positive atti- 
tudes to drugs (Dishion & Dodge, 2005). 
Neurobiological perspectives 
Neurobiological theories of drug use propose that two main systems are 
central to the development of harmful drug use and dependence 
(Hutchison, 2010). The first is the incentive motivation network or 
salen Sey which includes the mesolymbic_ dopamine pathway 
involving 
the ventral tegmental area and the nucleus accumbens. The 
second is the control network or inhibitory system, which includes areas 
of the prefrontal cortex. These are illustrated in Figure 4.2. 
The reward system motivates people to seek things essential for 
survival such as food, water and sexual mates. This is the system that 
is activated when positive reinforcement occurs (described below). The 
inhibitory system helps people consider the consequences of impulsively 
seeking these sorts of things without regard to possible dangers of 
doing so. 
When adolescents repeatedly use drugs such as nicotine, alcohol, 
cocaine or heroin, the reward system of the brain that is normally 
activated to release dopamine by survival-relevant stimuli such as food, 
water and sexual mates is ‘hijacked’ into responding as if drugs were 
required for survival. With repeated use, drugs and cues associated 
with their use take on increasingly greater motivational significance — a 

4 
* DRUG MISUSE 
109 
Prefrontal 
cortex 
Ventral 
tegmental 
area 
Nucleus 
accumbens 
Figure 4.2 The reward system in the human brain. Note: The ventral tegmental area is 
connected to both the nucleus accumbens and the prefrontal cortex via the pathways in the 
diagram, and dopamine 
is the principal neurotransmitter involved in the reward system 
process known as incentive sensitization - and drug use becomes 
compulsive. Eventually with chronic use of addictive drugs such as 
heroin or cocaine, people come to find drug use more rewarding than 
anything else, and other activities become far less rewarding. Through 
a combination of classical conditioning (described below) and incentive 
sensitization, intense motivation to use drugs — experienced as urges or 
cravings — comes to be activated by cues such as situations or people 
associated with drug use, and causes relapse even after long periods of 
abstinence. Loss of control over drug use is associated with greater 
activation of the brain’s reward system relative to the control system 
when exposed to cues associated with drug use. 
Adolescence is a critical period of addiction vulnerability due to the 
characteristics of the nervous system during this neurodevelopmental 
stage (Chambers et al., 2003). During adolescence there is a relative 
over-functioning of the incentive motivation network or reward system 
and under-functioning of the control network or inhibitory system. 
Adolescence is associated with increased impulsivity, risk-taking and 
novelty seeking, and with experiencing novel stimuli as more strongly 
reinforcing than in adulthood. 
From an evolutionary perspective, this increased risk-taking and 
novelty-seeking 
may have been 
adaptive because 
it motivated 
adolescents to explore novel behaviours associated with adult roles. 
4 /“ 
@ OL, / 
ot, AY Misch 
Unfortunately, 
this neurodevelopmental stage renders adolescents 
vulnerable to experimenting with drugs because drug taking is riskyand — 
provides novel experiences. It also renders adolescents vulnerable to 
addiction because the positive effects of drugs are experienced as more 
reinforcing than at other stages of the life cycle. 
As adolescents mature into adulthood, the inhibitory system’s effect 
on the reward system increases, and consequently risk-taking behaviour 
bad 
7 
ji 

110 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
decreases. This process is facilitated by pruning of cortical synapses 
and increased myelination, particularly in the frontal and temporal lobes, 
which leads to an increase in the efficiency of neural circuitry between 
the inhibitory system and the reward system. There is some evidence 
that pruning and myelination are adversely affected by frequent drug 
use in adolescence, which in turn may account for greater vulnerability 
to addiction during the teenage years (Lubman & Yticel, 2008). 
Neurobiological theories also propose that habitual drug use leads to 
long-term drug-induced changes in the brain’s reward system (Shaham 
& Hope, 2005). This neuroadaptation accounts for the phenomena of 
tolerance, dependence, withdrawal, and the high rate of relapse among 
recovered addicts. With tolerance, a gradual increase in drug dosage is 
required for intoxication to occur. This increase in dosage in turn leads 
to physiological dependence and the related phenomenon of unpleasant 
or hazardous withdrawal symptoms when drug taking ceases abruptly. 
An attempt to avoid this withdrawal syndrome maintains further drug 
use. Extensive pharmacological evidence supports the hypothesis that 
for certain classes of drugs, tolerance, dependence and withdrawal 
occur. In particular these phenomena are associated with habitual use 
of alcohol, opioids, stimulants (such as cocaine) and sedatives, but not 
hallucinogens (such as cannabis, MDMA and LSD) (Kaminer & Marsch, 
2011). 
Neurobiological theories have led to the inclusion of detoxification in 
treatment programmes for adolescents who have developed depend- 
ence. These theories have also informed the development of pharma- 
cological interventions such as methadone 
Jone 
maintenance programmes 
(Kaminer & Marsch, 2011). In such programmes, youngsters who have 
developed opioid dependency are prescribed a daily dose of metha- 
done as a substitute for street opioids. Methadone prevents withdrawal 
symptoms from occurring, but does not give the ‘high’ associated with 
heroin. People on methadone can function quite well socially and occu- 
pationally, and avoid the dangers of procuring and using street drugs. 
Methadone maintenance programmes typically include routine monitor- 
ing of drug use 2 
through-urinalysis and adjunctive counselling. They are 
ee 
ee 
effective 
> with a proportion of opioid-dependent adolescents. 
Intrapsychic deficit theories 
A number of theories account for drug misuse in terms of specific 
\ Se rapsychiy vulnerabilities and deficits. Among the more clinically 
ntial are those that invoke personality traits, stress and coping 
processes, learning difficulties and the challenges of identity formation 
to explain the development of drug misuse. 
Addictive personality 
The idea that people are predisposed to develop drug problems or 
addiction because they have particular personality traits or attributes is 
often referred to as the addictive personality hypothesis. This is quite 

4* DRUG MISUSE 
111 
similar to the temperament hypothesis mentioned earlier, although the 
addictive personality hypothesis also assumes that environmental 
factors play a role in the development of personality. 
There is some support for the addictive personality hypothesis. For 
example, a meta-analysis of data on personality traits of adult drug 
users showed that high levels of neuroticism and disinhibition and low 
levels of conscientiousness and agreeableness characterize adult 
substance use disorders (Kotov et al., 2010). ——— 
Stress and coping through self-medication 
Stress and coping formulations propose that drugs are used to alleviate 
negative affective states, and specific drugs are chosen because of their 
unique effects. This theory is often referred to as the self-medication 
hypothesis (Grunberg et al., 2011; Khantzian, 2003). From this perspec- 
tive drugs use is conceptualized as a strategy for coping with negative 
mood states or psychological disorders such as depression, posttrau- 
matic stress disorder (PTSD) or psychosis that have arisen in response 
to a range of current or past adversities such as abuse, neglect, bereave- 
ment, armed combat or problematic parent-child relationships. 
There are many versions of this broad hypothesis. For example, psy- 
choanalytic theorists have argued that low levels of care and high levels 
of criticism from primary caregivers in early childhood may lead to inse- 
cure attachment, unmet dependency needs, harsh superego develop- 
ment and low-self esteem. Drugs are used, according to this formulation, 
to alleviate the negative mood states that arise from these detrimental 
formative experiences (Wieder & Kaplan, 1969). Another variant of this 
position proposes that where adolescents have suffered sexual abuse 
or exposure to other traumatic events, drugs may be used to deal with 
the symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder or depression that have 
arisen from these adverse experiences. 
i 
iant is that teenagers 
with a 
genetic vulnerability 
for psychosis may use drugs to cope with 
C 
vo 
_ There is little doubt that in a proportion of cases adolescents use 
drugs to deal with stress, trauma and related psychopathology. In clini- 
cal samples between 70% and 80% of cases have c 
bid subs 
~ use and other 
psychological 
disorders (Kaminer et al., 201 1a). However, 
~ in many cases drug use is not preceded by stress or psychopathology. 
Rather stress and psychological difficulties arise as a result of harmful 
drug use. Where drug use occurs with comorbid psychological disor- 
ders such as PTSD, depression or psychosis, both the drug-use prob- 
lem and the comorbid difficulties require treatment. There is no evidence 
to suggest that treating 
comorbid disorders alleviates drug misuse or 
addiction. 
ect aan ld 
Learning difficulties 
Another intrapsychic deficit that has been suggested to predispose 
youngsters to developing drug misuse is learning difficulties. According 

112 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
e—™) 
to this position, children who have learning difficulties and who experi- 
ence academic failure at school do not develop a strong commitment to 
achieving academic goals and turn to drug use as an alternative life- 
style (Mason, 2010). Interventions that derive from this perspective aim 
~ to provide adolescents with a school curriculum appropriate to their abil- 
ity levels and a participative ethos that includes teenagers and their 
parents in school activities so as to enhance commitment to academic 
goals (Griffin & Botvin, 2010). 
Identity formation 
Erik Erikson (1950, 1968) argued that the lack of an established identity 
during adolescence is a normative intrapsychic deficit and that partici- 
pation in a drug-using subculture is one of a wide range of lifestyles that 
may be explored during the adolescent’s search for adult identity and 
autonomy from parental control. Recent studies have shown that young 
people who\consolidate their identities\in early adulthood engage in less 
drug use and other risky behaviours than those who have difficulty with 
identity formation (e.g., Arnett, 2005; Schwartz et al., 2010). 
Treatment programmes based on this position focus on facilitating 
individuation and developing alternatives to drug taking as a route to 
autonomy and identity formation. The treatment of chronic drug depend- 
ence in drug-free therapeutic communities such as Synanon, Daytop 
and Phoenix House in the US is consistent with this theoretical position 
(DeLeon, 2000). Therapeutic communities facilitate the development of 
drug-free lifestyles and identities by offering a context within which ado- 
lescent can engage in structured community living and therapeutic 
activities with ex-addicts who have successfully become drug-free. 
Research on therapeutic communities has shown that they can be 
effective for a proportion of young adult addicts who are motivated to 
engage in treatment (DeLeon, 2000; Smith et al., 2006). Therapeutic 
communities are probably not an appropriate intervention for young 
adolescents. 
Cognitive-behavioural theories 
Cognitive-behavioural theories focus on the role of classical and 
operant conditioning and cognitive processes in the maintenance of 
drug misuse. 
Operant conditioning 
Operant-conditioning or instrumental learning theories propose that 
drug Use is maintained initially by positive reinforcement associated 
with the mood-elevating effects of drugs and later, in the case of 
dependence-producing substances such as alcohol, cocaine or heroin, 
by negative reinforcement, where drug use prevents aversive withdrawal 
symptoms (e.g. O’Brien et al., 1992; Schulteis & Koob, 1996). Treatment 
programmes based on this formulation include initial detoxification so 
A
a 

4* DRUG MISUSE 
113 
drugs lose their negative reinforcement value, and the provision of 
positive reinforcement for alternatives to drug-using behaviours. 
ipa 
meeconts. 
Contingency R 
cy Reinforcement SPAN OR) is 
ence-base 
an evidence-based therapy in which operant conditioningis the central 
intervention (Dakof et al., 2011; Godley et al., 2006). With A-CRA, 
therapists work with adolescents and their parents, both alone and in 
conjoint sessions, to identify reinforcers or rewards that young people 
value and that will improve the quality of their lives, and reduce drug 
use. The process begins with a functional analysis of both drug using 
and prosocial behaviour to identify situations that trigger drug use and 
_—-prosocial behaviours;and related reinforcers. Adolescents are helped 
“to set goals and 
plan prosocial activities to improve their quality of life 
and, with their parents, arrangements are made for them to receive 
reinforcement for doing so. Adolescents and parents engage 
in 
communication, 
problem-solving, 
and 
relapse management 
skills 
training. Homework assignments are set and reviewed in all sessions, 
and drug use is monitored with regular urinalysis testing. A-CRA 
typically spans about 3 months of weekly sessions. In a series of trials 
A-CRA has been found to be effective for adolescents with a range of 
drug use problems (Waldron & Turner, 2008). 
Classical conditioning 
Wikler (1973) has offered an explanation of relapse following detoxifica- 
tion in people who have developed tolerance and dependence using a 
classical conditioning framework. According to this position, certain 
conditioned stimuli(CSs) or cues in the environments of drug users 
elicit withdrawal symptoms and craving (conditioned responses or 
CRs), because in the past these cues have been associated with (with- 
— 
Irécue exposure treatment, based on this formulation, exposure to 
withdrawal and craving eliciting cues (CSs) without engaging in drug 
taking leads to extinction of the CRs, particularly cravings. Adolescents 
enter situations that elicit craving, observe videotapes or audiotapes of 
such situations, or undergo imaginal exposure to such situations and 
concurrently use a variety of coping strategies to tolerate their discomfort 
and avoid drug-taking. 
There is controversy about the effectiveness of cue exposure treat- 
ment, and few studies have evaluated it in the treatment of adolescent 
drug users (Conklin & Tiffany, 2002; Drummond et al., 1995). 
Cognitive-behaviour therapy 
Within cognitive-behaviour therapy (CBT) models, drug use is concep- 
tualized as a set of learned behaviours and related cognitions (Kaminer 
et al., 2011b). Drug-use behaviours, and related urges, cravings, beliefs 
and expectations about the risks and benefits of drug use and the 
degree to which drug use can be controlled, are assumed to be learned 

114 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
through classical and operant conditioning as well as through cognitive 
learning processes. 
Witkiewitz and Marlatt (2004) argue that in high-risk situations, drug 
users who have well-rehearsed 
coping strategies and use them 
effectively develop increased self-efficacy beliefs and a decreased 
probability of relapse. Those who have poor coping strategies are driven 
to relapse by theirtow-self-efficacybeliefs in their capacity to avoid 
substance use and their expectations of a high from drug use. This 
leads to the abstinence violation effect (AVE), where guilt and a sense 
of loss of control predominate. With the AVE people may say to 
themselves, ‘I’ve relapsed. I’ve let myself and my family down. | have no 
control over my drug taking. There is no point in trying to stop now.’ This 
failure experience in turn leads to an increased probability of a minor 
slip becoming a major relapse. 
CBT for drug use involves helping adolescents become motivated to 
reduce or stop drug use and develop and implement skills and coping 
strategies to avoid relapse. Motivational interviewing or motivational 
_enhancementtherapy 
is the main intervention used to facilitate engage- 
ment in treatment (Miller & Rollnick, 2002; Tevyaw & Monti, 2004). With 
motivational interviewing the psychologist invites the young person to 
describe their drug-using behaviour and consider the pros and cons of 
continued drug use; gives normative feedback on the effects of the 
young person’s drug use and options for changing drug-using behaviour; 
invites the young person to make a decision about changing their drug 
use; and supports their self-efficacy beliefs about reducing drug use. 
CBT programmes help young people set drug-reduction goals, iden- 
tify situational cues that elicit urges or cravings to use drugs, and 
develop skills for drug refusal and strategies for coping with urges and 
cravings to use drugs in risky situations where they might relapse. In 
CBT programmes young people also develop skills for managing nega- 
tive emotions including anger, anxiety and depression without recourse 
to drug use. Finally, CBT programmes help young people develop com- 
munication and problem-solving skills and use these to increase social 
support and develop a drug-free lifestyle. 
Results from a series of controlled trials support the effectiveness of 
both individual 
and group-based CBT for adolescent drug use. 
Furthermore, contagion effects common in group treatment of antisocial 
youngsters have not been found in trials of CBT for adolescent drug 
misuse (Dishion & Dodge, 2005). Mindfulness-based meditation as a 
relapse prevention strategy has recently been incorporated into CBT for 
drug use (Zgierska et al., 2009). 
Systemic theories 
Systemic theories of drug misuse propose that family problems and 
challenges in the wider social system such as social disadvantage, 
deviant peer-group membership and drug availability are central to the 
aetiology of drug problems. 
_

4* DRUG MISUSE 
Family systems approaches 
The ideas that adolescent drug misuse is caused or maintained by 
parental drug use, poor parenting skills and family disorganization are 
some of the more important family systems hypotheses. Empirical 
studies have established an association between each of these factors 
and adolescent drug use (Kliewer, 2010). In families where parents use 
drugs, adolescents may learn drug using behaviour patterns directly 
through a process of modelling. They may acquire positive attitudes to 
drugs through exposure to their parents’ permissive attitudes. Further- 
more, parents’ drug-using behaviour may compromise their capacity to 
parent their adolescents adequately. If parents do not jointly establish 
clear rules prohibiting drug use and consistently apply clear conse- 
quences for violating these rules, then adolescent drug use is more 
likely to occur. 
Parenting problems may occur within a broad pattern of family 
disorganization associated with adolescent drug use. The pattern may 
include parental psychological problems; lack of a clear parental alliance 
and clear intergenerational 
boundaries 
between 
adolescents 
and 
parents; poor family communication, 
problem-solving and conflict- 
resolution skills; extreme family enmeshment or disengagement; and 
difficulty addressing the family life-cycle transitions, especially that of 
facilitating adolescent autonomy. Within such disorganized families drug 
misuse may serve an organizing function, since it introduces certain 2 
predictable routines into family 
life and provides a focus for parental 
- 
concern, which may increase family cohesion and prevent parental 
separation. 
Multidimensional family therapy (MDFT, Liddle, 2010), functional 
family therapy 
(FFT, Waldron & Brody, 2010), brief strategic family 
therapy (BSFT, Robbins et al., 2010) and multisystemic therapy (MST, 
Henggeler & Schaeffer, 2010) are evidence-based approaches to 
treating adolescent drug misuse based on systemic theory (Waldron & 
Turner, 2008). All of these approaches involve working directly with 
adolescents and their parents to improve family functioning as an 
avenue to reducing adolescent drug misuse. Parents are helped to 
establish clear rules prohibiting drug use and consistently apply clear 
consequences for violating these rules. 
These approaches also facilitate the development of positive family 
relationships and good family communication, problem-solving and 
conflict-resolution skills. There is a progression from initial engagement, 
to becoming drug-free, to addressing family issues associated with fos- 
tering adolescent development and autonomy, to disengagement, 
where the emphasis is on planning for relapse prevention. With these 
family-based approaches, treatment typically involves conjoint family 
sessions, separate sessions with adolescents and parents, and ses- 
sions with involved health, social service and juvenile justice profes- 
sionals and school staff, as required. Evidence from controlled trials 
shows that evidence-based family-oriented approaches are very effec- 
tive for adolescent drug-use problems (Waldron & Turner, 2008). 
115 

116 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Extrafamilial social problems 
Hypotheses about extrafamilial social problems propose that social 
disadvantage and deviant peer-group membership, as well as drug 
availability, cause and maintain drug misuse. 
Social disadvantage 
Social disadvantage theories argue that neighbourhoods character- 
ized by poverty, low socio-economic status; high population density 
and high crime rates create a context within which drug misuse can 
flourish. This is because drugs offer an escape from the multiple 
stresses associated with this type of social environment; they are avail- 
able in these environments; and they are socially sanctioned within a 
crime-oriented subculture (Catalano et al., 2011; Gardner et al., 2010). 
Social disadvantage theory entails the view that effective intervention 
programmes support families, enhance educational and vocational 
opportunities for young people, and strengthen communities. Evidence 
from prevention studies supports the effectiveness of parent training 
programmes during the prenatal, infancy, childhood and adolescent 
stages of the life cycle; school-based and after-school programmes that 
enhance social and academic competence; vocational programmes 
that create youth employment opportunities linked te ongoing educa- 
tion; and community-based programmes that strengthen community 
cohesion and reduce alcohol and drug availability to young people 
(Catalano et al., 2011). 
Deviant peer-group membership 
Problem-behaviour theory is an example of a formulation that links 
drug misuse to deviant peer-group membership. This theory pro- 
poses that drug use is one of a series of interrelated problem be- 
haviours, which reflect adherence to unconventional attitudes held by 
a deviant peer group (Catalano et al., 2011; Jessor & Jessor, 1977). 
Adolescents engage in these behaviours to obtain acceptance from 
their deviant peer group and for personal excitement. Young people 
are predisposed to developing problem behaviours if they are alien- 
ated from mainstream society. This may be reflected in their weak 
attachments 
to parents, their rejection of authority, their valuing 
independence more than academic achievement, and their lack of 
religiosity. 
A wealth of survey data supports this theory (Andrews & 
Hops, 2010). 
Treatment programmes based on the hypothesis that deviant peer- 
group membership is central to adolescent drug abuse provide residen- 
tial peer-group-based treatment, within the context of a therapeutic 
community, where the rejection of drug use is part of the therapeutic 
community’s subculture. Therapeutic communities as a treatment for 
drug use have been mentioned earlier, in the section on identify forma- 
tion, where it was noted that they can be effective for a proportion of 
young adult addicts, but may not be appropriate for young adolescents 
(DeLeon, 2000; Smith et al., 2006). 

4+ DRUG MISUSE 
Availability 
Hypotheses about availability suggest that lenient laws or inadequately 
enforced laws concerning teenage use of nicotine, alcohol and street 
drugs increase the probability of adolescent drug use. This type of the- 
ory has few treatment implications but suggests important avenues for 
prevention. Prevention programmes, according to this view, should pro- 
mote stricter drug-related legislation, and the enforcement of laws 
affecting availability of drugs to teenagers. The availability hypotheses 
has largely been supported by empirical tests, and prevention pro- 
grammes based on it have been moderately effective (Toumbourou et 
al., 2007). 
Social norms 
That social norms may contribute to the development of drug misuse is 
a widely held view. There is strong evidence from empirical studies for 
a causal link between exposure to favourable media attitudes to nicotine, 
alcohol and illicit drug use and drug-using behaviour (Nunez-Smith et 
al., 2010). One implication of this position is that the risks of drug use 
may be reduced by policies and legislation that prohibit positive media- 
based messages about nicotine, alcohol and drug use (Snyder & 
Nadorff, 2010). 
Integrative theories 
Two important integrative theories that draw on concepts from multiple 
domains are Prochaska and DiClemente’s transtheoretical stages of 
change model (Prochaska et al., 1992) and West's (2006) synthetic 
model of motivation and addiction. 
Transtheoretical stages of change model 
From an analysis of 24 schools of psychotherapy, Prochaska and 
DiClemente identified five stages of therapeutic change which they 
labelled pre-contemplation, contemplation, 
preparation, action and 
maintenance (Prochaska et al., 1992). They also found, by surveying 
clients and therapists engaged in therapy, that specific techniques were 
maximally effective in helping clients make the transition from one stage 
of change to the next. 
The techniques identified in this survey fall into the categories of 
support, belief exploration and consulting to behavioural change. In 
most schools of therapy there tends to be a progression from support, 
to belief-system 
exploration, 
to behavioural change consultation. 
Prochaska and DiClemente have applied their transtheoretical stages 
of change model and related interventions to the treatment of addictive 
behaviours including drug use (DiClemente, 2003). According to this 
model, in the pre-contemplation stage, the provision of support creates 
a climate within which adolescents may ventilate their feelings and 
express their views about their drug problems and life situation. Such 
117 

118 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
support facilitates movement from the pre-contemplation to the contem- 
plation stage. 
Facilitating the exploration of beliefs about the pros and cons of 
modifying drug use, according to the model, may promote movement 
from the contemplation to the planning stage. In the transition from the 
planning to the action stage the most useful interventions are helping 
adolescents examine various action plans for reducing drug use, and 
facilitating the development of an emotional commitment to change. In 
moving from the action to the maintenance stage the focus is on helping 
adolescents integrate positive changes into their lives and avoidance or 
management of relapses. 
Prochaska and DiClemente argue that five principal categories of 
factors are involved in symptom maintenance: situational maintaining 
factors, maladaptive cognitions, interpersonal conflicts, family conflicts 
and intrapsychic conflicts. These factors are hierarchically organized, 
with earlier factors being more responsive to change than later factors. 
Effective therapy follows one of three strategies once the person has 
passed through to the action stage. The first strategy is to target the 
situations that maintain drug use and only shift to the cognitive level or 
higher levels if no change occurs. The second strategy is to focus on 
the family systems level, which is the key level within the hierarchy 
typically involved in maintaining drug use. A third strategy is to target all 
levels, by, for example, offering individual work to alter maladaptive 
cognitions and intrapsychic conflicts associated with drug use; peer- 
group work and social skills training to target interpersonal conflicts or 
deviant peer-group membership; and family work to address family 
conflicts and drug misuse maintaining family interaction patterns. 
The central prediction of this model is that stage-specific interventions 
will be more effective than those that are not stage-specific. 
Little 
research has been conducted to test this hypothesis with adolescent 
drug users, and results from studies of adults are mixed (West, 2006). 
However, the theory has been very influential clinically and has informed 
the development of procedures such as harm reduction (Marlatt & 
Witkiewitz, 2010) and motivational interviewing (Macgowan & Engle, 
2010), where the aim is not to promote abstinence or reduction in drug 
use, but to prevent drug-related harm and facilitate movement towards 
. 
planning and action stages. Needle exchanges and provision of safe 
injection sites are examples of harm-reduction interventions. Motivational 
interviewing has been described above in the section on CBT. 
West's synthetic theory of motivation and addiction 
Robert West (2006), a major critic of the stages of change model, 
proposed that addiction is not a matter of conscious choice and 
progression through invariant stages, but a reward-seeking behaviour 
over which a person has lost control. It arises from abnormalities in the 
motivational system, many of which are not conscious, or abnormalities 
in the physical and social environment that are conducive to prioritizing 
drug use. Abnormalities in the motivational system may be caused by 

4+ DRUG MISUSE 
drug use, for example withdrawal symptoms and the acquired drive to 
seek drugs to alleviate these, or they may be due to predisposing factors 
such as negative affectivity or impulsivity. 
West explains drug addiction in terms of his synthetic theory of moti- 
vation, which is also referred to as PRIME theory. PRIME is an acronym 
for plans, responses, impulses and inhibitory forces (felt as urges), 
motives (felt as wants or needs) and evaluative beliefs. According to 
PRIME theory, adolescents’ conscious plans and evaluations influence 
their drug use through motives, and motives influence drug use through 
impulses which are determined in large part by non-conscious pro- 
cesses. The motivational system that underpins drug use is influenced 
by past experiences through non-conscious processes such as habitu- 
ation and sensitization, classical and operant conditioning, and con- 
scious processes such as cognitive learning. However, 
it is also 
influenced by stimuli in the immediate internal and external environ- 
ment. Therefore, an adolescent’s motivation to use drugs is inherently 
unstable and changes from moment to moment. 
Treatment based on this model capitalizes on the instability of the 
motivational system by bolstering the adolescent’s 
motivation 
to 
exercise restraint or temporarily suppress the forces driving drug use 
and addressing relevant predisposing factors. This may be done by, for 
example, modifying relevant emotional or environmental factors such 
as negative mood states induced by stressful life events, drug availability, 
peer pressure to use drugs, or family disorganization. According to 
West's model, treatment sessions should be scheduled close together 
so that they have a cumulative effect in altering the adolescent's 
feelings, impulses and beliefs that motivate them to use drugs. 
West's formulation integrates a vast body of animal and human 
research on the psychology, sociology and neurobiology of addiction, 
and offers an alternative to the oversimplified, but intuitively appealing, 
stages of change model described earlier. However, it has not yet led to 
the development of treatments for adolescent drug use. 
Assessment 
Assessment of adolescents with drug problems may be conducted 
by multidisciplinary teams that include clinical psychologists and medi- 
cal staff, and should involve interviews with the adolescent and parents 
or carers. 
Brief questionnaires such as the Personal Experience 
Screening Questionnaire (PESQ, Winters, 1991) may be used to screen 
for drug use. 
Comprehensive 
questionnaires 
such 
as the Per- 
sonal Experience Inventory (PEI, Winters & Henly, 1989) and compre- 
hensive structured interviews such as the Global Appraisal of Individual 
Needs (GAIN, Dennis, 1998) may be used for a more thorough assess- 
ment of drug use severity and personal, family and school-related 
adjustment problems. 
Physical examination and regular urinalysis may be included in the 
assessment of adolescents with drug problems. Physical examina- 
tion facilitates the identification and treatment of drug-related physical 
119 

120 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Personal factors — Genetic vulnerability to addiction, traits of impulsivity, risk 
taking and rebelliousness, and psychopathology, e.g., conduct eared ADHD, and 
mood or anxiety disorders 
Family factors — Role models of harmful drug use, parental maladjustment, parenting 
problems, family disorganization, and family adversity 
School factors — Learning disability, school failure, lack of educational resources, 
and lack of career opportunities 
Social factors — Deviant peer-group membership; community, laws and media 
supportive of drug use 
PROTECTIVE FACTORS 
Personal strengths and 
achievements 
MAINTAINING FACTORS 
Physiological dependence 
and fear of withdrawal 
PRECIPITATING 
FACTORS 
Family support for 
stopping drug use 
Drug use alleviates 
psychological problem 
Adolescence 
Drug availability 
Involvement in drug 
School support 
using subculture and 
ws 
[aus suse » bt: 
Lack of accessible 
DRUG MISUSE 
; 
alternative lifestyles 
Community support 
Engagement in treatment 
Prosocial peer-group 
Treatment refusal 
Figure 4.3 General formulation model for adolescent drug misuse 
complications including hepatitis and HIV infection. Awareness of the 
extent of physical problems may motivate adolescents and _ their 
families to engage in treatment. Regular urinalysis provides reliable 
information on relapse, which is critical for effective treatment of habit- 
ual drug users. A formulation is drawn up that integrates assessment 
information; highlights predisposing, precipitating, maintaining and pro- 
tective factors; and indicates whether the drug problem reflects tran- 
sient experimentation or a more entrenched pattern of habitual drug 
misuse. This formulation is used to guide intervention. A general clinical 
formulation model for adolescent drug misuse is given in Figure 4.3. 
Treatment 
Treatment of adolescent drug use should aim to engage the adolescent 
and parents or carers in therapy, motivate them to use therapy to 
work towards reducing adolescent drug use, and address the young 
person's personal, family- and school-related difficulties. Reviews of 
treatment outcome studies show that family-oriented approaches 
such as MDFT, FFT, BSFT, MST and A-CRA, and individual ap- 
proaches such as CBT, combined with motivational interviewing are 
effective interventions for adolescent drug use (Dakof et al., 2011: 

4 
* DRUG MISUSE 
Kaminer et al., 2011b; Waldron & Turner, 2008; Williams & Chang, 
2000). Literature reviews consistently show that for adolescents living 
with 
their 
parents, 
evidence-based 
family-oriented 
treatment 
programmes are the treatment of choice for drug problems because 
they have the best outcome, involve the young person's family as a 
treatment resource, and modify family problems that may be maintaining 
adolescent drug use (e.g., Williams & Chang, 2000). Family-based 
approaches have been shown to be effective for engaging adolescent 
drug users and their networks in therapy, for reducing drug misuse, for 
improving associated behaviour problems, for improving overall family 
functioning and for preventing relapse. 
Where there are significant obstacles 
to involving families 
in 
treatment, CBT combined with initial motivational interviewing is the 
intervention of choice. Motivational interviewing facilitates engagement 
in therapy and through CBT young people develop skills to reduce drug 
use, communicate, problem-solve and deal with relapses. Where 
adolescents have developed physiological dependence, psychological 
interventions may be combined with initial detoxification or with long- 
term pharmacological interventions such as methadone maintenance 
for opioid dependence (Kaminer & Marsch, 2011). For chronic drug 
problems with a high risk of relapse, long-term aftercare though regular 
attendance at 12-step NA meetings may prevent relapse (Jaffe & Kelly, 
2011). This overall approach to treatment of adolescent drug use is 
consistent 
with 
international 
best 
practice 
guidelines 
(American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 2005; Department of 
Health 2007; NICE, 2008b). 
Controversies 
A central controversy in the field of adolescent drug use concerns the 
stability over time of the motivation to use drugs. In the stages of change 
model, Prochaska and DiClemente argue that motivation to cease drug 
use evolves through a series of relatively stable and sequential stages 
of change from pre-contemplation through contemplation, planning and 
action to maintenance (DiClemente, 2003; Proschaska et al., 1992). 
In contrast, Robert West (2006) argues that motivation to cease drug 
use is inherently unstable. He has put forward the following arguments 
against the stages of change model. The precise boundaries of any of 
the stages of change are arbitrarily drawn in research studies; for 
example, a person is in the planning stage if their plans apply to the next 
30 days. There is no evidence that stages are always stable and that 
progression through them is invariably orderly. There is also no evidence 
that drug users’ attempts to quit are always guided by conscious, 
coherent plans, and much evidence that unconscious processes, 
classical and operant conditioning, erratic impulses, and highly specific 
environmental cues affect the development and cessation of drug use. 
In West’s (2006) synthetic theory of addiction he proposes that abnor- 
malities of the motivational system are central to addiction, that the 
motivational system is inherently unstable, and that important aspects 
121 

122 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
of the motivation to use or abstain from drugs are governed by un- 
conscious learning processes and impulses. According to West, inter- 
ventions should not stimulate adolescents to think about what ‘stage’ 
they are in or be matched to such stages, but rather they should put 
maximum tolerable pressure on the young person to cease drug use. 
A related controversy concerns harm-reduction programmes such as 
needle exchanges, safe injection sites, and the provision of free tests of 
the quality of MDMA sold at raves. Advacates of harm-reduction 
programmes argue that in the absence of highly effective treatments 
that all drug users and addicts are highly motivated to use, mortality or 
morbidity due to using street drugs of unknown quality under adverse 
conditions may be reduced by pragmatic and humane harm-reduction 
interventions (Marlatt & Witkiewitz,-2010). Critics.of this approach argue 
that harm-reduction interventions send a message to adolescents that 
drug use is acceptable (Leshner, 2008). 
Summary 
Habitual drug misuse in adolescence is of particular concern to 
clinical psychologists because it may have a negative long- 
term effect on adolescents and an intergenerational effect on 
their children. A conservative estimate is that between 5% and 
10% of teenagers under 19 have drug problems serious 
enough to require clinical intervention. 
A distinction is made between drug dependence and drug 
misuse. While drug misuse refers to using drugs in such a way 
that the person is harmed, drug dependence refers to those 
situations where there is a compulsive pattern of use that may 
involve physiological changes that accompany the phenomena 
of tolerance and withdrawal. Drug misuse is associated with a 
wide variety of behaviour patterns which may be described in 
terms of the age of onset, the duration of drug misuse, the 
frequency of use, the range of substances used, and the 
amount used. 
Physiological features of drug misuse may be grouped into 
those associated with intoxication, those that follow intoxica- 
tion, those associated with withdrawal following the develop- 
ment of dependence, and medical complications that arise. At 
an affective level, negative mood states typically follow the 
euphoria of intoxication for most classes of drugs. At a percep- 
tual level, some types of drug, but particularly hallucinogens, 
lead to pronounced abnormalities during intoxication and with- 
drawal. With respect to cognition, most street drugs lead to 
impaired concentration, reasoning and judgement during intox- 
ication and withdrawal. Long-term regular drug misuse in many 
instances leads to impaired cognitive functioning. Drug misuse 

4 * DRUG MISUSE 
may have an impact on interpersonal adjustment leading to 
family, school and peer-group-based difficulties. 
Drug misuse often occurs with comorbid psychological 
problems including conduct disorder, ADHD, specific learning 
difficulties, mood disorders, anxiety disorders, psychosis and 
bulimia. The relationship between these comorbid psychological 
problems and drug misuse is complex. Explanations for drug 
misuse 
focus 
on 
biological 
factors, 
intrapsychic 
deficits, 
- 
cognitive-behavioural learning processes, social factors and 
multiple factors from these four domains. 
Biological formulations are concerned with the disease- 
like nature of drug addiction, the role of genetic and tempera- 
mental predisposing factors in rendering some adolescents 
vulnerable to drug misuse, and the centrality of neurobiologi- 
cal processes to the maintenance of harmful drug use and 
addictive behaviour. Biological theories have informed the 
development of pharmacological treatments for drug prob- 
lems such as detoxification and methadone maintenance, and 
have been endorsed by the self-help movement Narcotics 
Anonymous to justify its claims that addiction is a medical 
disease. 
With regard to theories that emphasize the role of intra- 
psychic vulnerabilities and deficits, among the more clinically 
influential are those that invoke personality traits, stress and 
coping processes, learning difficulties and the challenges of 
identity formation to explain the development of drug misuse. 
These perspectives have informed the development of a range 
of psychotherapeutic approaches to drug misuse including 
drug-free 
therapeutic 
communities. 
Cognitive-behavioural 
theories explain drug problems and their treatment in terms of 
classical and operant conditioning and various cognitive learn- 
ing processes. CBT, motivational interviewing, contingency 
management and cue-exposure treatments for dug misuse 
developed within the cognitive-behavioural tradition. 
Systemic theories of drug misuse propose that family prob- 
lems and challenges in the wider social system, such as social 
disadvantage, deviant peer-group membership and drug avail- 
ability are central to the aetiology of drug problems. Family 
therapy and community-oriented approaches to the prevention 
of drug use are based on systemic theories. 
With 
regard 
to 
integrative 
theories, 
Prochaska 
and 
DiClemente propose that the motivation to cease drug use 
evolves through a series of sequential stages and effective 
intervention must be matched to the adolescent’s readiness to 
change. In contrast, West’s synthetic theory of addiction pro- 
poses that the motivational system is inherently unstable, and 
that effective interventions place maximum tolerable pressure 
on the young person to cease drug use. 
123 

124 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
The assessment of adolescents with drug problems should 
be multidisciplinary and involve both medical and psychologi- 
cal evaluation. Treatment of adolescent drug use should aim to 
engage the adolescent and parents or carers in therapy, moti- 
vate them to use therapy to work towards reducing adolescent 
drug use, and address the young person’s personal, family- 
and school-related difficulties. Evidence-based family therapy 
is the treatment of choice for adolescent drug problems. There 
is controversy about the value of harm-reduction interventions 
for drug problems, with one group proposing that such inter- 
ventions improve public health while another argues that they 
give adolescents the message that drug misuse is acceptable. 
Questions 
What are the principal differences between drug experimentation 
and harmful drug use? 
What are the areas that need to be covered when offering a 
comprehensive description of the clinical features of an adolescent 
with drug problems? 
How prevalent is drug misuse? 
What are the main risk factors for drug misuse? 
What are the main biological, psychological and integrative theories 
of drug misuse and the main research findings relevant to these 
theories? 
What are the main evidence-based approaches to the assessment 
and treatment of drug misuse? 
Are harm-avoidance strategies for addressing drug misuse justified? 
Should parents be included in the treatment of adolescent drug 
problems? 
FURTHER READING 
Professional 
Carr, A. (2006). Handbook of child and adolescent clinical psychology: A 
contextual approach (second edition). London: Routledge (Chapter 16). 
Kaminer, Y. & Winters, K. (2011). Clinical manual of adolescent sub- 
stance abuse treatment. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Weisz, J. & Kazdin, A. (2010). Evidence-based psychotherapies for chil- 
dren and adolescents (second edition). New York: Guilford Press. 
WEBSITES 
AACAP (American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry) prac- 
tice parameters for the treatment of substance use disorders: 
www.aacap.org/cs/root/member_information/practice_information/ 
practice_parameters/practice_parameters 

4+ DRUG MISUSE 
BSFT manual for Adolescent Drug misuse: 
http://archives.drugabuse.gov/txmanuals/bsft/bsftindex.html 
Chestnut Health Systems manuals for MDFT, CBT, A-CRA and GAIN 
are available: 
: 
www.chestnut.org/LI/cyt/products 
Drugscope, UK: 
www.drugscope.org.uk 
Drug Treatment Centre Board, Ireland: 
www.addictionireland.ie 
_ Gilbert Botvin’s Life Skills Training drug misuse prevention programme: 
www.lifeskillstraining.com 
Howard Liddle’s Multidimensional Family Therapy (MDFT): 
www.miami.edu/ctrada 
Jim Alexander and Tom Sexton's Functional Family Therapy (FFT): 
www. fftinc.com 
José Szapocznik’s Brief Strategic Family Therapy (BSFT): 
www.bsft.org 
Narcotics Anonymous: 
www.na.org 
National Institute on Drug Abuse, USA: 
www.nida.nih.gov 
National Treatment Agency for Substance Misuse, UK: 
www.nta.nhs.uk 
NICE (National Institute for Clinical Excellence) guidelines for treating 
drug misuse: 
http://guidance.nice.org.uk/Topic/MentalHealthBehavioural 
Scott Henggeler’s Multisystemic Therapy (MST): 
http://mstservices.com 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, USA: 
www.samhsa.gov 
125 

After studying this chapter you will be able to: 
Anxiety disorders 
Learning objectives 
distinguish between separation anxiety, phobias, 
generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, 
posttraumatic stress disorder and obsessive compulsive 
disorder in terms of their main clinical features 
summarize the epidemiology of anxiety disorders 
list the risk factors for anxiety disorders 
outline the main biological and psychological 
theories of anxiety disorders 
name the main evidence-based approaches to 
assessment and treatment of anxiety disorders 
give a considered view on the medicalization of fear. 
Introduction 
While normal fear is adaptive and prevents people from entering threat- 
ening situations, with anxiety disorders people develop irrational fears of 
situations that do not threaten their survival (Antony & Stein, 2009a). 
They also develop non-adaptive behavioural patterns associated with 
avoidance of feared situations or experiences. For people with anxiety 
disorders, their fears are accompanied by intense physiological arousal 
shown by some or all of the following features: accelerated heart rate, 
sweating, trembling, sensations of shortness of breath or smothering, 

5» ANXIETY DISORDERS 
feelings of choking, chest pain, nausea, numbness or tingling, and chills 
or hot flushes. The person may also experience dizziness, derealization 
(feelings of unreality) or depersonalization (feelings of being detached 
from the self). 
Within DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000) and 
ICD-10 (World Health Organization, 1992), distinctions are made between 
a variety of anxiety disorders based on the developmental timing of their 
emergence, the classes of stimuli that elicit the anxiety, the pervasive- 
ness and topography of the anxiety response, and the role of clearly iden- 
tifiable factors in the aetiology of the anxiety. The following are the 
principal anxiety disorders described in DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10. 
Separation anxiety 
Phobias 
Generalized anxiety disorder 
Panic disorder 
Posttraumatic stress disorder 
e 
Obsessive compulsive disorder 
Descriptions of these conditions and case examples are given below. 
This is followed by a consideration of the clinical features, epidemiology, 
risk factors, course, theoretical explanations, assessment and treatment 
of anxiety disorders. 
Separation anxiety disorder 
With separation anxiety disorder, which occurs most commonly in chil- 
dren, a recurrent and persistent fear is aroused when separa- 
tion from parents or caregivers is anticipated (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2000; Furr et al., 2009; Pine & Klein, 2008; World Health 
Organization, 1992). Separation anxiety disorder is characterized by 
persistent, excessive worry about losing, or about possible harm be- 
falling, a parent. In some instances nightmares about these issues 
may occur. Separation anxiety is also characterized by recurrent head- 
aches, stomach-aches, nausea and vomiting. There may be a refusal 
to sleep without being near parents, and although not the only 
cause of school refusal, it is one of the most common causes. 
Case example of separation anxiety 
Barry, aged 11, was referred because he had not attended school for 
2 months, following the Easter holidays in the year prior to his entry to 
secondary school. The family doctor could find no organic basis for the 
abdominal pain or headaches of which he periodically complained, 
particularly on the mornings when his mother asked him how his health 
was. Barry’s friends visited him at weekends and he went cycling with 
them regularly. But on Monday mornings he was unable to get to school 
both because of the abdominal pains and also because of a sense of 
foreboding that something dangerous might happen to his mother. If 
forced to go to school, he would become tearful or aggressive. 
127 

128 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Family history 
While there was no serious threat to Barry’s mother’s health, she had a 
variety of complaints including rheumatism and epilepsy which compro- 
mised her sense of well-being. Her epilepsy was usually well controlled, 
but she had experienced a number of grand mal fits in the 6 months 
prior to Barry’s referral. Barry was one of four children and all had his- 
tories of school refusal. Barry’s three brothers aged 20, 25 and 30 all 
lived at home and had few friends or acquaintances. His eldest brother 
ran a computer software business from his bedroom. All of the boys had 
very close relationships with their mother and distant relationships with 
their father. The father, Martin, who was a healthy man, ran a grocery 
shop and worked long hours. He left early in the morning and returned 
late at night. He was very concerned for Barry’s welfare and believed 
that his wife mollycoddled the boy. However, he was reluctant to chal- 
lenge her because he did not want to upset her. The parents had a 
history of marital discord and over the year prior to the referral had 
strongly disagreed about how to handle Barry’s separation anxiety. 
Two of Barry’s maternal 
uncles had psychological adjustment 
difficulties and both had been on medication, although details of their 
problems were unavailable. These uncles had lived at home with their 
mother until her death. They, Barry’s mother and her sister Gina had 
very close relationships with their mother, Mary, but distant relationships 
with their father. Barry’s mother’s parents had also quarrelled about 
how best to manage the children, with Mary being lenient and her 
husband being strict. Thus, the pattern of relationships in Barry’s 
mother’s family of origin and Barry’s family were very similar. 
At school, Barry was very popular, particularly because he generously 
shared candy and sweets from his father’s shop with his peers. He had 
complained of bullying once or twice and on one occasion said the gym 
teacher victimized him. 
Psychometric assessment showed that Barry was of high average 
intelligence and his attainments in reading, spelling and arithmetic were 
consistent with his overall level of ability. His school reports were good 
and he was in the top third of his class with respect to ability. 
Formulation 
Barry presented with separation anxiety disorder and school refusal. 
Barry’s anticipation of the transition to secondary school in the autumn 
and his awareness of his mother’s worsening health may have precipi- 
tated the onset of these problems. Predisposing factors in this case 
include a possible genetic vulnerability to anxiety, a multigenerational 
history of mother-child over-involvement and the modelling experience 
of seeing his three brothers develop separation anxiety and subsequent 
school refusal. 
The separation anxiety and school refusal were maintained by 
parental conflict about the management of these problems, the mother’s 
over-concern and the father’s limited involvement in the management of 
Barry’s difficulties. They may also have been maintained by the 
availability of an active social life within the house involving frequent 

5 * ANXIETY DISORDERS 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Genetic vulnerability to anxiety 
Multigenerational history of mother-child over-involvement 
Modelling of separation anxiety by 3 older siblings 
MAINTAINING 
PROTECTIVE 
Specdpsliay 
PRECIPITATING 
oe 
Parental conflict 
FACTORS 
Good premorbid 
about managing the 
Anticipation of 
adjustment 
Boo 
: 
secondary school 
Parents’ joint 
aternal anxiety an 
; 
commitment to 
| 
Over-involvement 
Ei deteaiaett 
treatment 
Father’s 
School’s 
| under-involvement 
commitment 
Active social life 
within the home 
Peer group support 
Separation 
- 
Anxiety Disorder 
School refusal 
Figure 5.1 Formulation of a case of separation anxiety disorder 
contact with his mother, three brothers and friends who regularly visited 
him. 
Protective factors included Barry’s good premorbid adjustment, the 
parents’ commitment to become jointly involved in Barry’s treatment, 
the school’s commitment to help Barry overcome his school refusal, 
and Barry's membership of a supportive peer group, whose members 
wanted him to overcome his problems. This formulation is diagrammed 
in Figure 5.1. 
Treatment 
Treatment involved a series of family sessions and home-school liaison 
meetings of the parents and school staff. Martin, the father, agreed to 
drive Barry to school regularly for a month, and the school staff agreed 
for a teacher to meet Barry in the car park and bring him into the 
classroom, where he was to sit with two peers and work on a special 
project for 20 minutes before class started each day. Concurrently, 
weekly family sessions were held in which progress was assessed, a 
reward system for school attendance was set up, and the transition to 
secondary school was discussed. 
Arrangements were also made for the mother to attend a series of 
consultations for her epilepsy, which became better controlled, and for 
Barry to be given some psychoeducation about his mother’s seizure 
disorder, 
its treatment and prognosis. Barry returned to school and 
moved to secondary school in the autumn. His recovery, however, was 
incomplete and he later relapsed and required further treatment. 
129 

130 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Phobias 
Phobic anxiety is the intense fear that occurs when one is faced with an 
object, event or situation from a clearly defined class of stimuli which is 
out of proportion to the danger posed by the stimulus (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2000; Blackmore et al., 2009; Hofmann et al., 
2009; World Health Organization, 
1992). Exposure to the phobic 
stimulus, or anticipation of exposure, may lead to a panic attack in 
adults or to excessive crying, tantrums, freezing or clinging in children. 
In phobias there is persistent avoidance of phobic stimuli or they are 
endured with intense distress, and this interferes significantly with 
personal, social or academic functioning. 
Specific phobias are subdivided in DSM-IV-TR into those associated 
with animals, injury (including iniections), features of the natural envi- 
ronment (such as heights or thunder) and particular situations (such as 
elevators or flying). Specific phobias are distinguished from social pho- 
bias and agoraphobia. With social phobia, anxiety is aroused by social 
situations such as public speaking or eating in public, where there is the 
possibility of scrutiny by others and humiliation or embarrassment as a 
result of acting inappropriately. With agoraphobia there is a fear of pub- 
lic places, such as standing in a queue or travelling on public transport, 
and so these situations are avoided. Agoraphobia often occurs when 
panic attacks have spontaneously occurred in public places, and these 
places are avoided in case attacks recur. Panic attacks are discussed 
in more detail below. 
Case example of a specific phobia 
Nora, aged 9, was referred because of her fear of the dark. She wanted 
to go on a camping trip with the Brownies but was frightened because 
she would have to sleep in complete darkness. This was something she 
had never done. She always slept with the light on in her bedroom and 
with the door open and the landing light on. Her developmental history 
was within normal limits and she had never experienced a traumatic 
incident in the darkness. Her parents had tried to convince her to sleep 
with the light off, but she became so distressed on these occasions that 
they had stopped making such attempts and believed that she would 
eventually grow out of the darkness phobia. 
Nora was an only child and there was no family history of anxiety 
disorders or adjustment problems, nor was there a developmental 
history of a particularly traumatic incident. 
Treatment 
This uncomplicated specific phobia was treated with in vivo, parent- 
assisted systematic desensitization. That is, with support from her 
parents, on successive nights Nora was helped to cope with sleeping in 
an increasingly darker bedroom at home. The level of illumination was 
decreased by leaving the light outside her room illuminated and gradually 
closing over the door further on successive nights. After a month of this 
treatment programme, Nora's darkness phobia had improved sufficiently 

5 * ANXIETY DISORDERS 
for her to go camping and successfully sleep in a dark tent for three 
nights without experiencing undue anxiety. 
Generalized anxiety disorder 
When individuals experience generalized anxiety, they have an ongoing 
apprehension that misfortunes of various sorts will occur (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2000; Bitran et al., 2009; Hazlett-Stevens et al., 
2009; World Health Organization, 1992). Their anxiety is not focused on 
one particular object or situation. There is also difficulty controlling the 
worrying process, and a belief that worrying is uncontrollable. 
Generalized anxiety disorder is characterized by nervousness, rest- 
lessness, difficulty relaxing, feeling on edge, being easily fatigued, con- 
centration difficulties, 
irritability, tearfulness, sleep disturbance and 
Signs of autonomic overreactivity such as trembling, sweating, dry- 
mouth, light-headedness, palpitations, dizziness and stomach discom- 
fort. DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10 require some but not all of these features 
to be present. 
Case example of generalized anxiety disorder 
Margie, aged 10, was referred because of excessive tearfulness in school 
which had been gradually worsening over a number of months. The 
tearfulness was unpredictable. She would often cry when spoken to by 
the teacher or while playing with her friends during break time. In the 
referral letter her family doctor described her as a worrier, like her mother. 
Presentation 
In the intake interview Margie said that she worried about many routine 
daily activities and responsibilities. She worried about doing poorly at 
school, that she had made mistakes which would later be discovered, 
that her friends wouldn't like her, that her parents would be disappointed 
with the way she did her household jobs, that she would be either too 
early or too late for the school bus, that there would be no room for her 
on the bus and that she would forget her schoolbooks. She worried 
about her health and had frequent stomach aches. 
She also had wider ranging fears about the safety of her family. She 
worried that the house would be struck by lightening, that the river would 
break its banks and flood the low lying fens where she lived and her 
house would be washed away. She had concerns about the future and 
worried that she would fail her exams, be unable to find a satisfactory 
job, and would fail to find a marital partner or would marry an unsuitable 
person. She reported feeling continually restless and unable to relax. 
Family history 
Margie was the eldest of four children and the only girl in the family. The 
family was very close-knit. Both of the parents showed symptoms of 
anxiety in the intake interview and the mother had been treated with 
benzodiazepines for anxiety over a number of years. The parents 
131 

1322 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
regularly discussed their worries about their own health and safety and 
their own concerns about the uncertainty of the future. 
The father, Oliver, worked with an insurance company, and frequently 
discussed at the family dinner table accidents and burglaries that had 
befallen his clients. Margie regularly participated in these conversations, 
being the eldest child. The parents’ chief concern was about Margie’s 
tearfulness, which they viewed as unusual. Her worries and fears they 
saw as quite legitimate. Margie had a couple of close friends with whom 
she played at the weekends, but she spent a lot of time in her parents’ 
company. 
Formulation 
Margie presented with a generalized anxiety disorder. No clear-cut pre- 
cipitating factor for the condition was apparent. It had gradually evolved 
over the course of Margie’s development. However, the referral was 
precipitated by episodes of tearfulness at school. Predisposing factors 
in this case included a possible genetic vulnerability to anxiety and 
exposure to a family culture marked by a concern with safety and an 
over-sensitivity to danger. Ongoing involvement in parental conversa- 
tions about potential threats to the well-being of family members possi- 
bly maintained the condition along with inadvertent reinforcement of 
Margie’s tearfulness at school, where crying was responded to with 
considerable concern. 
Protective factors in this case included good premorbid adjustment, 
particularly at school, the parents’ and school’s commitment to resolving 
the problem and the availability of peer-group support. This formulation 
is diagrammed in Figure 5.2. 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Genetic vulnerability to anxiety 
Family culture over-sensitive to danger and need for safety 
MAINTAINING 
PREGIPITATING 
PROTECTIVE 
— 
FACTORS 
FACTOR 
FACTORS 
Family culture 
Referral precipitated by 
Good premorbid 
over-sensitive to 
episodes of crying 
adjustment in school 
danger 
Parents’ joint 
Inadvertent 
commitment to 
reinforcement of 
treatment 
tearfulness at school 
School's 
commitment 
Peer group support 
Figure 5.2 Formulation of a case of generalized anxiety disorder 

5 * ANXIETY DISORDERS 
Treatment 
Treatment in this case involved family work focusing on helping 
Margie and her parents reduce the amount of time they spent talking 
about danger and threats to their health and safety, and increase 
the amount of time they spent engaged in activities and conversa- 
tions focusing on Margie’s strengths and capabilities. The parents were 
also helped to coach Margie in relaxation skills and mastery-oriented 
coping self-statements. Some reduction in anxiety and tearfulness 
occurred, and Margie showed some improvement in her adjustment in 
school. 
Panic disorder 
With panic disorder there are recurrent unexpected panic attacks; an 
ongoing primary fear of further attacks; and a secondary fear of losing 
control, going crazy, having a heart attack or dying (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2000; Ballenger, 2009; Hofmann et al., 2009; World Health 
Organization, 1992). Panic attacks are experienced as acute episodes 
of intense anxiety which reach a peak within 10 minutes. They are char- 
acterized by autonomic hyperarousal shown by some of the following: 
palpitations, sweating, trembling or shaking, shortness of breath, feel- 
ings of choking or smothering, chest pain or discomfort, nausea or 
abdominal 
distress, dizziness, 
chills or hot flushes, parasthesias, 
(numbness or tingling sensations), derealization (feelings of unreality) 
and depersonalization (feelings of being detached from oneself). 
People with panic disorder come to perceive normal fluctuations in 
autonomic arousal as anxiety-provoking, since they believe that such 
fluctuations may signal the onset of a panic attack. During a panic attack 
there is typically an urge to escape from the situation in which the attack 
occurred and to avoid such situations in future. Panic attacks typically 
occur in public settings such as in queues or on public transport, and 
escaping from these situations usually alleviates acute autonomic 
arousal. Thus, secondary agoraphobia often develops whereby the 
person fears leaving the safety of the home in case a panic attack 
occurs in a public setting. 
Case example of panic disorder 
Sandra, a 15-year-old girl, was referred because of anxiety about sitting 
exams. She lived with her grandparents, Ruth and Josh. She slept and 
ate well and appeared to be happy. However, she would not leave the 
house to socialize or attend college. A tutor from the local technical 
college at which she was enrolled had regularly brought school work to 
her for about 9 months. The imminence of her GCSE state exams, 
which were due to be held at the college, precipitated the referral. She 
wanted to overcome her anxiety so that she could travel to college and 
sit her exams, which she had felt unable to complete the previous year 
due to anxiety. 
133 

134 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
History of the presenting problem 
In a preliminary interview, conducted at her grandparents’ house where 
she lived, Sandra described a fear of leaving the safety of her home and 
how the distress she experienced increased the further away from her 
home she travelled. The anxiety began during her mock O-Level school 
exams a year previously. She had a panic attack and left the exam hall. 
She ran to her grandparents’ house after this incident and subsequent 
attempts to return to school led to further panic attacks. During the 
attacks she couldn't catch her breath and felt dizzy. She also felt as if 
she were out of her body (depersonalization) and as if the world was 
dream-like (derealization). She then feared she would die. The initial 
attack lasted no more inan a few minutes. Subsequent attacks were 
similar to the first. 
Her family and the college staff, after some preliminary ineffective 
attempts to help her get out and about, gave up trying. On many 
occasions, when she found herself any distance from the house, she 
would begin to panic and run back quickly. This led to the symptoms of 
panic abating. One staff member at the college visited her and taught 
her some relaxation exercises. He suggested she use these to help her 
cope with attempts to leave the house, but she found them of little 
benefit. Eventually she settled for a house-bound life. 
On a couple of occasions, when she had sufficient courage to visit 
her friends, she had panic attacks. At these times she was frightened of 
accepting a cup of hot tea because she believed she might not be able 
to finish the tea without scalding herself, should she experience a panic 
attack and need to escape from the situation quickly. She said she 
would not like to offend her friends by not finishing her tea. Sandra was 
also frightened of going on buses or in cars on the motorway and of 
queuing.at the bank. She worried that she might have a panic attack in 
these situations and not be able to get home safely. 
Family history 
Sandra’s parents were divorced. Her father, Des, was a police officer in 
London and had separated from her mother, Lynn, when Sandra was 7 
years old. Lynn lived near the grandparents, in a rural village about a 
3-hour drive from London. Lynn cohabited with Jeff, whom she had met 
while hospitalized for depression. She had an extensive history of 
psychiatric treatment for anxiety and depression. 
Sandra’s mother and grandparents were preoccupied with physical 
illness and psychological problems, and regularly discussed threats to 
each other’s well-being. They shared a view, based on Lynn’s experi- 
ences, that psychological problems ran a chronic course and were 
unresponsive to psychological treatments, because they were due to 
biological factors. 
; 
There were a number of distinctive family relationships in this case. 
Sandra had very close relationships with her mother and grandparents. 
The mother and grandmother were involved in regular conflicts over the 
suitability of Jeff as a partner for Lynn. Sandra’s brother, Paul, who 
attended university, visited her occasionally with his friends and she 

5 * ANXIETY DISORDERS 
135 
envied his lifestyle. He rarely joined in the conversations about illness at 
the grandparents’ house. He was a drama enthusiast and Sandra would 
help him rehearse his lines when he visited. For Sandra, this was a 
welcome break from the regular conversation about ill-health at her 
grandparents’ house. Sandra had four or five friends who lived locally, 
and two of these visited regularly. 
Formulation 
Sandra presented with panic disorder with agoraphobia, initially precipi- 
tated by participation in a school examination. The principal predisposing 
factors were a genetic vulnerability to anxiety from the mother’s side of 
the family and a family culture that focused on illness, fear and danger. 
Multiple unsuccessful treatments and the experience of negative rein- 
forcement afforded by escaping from threatening situations maintained 
the agoraphobic, avoidant behaviour. Other maintaining factors included 
the father’s lack of involvement in attempts to help Sandra recover, com- 
bined with the grandparents’ and mother’s over-involvement with Sandra. 
This maintained Sandra’s anxiety and prevented recovery because it led 
to her continued involvement in conversations about illness, fear and 
danger, and a pessimistic biomedical view of anxiety. 
However, Sandra’s good premorbid adjustment, her positive relation- 
ship with her brother who was a good role model for recovery, her two 
positive close peer relationships, and a desire for vocational progression 
were important protective factors in this case. The family and the school 
also were supportive of treatment that might help Sandra sit her exams. 
This formulation is diagrammed in Figure 5.3. 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Genetic vulnerability to anxiety 
Family culture focused on illness, fear and danger 
MAINTAINING 
PROTECTIVE 
FACTORS 
FACTORS 
hy 
ce 
7 
PRECIPITATING 
Good 
bid 
Family 
culture over 
ood premor! 
kal danger 
FACTOR 
adjustment in school 
School examination 
Vocational plan 
Brother as role 
Biomedical view of 
| anxiety 
‘Enmeshed 
model 
_ grandparents and 
Family and school 
‘mother & 
commitment 
caribbean father 
Baancraup supcrt 
Failed treatment 
| Negative reinforcement 
| of agoraphobic 
behaviour 
Figure 5.3 Formulation of a case of panic disorder with agoraphobia 

136 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Treatment 
Treatment in this instance began with family work involving the grand- 
parents, the mother and, on a couple of occasions, the father, to reduce 
the amount of illness and anxiety-focused conversation to which Sandra 
was exposed and to challenge the beliefs that psychological problems 
were unresponsive to psychological treatments. This was followed with 
in vivo systematic desensitization coupled with a brief trial of clomi- 
parmine (Anafranil). 
In vivo systematic desensitization Nee Sandra being supported 
to make increasingly longer outings from her house, while concurrently 
using relaxation exercises to help her to manage the anxiety these out- 
ings evoked. Sandra could not tolerate the side-effects of clomiparmine, 
so the medication was discontinued. It was also arranged for her to sit 
exams at school in a private room. Following this, work placements at a 
creche and at an old folks’ home were arranged by the college staff. 
While Sandra made a good recovery, she suffered periodic relapses 
and re-referred herself for a number of further episodes of treatment 
over the following 2 years. 
Posttraumatic stress disorder 
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) occurs following a catastrophic 
trauma such as child abuse, rape, torture, a terrorist attack, armed 
combat, a natural or man-made disaster, or a serious accident that 
was perceived to be potentially life-threatening for oneself or others. 
PTSD is characterized by (1) recurrent intrusive traumatic memories; 
(2) intense anxiety in response to these memories and ongoing hyper- 
arousal in anticipation of their recurrence; and (3) attempts to regulate 
anxiety and hyper-arousal by avoiding cues that trigger traumatic 
memories and attempts to suppress these memories when they intrude 
into consciousness (American Psychiatric Association, 2000; Ehlers, 
2009; Friedman, 2009; World Health Organization, 1992). 
Recurrent, traumatic memories include flashbacks, nightmares, or 
repetitive trauma-themed play in the case of children. These occur in 
response to internal (psychological) or external (environmental) cues 
that symbolize the traumatic event or aspects of it. Because they antici- 
pate the recurrence of traumatic memories, people with PTSD experi- 
ence chronic hyper-arousal which may lead to difficulty concentrating, 
hyper-vigilance, irritability or sleep difficulties. 
In PTSD, avoidance of trauma-related situations and attempts to 
suppress traumatic memories may initially be relatively unsuccessful 
and lead to an increase in the frequency and intensity of flashbacks. 
However, in chronic cases, frequent, recurrent attempts to keep trauma- 
related memories out of consciousness often result in emotional numb- 
ing and an inability to recall traumatic memories. With emotional 
numbing, not only are trauma-related emotions such as anxiety and 
anger excluded from consciousness, but also tender feelings such as 
love and joy are no longer experienced. PTSD may lead to restricted 
involvement in normal activities and a sense of foreshortened future. 

5 * ANXIETY DISORDERS 
Case example of PTSD 
Margaret, a 25-year-old woman, was referred because of recurrent night- 
mares and erratic behaviour at work. She was employed as a cashier in 
a petrol station in a busy suburban area. On two occasions while she was 
at work, a man armed with a hypodermic syringe filled with blood, which 
he claimed was HIV-infected, had coerced her into handing over the con- 
tents of the cash register. She subsequently suffered from nightmares 
and daytime flashbacks. She also suffered from a high level of general- 
ized physiological arousal and was anxious and short-tempered at work. 
She attempted to deal with the nightmares and flashbacks by putting 
them out of her mind and thinking about other things, but found that this 
was becoming less and less effective. When she became flooded with 
feelings of anxiety she would become inappropriately aggressive to 
customers at work and was frightened that she would lose her job 
because of this. At home her relationships with her mother and sisters 
had deteriorated. 
Treatment 
Treatment involved Margaret writing down accounts of her dreams and 
flashbacks and organizing these into a sequence from the least to the 
most threatening. She was also invited to alter the endings to these 
scenarios so that she emerged victorious rather than victimized at the 
conclusion of each of them. For example, in one scenario, rather than 
the aggressor successfully attacking her with the HIV-infected syringe, 
she imagined him shrinking to half his size and then she overpowered 
him easily. 
In therapy sessions, Margaret was imaginally exposed to these 
scenarios, beginning with the least threatening and concluding with the 
most threatening, until she could vividly imagine each of them without 
being overwhelmed with anxiety. During the imaginal exposure ses- 
sions, she was helped to enter a state of deep relaxation and then 
listened to the account of the scenario that the psychologist read to her. 
She coped with the anxiety that listening to these traumatic scenes 
evoked by using relaxation and deep breathing exercises in which she 
had been coached, and also by concluding each imagined scenario by 
emerging victorious rather than victimized. Her symptoms abated over 
a 6-month period. 
Obsessive compulsive disorder 
Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) is a condition typically character- 
ized by distressing obsessions on one hand and compulsive rituals that 
reduce anxiety associated with obsessions on the other (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2000; Mathews, 2009; World Health Organiza- 
tion, 1992; Zohar et al., 2009). Obsessions are recurrent, persistent 
and stereotyped thoughts, images or impulses. They cause significant 
anxiety because they are experienced as involuntary, uncontrollable and 
senseless, and concern issues such as danger, violence and obscenity. 
137 

1388 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
For example, there may be fears of contamination, of violently assaulting 
or raping others, or that a catastrophe may occur unless symmetry or 
order is maintained. 
Compulsions are repetitive, ritualistic, stereotyped behaviours such 
as hand-washing, ordering and checking or mental acts such as praying, 
counting, or repeating words silently, which people feel compelled to 
perform to regulate anxiety caused by obsessions. Compulsions are 
either unrealistic ways to avert imagined dangers entailed by obsessions 
or are clearly excessive. They are not inherently enjoyable and are 
usually recognized as pointless, and repeated attempts are made to 
resist them. 
Case example of obsessive compulsive disorder 
April, a 35-year-old woman, was referred because gradually over a 
2-year period she had developed some unusual habits, beliefs and feel- 
ings. With respect to her behaviour, she scrubbed the floors and walls 
of the kitchen, bathroom and toilet every day. On one occasion she put 
a full set of new bathroom towels in the dustbin after a student lodger 
had used them once. On another occasion she put all the crockery from 
her kitchen and the family’s Sunday dinner which she had cooked in the 
dustbin. 
She prevented the children from playing anywhere that they might 
fall and cut themselves, including the playground. She took an hour to 
go to bed each night because she had to return downstairs repeatedly 
to check that the doors were locked and the fire was extinguished. She 
had been an affectionate person, but now balked if her friends tried to 
embrace or kiss her. 
With respect to her beliefs, she was frightened that she or her 
children or husband would catch HIV and develop AIDS. She feared 
that the student lodger, her friends, or germs from the crockery might 
infect her with the HIV virus. She was also frightened that a burglar 
might break in if she did not lock up at night, stab her with a needle and 
infect herself or the children with the HIV virus. 
With respect to her mood, she felt anxious much of the time and had 
difficulty sleeping. She also felt sad and empty. She was embarrassed, 
because she knew that her extreme fears of HIV infection were unfounded. 
Family history 
April was brought up by strict parents with whom she continued to have 
close contact. She had trained as a nurse but now was a homemaker 
with a caring and successful husband and two healthy children. She 
devoted herself fully to the welfare of her children and her husband. 
Before the onset of her problems, in every way she described herself as 
an exemplary wife and mother. 
While on duty as a nurse she pricked her finger with a needle, and 
this led to her first thought of HIV infection. Her HIV test was negative, 
but she could not accept this and developed the obsessional belief that 
she, her children and her husband would get AIDS. The belief became 

5 * ANXIETY DISORDERS 
stronger when her husband changed job, her youngest child went to 
play school and she took in a lodger. 
Her family and friends responded to her condition in the following 
ways. Her husband helped with’ her cleaning and checking rituals and 
reinforced them. Her children did not object to over-protection. Her friends 
were very understanding of her lack of physical affection. Her sisters 
discussed her fear of AIDS with her regularly in a sympathetic manner. 
Formulation 
April presented with OCD which was precipitated by her pricking her 
finger with a hypodermic needle and recent life stresses including her 
husband's change of jobs, her children starting preschool and taking in 
a lodger. She was predisposed to developing OCD by two main factors. 
First, she came from a family where control and cleanliness were 
valued. Second, because of her nursing training she was highly aware 
of the risk of possible infection with the HIV virus. 
The OCD was maintained in the following way. She found that her 
compulsions to clean, discard food, over-protect the children, and check 
the security of the house every night relieved her anxiety, so she repeated 
these actions compulsively. Her family and friends reinforced her obses- 
sional thoughts and her husband participated in her compulsive behav- 
iour by, for example, checking the security of the house at her request. 
There were two protective factors in this case deserving mention. 
April was very intelligent and able to take on board a formulation of her 
problem and understand its relevance to treatment. Her husband was 
prepared to be involved and enlist family help in combating the 
compulsions. This formulation is diagrammed in Figure 5.4. 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Culture of control and cleanliness in family of origin 
Sensitized to HIV/AIDS risk due to nursing training 
PROTECTIVE 
FACTORS 
MAINTAINING 
FACTORS 
PRECIPITATING 
Compulsive 
Good premorbid 
_ behaviour reduced 
FACTORS 
adjustment 
obsessional anxiety 
_ 
Needle prick 
Accepted 
| Family and friends 
Recent life stresses 
formulation and 
accommodated to 
motivated to engage 
compulsive behaviour 
in treatment 
Partner and family 
support 
Figure 5.4 Formulation of a case of obsessive compulsive disorder 

140 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Treatment 
April was treated with a multimodal programme that included anti- 
depressant medication 
and a spouse-assisted 
behaviour therapy 
programme of exposure and response prevention. She drew up a list of 
situations that elicited her obsessions, from the least to the most 
anxiety-provoking. She planned to expose herself to these situations in 
order of increasing provocativeness and not engage in compulsions 
while doing so (with her husband’s support) until her anxiety abated. 
For example, she lay in bed, allowed herself to worry about the security 
of the house, and-prevented herself from returning downstairs to check 
that the doors were locked and the fire extinguished, while her husband 
talked reassuringly with her, until her anxiety abated. She responded 
well to treatment, which was carried out over a 3-month period. 
Clinical features of anxiety disorders 
The clinical features of the six types of anxiety disorder described above 
are presented in Table 5.1. In the table clinical features are classified 
into the domains of perception, cognition, affect, arousal, behaviour and 
interpersonal adjustment. With respect to perception, the disorders 
differ in the classes of stimuli that elicit anxiety. 
With separation anxiety, the stimulus is separation from parents. For 
phobias it is specific creatures (e.g. animals), events (e.g. injury), or 
situations (e.g. meeting new people) that elicit anxiety. With generalized 
anxiety disorder, the person interprets many aspects of their environ- 
ment as potentially threatening. In panic disorder, somatic sensations of 
arousal such as tachycardia are perceived as threatening since they are 
expected to lead to a full-blown panic attack. With PTSD, internal and 
external cues that remind the person of the trauma that led to the condi- 
tion elicit anxiety. With OCD, stimuli that evoke obsessional thoughts 
elicit anxiety. For example, potentially dirty situations may evoke obses- 
sional ideas about cleanliness, and anxiety about contamination. 
Cognitions in all six anxiety disorders have the detection and/or 
avoidance of danger as the central organizing theme, and the belief that 
danger-related thoughts have become uncontrollable. With separation 
anxiety, children believe that they or their parents will be harmed if 
separation occurs. With phobias, the person believes that contact with 
the feared object or creature, or entry into the feared situation, will result 
in harm such as being bitten by a dog in the case of dog phobia or being 
negatively judged by strangers in the case of social phobia. With 
generalized anxiety, people catastrophize about many features of their 
environment. For example they may fear that the house will burn down, 
their car will crash, they will be punished for wrongdoing, their friends 
will leave them, and so forth. They also believe that the worrying process 
has become uncontroliable. 
In panic disorder, there is a belief that further panic attacks will occur 
and that these may be fatal. Often individuals also believe that provided 
they remain within the safety of the home, the panic attacks are less 

ANXIETY DISORDERS 
141 
5 
(panuyuog) 
SS@USNOIOSUOD 
wo s}yBnou} 
asey} apnjoxe 
0} Seu] UOSJEd OY L 
uoisseib6e 40 
XS ‘UOIJEUILUEJUOD JO 
Sas} aAjOAU! Aew 
pue sseusnoiosuos 
O}U! epnjul 
Send |EJUSWUOJIAUS 
Aq payoie 
sesinduui 10 sobew! 
‘s}yuBnou} jeuoissesgo 
ajqe|joujuooun 
‘Ase yUN|OAU 
s]ybnou} jeuolssesgo 
oye pue Buiusyeosyy 
se pealsoied 
ase ‘uip Buijoau! 
esou} se yons 
‘SUOHENS DYI0edS 
(G90) 4eps0sip 
@AISINAWOD BAISSESQO 
dojeasp Aew 
ainyny peusLOUselo} 
e ul jaljeq Vv ° 
way} sseiddns 0} JO 
SOLIOWSW DEWNEL} 
esau} Burjyjeoe Wosy 
SeA|@SWEU} JOSIP 
0} Sel] UOSJEd OU] 
unooo ewnedy 
au} JO SeUOWAW 
gjqe|josyjuooun 
juaunoey e 
penisoiedas 
ase ewnely 
ay} JO sjoodse asoyM 
jnooo0 Aew Suoisn||! 
Jo suoeuionyjey 
‘syoequse|4 e 
“‘Buiusjeosy} 
se peAlaoied ae 
ewinej} au} JO UOSIed 
OU} PUILWOJ Jey} SEND e 
(S1d) 4epsosip 
ssauJs IeWNeMSOd 
ujeap Jo yoreye Leay 
e ‘Ayuesul ‘}01jU00 
JO SSO] 0} pea} Aew 
syoeye clued au} Jeu} 
soAaijaq UOSIed OY 
e 
yoeye oiued e 
jo yosuo 9u} BuljjeuBbis 
se uees aie Aau} 
esneoeg Bulusyeesy} 
Se pejaiduajuisiw ae 
SUOI}ESUAS OIJEWOS 
ubiueg pue spJemul 
papoip SI UOUsHY ¢ 
GHulusyeasu} se 
uaes Si syoeye sued 
JO 90UaUNDe! OYUL © 
JEPsOSIP IU 
ajqe}josjuooun 
si sse90id 
BurA0m au} yeu} 
Joujeq e SI aJeUuL e 
suse Ajrep 
Jou Auew ynoge 
seziydoujseyeo 
uosiad aul e 
Hulaq 
-|J9M O} SJEQIU} 
JO} JU@WUOIIAUa 
9} Buiuueos 
‘yueyi6ia-s9dAy 
sl uosued Oy] « 
Huluayeosu} 
se panisoied 
$] JUQWUOIIAUS 
ajOUM su 
e 
Jepsosip Ajaixue 
paziyjeiues 
suapiosip Ajaixue 40 saanjzea} [221UI]> 
LS F19VL 
ayqe}joquooun 
se psouaiedxe SI 
pue AjueyunjOAu! 
4n990 O} 
SW9AS Jal|[eq SIL 
eyudoyjsejyeo 
O} Pes ||IM 
uoyjeniis aiqoyd 
8u} Oyu! Aljue 
Jo yelgo siqoud 
9U} U}IM JOR}UOS 
yey} SEAaljaq 
uosied au 
Buruejeauu} 
se peatsoied 
aie suonenyis 
JO SJUSA9 
‘sjoalqo ayloeds e 
seiqoyg 
 Ajaixue uojesedas 
9)qe}jojuooun 
se peousiedxe sl! 
pue AjueyunjoAul 
4no90 0} 
SW99S JaI}9q SIUL e 
uoneiedes 
Buimojjoj 
4N990 [IM 
jJ@S ay} JO Jused 
Su} O} WEY 
yey} S8ASI9q 
Pylyo oyt e 
Buiueyeosu} 
se peaisoiod 
si sJOAIBaIe9 
Jo syuaued 
wo. uoesedas e 
JEpsOSIp 
uomubod 
uondediad 

INTRODUCTION 
AN 
swajqoid 
daajs 
e 
142 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY 
jesnoe 
~JadAy 
ejyesepow 
si 
e198} 
Syoeye 
usemjog 
uolezijeuosiedap 
poyedionue 
pue 
uojeziyeosap 
swajqoid 
deals 
e 
si 
oalgo 
o1igqoud 
‘seiseujsesed 
‘seysny 
OJWODSIP 
8U] 
0} 
aunsodxe 
Swajqoid 
deals 
e 
joy 
JO 
sijiyo 
‘ssoulzzip 
Yoeuwo]s 
JUSUIWUI] 
swejqoid 
daajs 
e 
Buixejas 
‘easneu 
‘ued 
pue 
‘ssaulzzip 
ji 
swiajqoid 
deals 
Buljwoa 
peysisel 
pue 
Bunjejusou0o 
yseyo 
‘Buueujows 
*‘suoeyidjed 
uojenyis 
JO 
Basneu 
ele 
suoIsjndwoo 
SaiNoyyIp 
JO 
Burjoyo 
jo 
shuljae) 
‘ssoupapeoy 
JO 
yalgo 
pases} 
‘soyoepeoay 
pue 
suoissesgo 
ujiM 
jesnoe 
‘yjeaig 
JO 
ssouOYs 
-}461) 
‘yjnow 
94} 
0} 
pesodxe 
‘ured 
jeuluopqe 
}idlja 
Sano 
UaYyM 
-sedAy 
ajesepouw 
Jo 
‘Buljquiey 
‘Buyeems 
-Aup 
‘Buneems 
udayM 
INDD0 
yueunoel 
sinoo0 
jesnoue-sadAy 
punoibyoeg 
e 
ysureGbe 
‘suojejidjed 
yywm 
‘Buijquias} 
uM 
syoeye 
oiued 
Y}IM 
1nd00 
$ino00 
jesnoje-1adAy 
4na90 
jesnoje-sedAy 
Jno90 
jesnoJe-sedAy 
sinooo 
jesnole 
JO 
jesnose-1edAy 
jesnoue-sadAy 
ajyesopow 
Buiobuo 
@Ws]X9 
JO 
Saposidy 
@Wa}Xe 
JO 
Seposidy 
-JedAy 
jenujuoy 
jo 
seposidy 
JO 
saposidy 
e 
jesnoly 
4na90 
Aew 
uoissaideq 
SuOHOWS 
Japue} 
soueuedxe 
0} 
ajqeun 
pue 
pejunjg 
Ajjeuojowe 
ewooegq 
Aew 
uosied 
@Y} 
SESED 
DIUOIUO 
Uj 
peousuiedxe 
aue 
Bune 
s} 
sino90 
uy} 
Bulinp 
pesino90 
JO 
payedionue 
uogesedas 
yeu} 
SSOU} 
9») 
peouauedxe 
Ajerxue 
SI 
uOlenys 
Buimoyjoj 
40 
ssejasues 
JoBue 
Jo 
1010y 
‘e984 
SI 
8OUBINISI 
JO 
Hujeoy-sey 
JO 
algo 
pales} 
uojesedas 
Buinp 
pue 
ajqejo1ju09UNn 
asuajul 
Jo 
saposids 
Jed} 
JO 
JaAg] 
Byeapow 
— 
peouaiiedxs 
8U} 
U}IM 
JOR}UCO 
‘payedionue 
si 
se 
peouaiiadxe 
ae 
8AIsnJjUu! 
DIPOWed 
e 
syoeye 
usemjeg 
pue 
SI 
129} 
JO 
Jad} 
ji 
psouausdxe 
uojeiedas 
usym 
Aauy 
asneseg 
Ajeixue 
‘jesnose-sedhy 
Jo 
$JND90 
Je2} 
asusju! 
ybiy 
Ajeyesapow 
si 
JoBue 
sinooo 
se6ue 
esneo 
suoissesqo 
ay, 
e 
punoibyoeg 
e 
jsureby 
e 
syoeye 
oiued 
Bung 
e 
Jenujuoo 
Vy 
e 
JO 
Je9} 
BSUdlU] 
e 
JO 
Je} 
Sua] 
e 
peony 
(G90) 
4@psosip 
(AS_1d) 
4@psosip 
Japsosip 
Ajaixue 
49pJOSIp 
OAIS|NAWOD 
aAIssesgoC 
SSauJs 
ONeWNeISOg 
4OpJsOSIP 
Due 
paezyeseuay 
seiqoyqd 
Ajaixue 
uoyeiedas 
e
(panunuo 
) 
L's 
J1aVL 

ANXIETY DISORDERS 
143 
5 
-giepiosip Ayarxue jo suojduosep (000z ‘uonetossy OU}eIyOKSy UEDUEWY) Y1-AI-WSG Pue (2661 “YoHEZIUeBIO UNESH PHON) OL-COI UO pesed aie Seuntee -SION 
PSR SRR 
eS ee 
a PSU ESE 
Se ee ee 
oe ee 
peireduu! Swi099eq 
Aew Buiuojouny 
jeuoyednos0 pue 
jeuowqeonpe ‘je!I00g e 
Wel} 
aoJOjules ARUSLSAPEU! 
pue sjenju 
@AIsjndwoo Wiopied 
uosied su} Buidjeu 
Ul P@A[OAU! BUUODEq 
AeEwW YJOMJoU [2190S 
Jo Ajue} Ss 
Jenpiaipul 
ay} JO SIOQWIA)\| e 
@AISSBOXO 
JO onsijeasuns Ayensn 
ase sjenj esoul 
peinoso sey 
yeu} juaAe Bulueyeosy} 
A\jequeajod ewios opun 
JO Bulund00 WO} 
aydojsejyeo & jUaAaId 
ym aaaijeg Aay} YoIyM 
sjenju aais;ndwoo 
ul aGeGue sjenpiaipu! 
‘sloljeq jeuoIssesqo 
Aq pasnoe 
Ayaixue au} eonpe. 
0} ysim @ Aq pajeAloy « 
ewinedy 
au} peseys yeu} dnoib 
Qu} 0} SUOHOLJOU! 
euyuoo Aew JenpiAipul 
ay} ‘peseys SEM 
BWNEJ] OU} SIOU/\A 
Aseyyos 
sem Bwne} au} 
ji nooo Aew uoljejos! 
Jelo0s ajajdwoD e 
4no90 
Aews sjdweye jepioing e 
SUONOWS 
pue sjy6noy} saisnijul 
BY} YOO}G O} |OYOO|e 
jo s6nip esn Aew 
sjinpe pue siobeuse| e 
auoje daajs 
0} esnjei pue sjussed 
0} Buijo Aew uaspyiuD e 
4no90 
Aew uoljejosi jeio0s 
‘syoeye clued ou} 
0} Asepuooas sdojaaep 
eiqoudesiobe jj e 
awoy jo 
Ayoyes ayy wos Aeme 
ynooo0 syoeye o1ued 
ay} aseo ul seoeRjd 
oaljqnd spioae uosied 
au} B8yM dojeAsp 
Aew eiqoydesobe 
Aiepuooes e 
ayeJOUa}ep 
Aew souewiojied 
oluapece 
JO jeuoywedns90 e 
ayesousjep Aew 
SdIYSUONE|as 198d 
peyoujsed 
ewodeg SalyIAoe 
jel00S ‘sayisuequl 
BulAiom sy e 
uoNejos! jelos 
0} pes] Aew 
eigoud jeioos 
pue eiqoudesoby e 
suoienyis s1qoud 
ayesousjap 
QO} pauyuos 
Aew soueuwwopied 
aie swajqoid 
dIWapeoy ° 
jeuosiadisjul 
ayesousjep 
‘seiqoud 
Aew sdiysuoejes 
juewsnipe 
oyloads UM ¢ 
JOaq e 
jeuosiedsejul 
4no90 
Aew 6uiburyjo 
Jo Bulzee.4 
UaJPIIYO Ul INDIO 
‘SWINJUB} 
Aew 6BuiBuryo 
‘Burhuo ‘ayesedas 
Jo Buizeo.y 
O} P2dJO} jj 
“‘suunujue} 
auoje desis 0} 
‘Buiduo ‘uonenyis 
SOSNjol pjlyo oul e 
Jo yoalgo aiqoyd 
joouos 0} 06 0} 
Au] 0} pesodxe jj e 
sasnjes pjlyo oy] © 
papioae 
peysisol 
S| UOeN|IS JO 
JO papioae 
yoefqo diqoyd aul e 
si uoeiedas e 
inoiweyeg 

144 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
likely to occur, and so secondary agoraphobia develops. With PTSD, 
there is a belief that provided the memories of the trauma are excluded 
from consciousness, the danger of re-experiencing the intense fear, 
distress and horror associated with the trauma that led to PTSD can be 
avoided. With OCD, the most common obsessions are with dirt and 
contamination; catastrophes such as fires, illness or death; symmetry, 
order and exactness; religious scrupulosity; disgust with bodily wastes 
or secretions such as urine, stools or saliva; unlucky or lucky numbers; 
and forbidden sexual thoughts. There is also the belief that engaging in 
specific rituals will neutralize the threat posed by specific obsession- 
related stimuli. 
In all six of the anxiety disorders listed in Table 5.1 the beliefs about 
threat and danger are accompanied by affective states, characterized 
by feelings of tension, restlessness and uneasiness. If one is compelled 
to approach feared stimuli, or in the case of OCD prevented from exe- 
cuting a compulsive ritual, outbursts of anger may occur. For example, 
children with separation anxiety may have aggressive tantrums if forced 
to remain at school without their parents. In PTSD, in addition to the 
affective experiences of uneasiness and tension, an affective experi- 
ence of emotional numbing, arising from attempts to exclude all affec- 
tive material from consciousness, may develop. 
The patterning of physiological arousal varies depending on the 
frequency with which contact with feared stimuli occurs. With sepa- 
ration anxiety, hyper-arousal occurs only when separation is imminently 
anticipated. With specific phobias it occurs only in the presence of the 
feared object. With generalized anxiety disorder, there is a pattern of 
ongoing continual hyper-arousal. With panic disorder and PTSD there 
is a moderate level of chronic hyper-arousal, punctuated by brief 
episodes of extreme hyper-arousal. These occur in panic disorder 
during panic attacks and in PTSD when memories of the traumatic event 
intrude into consciousness. With OCD, specific obsession-related cues 
evoke acute and intense episodes of arousal. 
The extent to which physiological arousal finds expression in somatic 
symptoms varies across conditions. For example, recurrent abdominal 
pain and headaches are especially common in separation anxiety; full- 
blown panic attacks with sweating, trembling, shortness of breath, feel- 
ings of choking or smothering, chest pain, nausea, dizziness, chills or 
hot flushes, parasthesias, derealization and depersonalization are most 
common during panic attacks; whereas sleep problems occur in most 
anxiety disorders. 
Avoidance 
behaviours 
characterize 
all anxiety disorders. 
With 
specific phobias, avoidance may lead to only a moderate constriction in 
lifestyle. For example, a person may refuse to engage in sports or 
athletics or to ride a bicycle because of an injury phobia. However, with 
separation anxiety, generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder and 
PTSD, avoidance behaviour may lead the person to become house- 
bound. With PTSD, individuals may use alcohol or drugs to regulate 
negative affect and suppress traumatic memories. With OCD, indivi- 
duals engage in compulsive rituals to regulate anxiety associated with 

5 * ANXIETY DISORDERS 
obsessional thoughts. Common compulsions include washing, repeating 
an action, checking, removing contaminants, touching, ordering and 
collecting. 
Interpersonal relationships are affected by each of the anxiety disor- 
ders in different ways. With simple phobias interpersonal difficulties 
arise only in those situations where the individual refuses to conform or 
co-operate with normal social activities so as to avoid the feared stimuli. 
For example, a brief episode of marital conflict may occur if one partner 
refuses to get in an elevator at a shopping mall because of claustropho- 
bia. Separation anxiety, panic disorder, generalized anxiety and PTSD 
may prevent young people from attending school or adults from attend- 
ing work, and in all of these conditions family relationships and friend- 
ships may be seriously compromised. With OCD, family members may 
attempt to reduce the sufferer’s anxiety by participating in compulsive 
rituals or in other instances they may increase anxiety by punishing 
the individual for his or her compulsive behaviour. In extreme cases, 
compulsive behaviour may become so frequent and intense that the 
person’s lifestyle becomes constricted. 
Epidemiology, risk factors and course 
Anxiety disorders are more prevalent than any other category of psy- 
chological disorders. The lifetime prevalence rate in adults for all 
DSM-IV anxiety in the US National Comorbidity Survey Replication was 
28.8% (Kessler et al., 2005). Across a wide range of epidemiological 
studies there is a consensus that phobias are the most prevalent anxi- 
ety disorders and that OCD is the least prevalent (Kessler et al., 2009; 
Furr et al., 2009). Lifetime prevalence estimates for phobias range from 
6% to 12%, whereas those for OCD fall below 3%. The lifetime preva- 
lence rate of generalized anxiety disorder is 1-6%, and of panic disor- 
der in adults and separation anxiety in children is 2-5%. The prevalence 
of PTSD in national representative samples ranges from less than 1% 
or 2% in western European countries to almost 8% in the US. This wide 
variability is due to the fact that PTSD rates are dependent on both the 
prevalence of trauma exposure within specific countries and the vulner- 
ability of populations within these countries to developing PTSD symp- 
toms. In populations exposed to terrorism the prevalence of PTSD is 
12-16% (DiMaggio & Galea, 2006). 
Comorbidity among anxiety disorders is quite high, and up to a third 
of people with one anxiety disorder also suffer from another (Kessler et 
al., 2009). Anxiety disorders may also occur comorbidly with mood 
disorders in children and adults, substance use disorders in adolescents 
and adults, and disruptive behaviour disorders in children (Furr et al., 
2009; Huppert, 2009; Zahradnik & Stewart, 2009). Where substance 
misuse occurs, often alcohol or drugs are used for self-medication to 
manage anxiety. 
Comorbidity between anxiety disorders and personality disorders is 
very common, and the highest level of comorbidity occurs with Cluster 
145 

1446 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
C personality disorders (avoidant, dependent, and obsessive compulsive 
personality disorders) (Brandes & Bienvenu, 2009). There is a strong 
association between OCD and eating disorders. A significant proportion 
of people with eating disorders such as anorexia nervosa also suffer 
from OCD (Halmi, 2010). 
There are clear age and gender differences in the prevalence of 
anxiety disorders (Antony & Stein, 2009a; Furr et al., 2009; Kessler et 
al., 2009). Across most available studies, the modal age of onset of 
separation anxiety disorder and specific phobias is in childhood, 
whereas that of other anxiety disorders tends to be in adolescence or 
adulthood. In children and adults more females than males suffer from 
anxiety disorders. The main exception to this finding is that equal 
numbers of males and females suffer from OCD. 
Anxiety disorders follow a recurring episodic course with a gradual 
reduction in prevalence over the course of the life cycle (Kessler et al., 
2009). While most anxious adults have a history of childhood anxiety 
disorders, most children with anxiety disorders do not grow up to have 
anxiety or depression in adulthood (Pine & Klein, 2008). 
A number of risk factors are associated with the development of 
anxiety disorders. These include a family history of anxiety disorders 
or psychopathology, a behaviourally inhibited temperament, neuroti- 
cism, a personal 
history of psychopathology, 
a history of over- 
controlling or critical parenting, a history of family conflict and violence, 
and a history of stressful life events (Antony & Stein, 2009b; Pine & 
Klein, 2008). In this context, behaviourally inhibited temperament is the 
tendency, present from birth, to become nervous and withdraw from 
unfamiliar stimuli and situations. Neuroticism is a personality trait that 
develops over the life-span characterized by the tendency to experi- 
ence negative affect including anxiety, depression and hostility. 
For PTSD, additional risk factors include trauma severity, dissociative 
experiences immediately following the trauma, low social support and 
high life stress following the trauma, and low socio-economic status, 
educational level and intelligence (Ehlers, 2009; Ozer et al., 2003). In 
this context dissociative experiences refer 
to abnormalities of perception, 
memory or identity such as derealization (seeing the world as dream- 
like), depersonalization (viewing the self from an external perspective) 
or inability to recall important personal information. For children, parental 
PTSD is also a risk factor for developing the condition (Pine & Klein, 
2008). 
Aetiological theories 
Theoretical explanations for anxiety disorders, related research and 
interventions have been developed within biological, psychoanalytic, 
cognitive-behavioural, and family systems traditions. Vulnerability to 
anxiety disorders has also been studied by temperament and trait theo- 
rists, and from an experimental psychopathology perspective to identify 
information-processing biases associated with anxiety disorders. 

5 * ANXIETY DISORDERS 
Biological theories 
Biological theories point to the role of genetic factors and neurobiological 
abnormalities in the aetiology of anxiety disorders. 
Genetics 
The genetic hypothesis proposes that anxiety disorders develop where 
a person with an inherited vulnerability to anxiety is exposed to 
threatening or stressful environmental stimuli at critical developmental 
stages when they are primed or prepared to develop fears. Results of 
twin and family studies of anxiety disorders partially support the genetic 
hypothesis, with twin studies yielding moderate heritability estimates 
ranging from about 25% to 60%, with most in the 30-40% range, for 
phobias, panic disorder, and vulnerability to PTSD and OCD (Afifi et al., 
2010; Gelernter & Stein, 2009; Hettema et al., 2001). 
There is also support for the proposal that sensitivity to particular 
classes of stimuli emerges at particular developmental stages (De Silva 
et al., 1977). For example, it was mentioned in the section on epidemiol- 
ogy that vulnerability to developing specific phobias and separation 
anxiety is highest during childhood, whereas vulnerability to social pho- 
bias, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder and OCD more 
commonly emerges in adolescence. 
The genetic hypothesis also entails the view that a dysfunctional bio- 
logical factor which underpins the process of regulating stress responses 
is genetically transmitted in families where anxiety disorders occur. 
Many candidate genes for anxiety disorders have been investigated; 
few have been identified; and where significant associations between 
candidate genes and anxiety disorders have been found, very few con- 
sistent replication studies are available. The search for candidate genes 
has focused in large part on those whose products affect neurotransmit- 
ters thought to be involved in the aetiology of anxiety disorders. Two 
candidate genes — which affect the serotonin and dopamine systems — 
deserve mention because consistent support has been found for a link 
between them and anxiety disorders. 
The short (rather than the long) allele variant of the 5-HTTLPR poly- 
morphism, which regulates expression of the serotonin transporter 
gene (which is called 5HTT or SLC6A4), is a risk factor for PTSD and 
significantly increases the chances of developing PTSD following 
trauma (Xie et al., 2009). In response to stress or trauma, people with 
the short allele variant of 5-HTTLPR show decreased serotonin re- 
uptake, increased amygdala neuronal activity, and increased hypotha- 
lamic—pituitary—adrenal (HPA) axis reactivity. The amygdala is a brain 
structure within the limbic system (which includes the amygdala, hip- 
pocampus, insula and parts of the anterior cingulated cortex) located in 
the medial temporal lobes that subserves the processing of emotional 
information and memories. The HPA axis is a major part of the neuroen- 
docrine system involving the hypothalamus, the pituitary gland located 
below the hypothalamus, and the adrenal glands (located on top of the 
147 

148 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
kidneys), which controls stress reactions and other processes including 
the immune system, sexuality and digestion. 
At a behavioural level, these neurobiological processes associated 
with the short allele variant of 5-HTTLPR subserve increased atten- 
tional bias to threat, enhanced fear conditioning and stress sensitivity 
(Caspi et al., 2010). However, the short allele variant of 5-HTTLPR 
seems to be a general vulnerability factor for stress-related psychologi- 
cal disorders, rather than a specific vulnerability factor for PTSD. For 
example, it is also a vulnerability factor for depression and borderline 
personality disorder. 
A specific allele of the Val158Met polymorphism of the catechol-O- 
methyltransferase COMT gene is a risk factor for panic disorder (Maron 
et al., 2010). The COMT gene encodes an enzyme that breaks down 
dopamine, weakening its signal. People with panic disorder are more 
likely to have the COMPT allele associated with less efficient dopamine 
breakdown. The consequent higher levels of dopamine in the limbic sys- 
tems of such people with panic disorder may subserve their increased 
sustained attention to salient stimuli, even when these stimuli are anxiety 
provoking. 
Neurobiology 
The neurobiological hypothesis is that anxiety disorders are charac- 
terized by neuroanatomical, 
neurotransmitter and neuroendocrine 
abnormalities. There is considerable support for this hypothesis from 
neuroimaging, 
psychophysiological 
and 
pharmacological 
studies, 
although current knowledge of these abnormalities is incomplete (Britton 
& Rauch, 2009; Khan et al., 2009; Martin et al., 2009). 
However, there is a consensus about certain aspects of the neuro- 
biology of anxiety disorders. With the exception of OCD, which has 
distinct neurocircuitry mentioned below, anxiety disorders are asso- 
ciated with abnormalities in brain structures that subserve processing 
information about danger, fear conditioning and fear responses, pri- 
marily the limbic system. Within this system, overactivity of the amyg- 
dala during exposure to feared stimuli is central to anxiety disorders. 
Excessive activity in the limbic system which subserves the experience 
of fear and anxiety is normally inhibited by the orbitofrontal cortex, which 
subserves impulse control, and the prefrontal cortex, which subserves 
executive functions such as planning and decision-making. In anxiety 
disorders, communication between the limbic system and the frontal 
cortex is impaired and so persistent limbic overactivity occurs when 
one is exposed to anxiety-provoking stimuli. 
There is evidence for dysregulations of neurotransmitters, notably 
GABA (gamma-amino-butyric-acid) and serotonin, which facilitate com- 
munication between the limbic system and the frontal cortex — the brain 
structures centrally involved in anxiety disorders. The efficiency of 
both of these neurotransmitter systems is reduced in anxiety disord- 
ers, and increased by anti-anxiety drugs (Dent & Bremner, 2009; 
Mathew & Hoffman, 2009; Pollack & Simon, 2009; Stewart et al., 2009; 
van Ameringen et al., 2009). 

5 
* ANXIETY DISORDERS 
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) such as fluoxetine 
(Prozac) target the serotonergic neurotranmitter system, and benzodi- 
azepines such as diazepam (Valium) target the GABA neurotransmitter 
system. In the normal brain, GABA is usually released once arousal 
reaches a certain level and decreases the experience of anxiety, but 
this process is less efficient in people with anxiety disorders. Benzo- 
diazepines 
reduce anxiety by binding 
to GABA neuroreceptors. 
Unfortunately, benzodiazepines are addictive, and so long-term use for 
the treatment of anxiety disorders is not regarded as best practice. 
Dopamine, noradrenaline, glutamate and other neurotransmitter sys- 
tems may also be dysregulated in anxiety disorders, although their roles 
are less clearly understood. 
Genetic vulnerability to anxiety disorders involves genes whose 
action affects the efficiency of neurotransmitter systems associated 
with anxiety, as was noted above in the discussion of genetic factors. 
Evidence from a small number of neuroimaging studies shows that 
psychological 
interventions, 
such as cognitive behaviour therapy, 
normalize neurobiological 
functional abnormalities associated 
with 
anxiety disorders (Frewen et al., 2008a). 
In anxiety disorders there is evidence for the dysregulation of neuro- 
peptides in the limbic system, notably corticotropin-releasing factor 
(CRF). CRF is associated with HPA axis hyperactivity. Such hyperactiv- 
ity is a central neurobiological feature of anxiety disorders, and is asso- 
ciated with the release of the stress steroid cortisol which is elevated in 
people with anxiety disorders (Khan et al., 2009). 
The neurobiology of OCD differs from that of other anxiety disorders. 
With OCD there are abnormalities in the functioning of circuits which 
link the basal ganglia, the prefrontal cortex (particularly orbitofontal and 
anterior cingulate regions) and the thalamus, which is referred to as the 
cortico-striatalthalamic circuit. Overactivity of the prefrontal cortex and 
thalamus subserves the initiation and maintenance of obsessional 
worrying, and overactivity of the basal ganglia subserves stereotyped 
compulsive behaviour patterns typical of people with OCD. Surgical 
disruption of the cortico-striatalthalamic circuit alleviates chronic OCD, 
although this invasive treatment is used only in cases resistant to 
psychotherapy or medication (Aouizerate et al., 2006; Stewart et al., 
2009; Zohar et al., 2009). SSRIs are the most common pharmacological 
intervention in both adults and children for OCD because, the condition 
is associated with inefficient functioning of the serotonin neurotransmitter 
system (Rapoport & Shaw, 2008; Zohar et al., 2009). 
Temperament, traits, cognitive biases 
and coping strategies 
Temperament, 
traits, cognitive bias and coping strategy theories 
propose that anxiety disorders develop in people who have specific 
anxiety-prone dispositions. Temperamental characteristics are biologi- 
cally based behavioural attributes present from birth. In support of this 
149 

150 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
view there is a substantial body of longitudinal research which shows 
that infants with a temperament characterized by behavioural inhibition 
— nervousness and avoidance of unfamiliar stimuli and situations — are 
at risk for developing anxiety disorders (Kagan, 2010). 
Personality traits are cross-situationally stable psychological charac- 
teristics determined by both genetic and environmental factors. There is 
a growing consensus that a five-factor model of personality traits is 
probably the most parsimonious (John et al., 2008). The ‘Big 5’ per- 
sonality traits are neuroticism, extraversion, openness to experience, 
conscientiousness and agreeableness. In a meta-analysis Kotov et al. 
(2010) found that all anxiety disorders were strongly associated with the 
personality trait neuroticism; all disorders except specific phobias were 
associated with low conscientiousness; and all anxiety disorders except 
simple phobias and generalized anxiety disorder were associated with 
high levels of introversion. High neuroticism entails emotional instability 
and distress; low conscientiousness 
is the tendency not to follow 
through on plans; and introversion involves social withdrawal. 
A number of lower-order traits have been found to correlate with spe- 
cific anxiety disorders. These include anxiety sensitivity, fear of nega- 
tive evaluation, intolerance of uncertainty, perfectionism, thought—action 
fusion and alexithymia (Starcevic & Berle, 2006). Because correlational 
evidence on these traits comes from cross-sectional studies, it is not 
clear whether they are predisposing vulnerability factors or correlates of 
anxiety disorders. In a meta-analysis, Naragon-Gainey (2010) found 
that anxiety sensitivity correlated .4—.6 with all anxiety disorders and 
most strongly with panic disorder. Anxiety sensitivity refers to the ten- 
dency to fear somatic, cognitive and sociai anxiety-related symptoms. 
Fear of negative evaluation by others in social situations is correlated 
with social phobia (Weeks et al., 2005). Intolerance of uncertainty is 
associated most strongly with generalized anxiety disorder (Dugas et 
al., 2004). People with a high level of intolerance for uncertainty believe 
uncertainty is undesirable and should be avoided, and have difficulties 
functioning well in uncertain situations, especially where stressful 
events may occur. Perfectionism and thought—action fusion are strongly 
correlated with OCD (Berle & Starcevic, 2005; Egan et al., 2011). 
Perfectionism is the tendency to adhere to very high standards and 
experience distress if these standards are not reached. With thought- 
action fusion, there are beliefs that thoughts and actions are inextricably 
linked, that immoral thoughts are equivalent to immoral acts, and that 
that thoughts about specific events increase the likelihood of such 
events occurring. Alexithymia, which refers to difficulty identifying and 
labelling feelings, is strongly correlated with PTSD (Frewen et al., 
2008b). 
Research 
from experimental 
psychopathology 
has consistently 
shown that people with anxiety disorders show a range of information- 
processing biases (McNally & Reese, 2009). They have an attentional 
bias for threatening information, as shown by the tendency to take longer 
to name the colours of threatening words than the colours of positive or 
neutral words in the emotional Stroop test. In this test individuals read 

5 * ANXIETY DISORDERS 
randomized lists of all three types of words printed in different colours. 
People with anxiety disorders also show a bias towards threatening 
interpretations of ambiguous situations in studies where they are asked 
to write interpretations of descriptions of situations such as ‘You are 
awoken by a noise at night’. People with panic disorder have a memory 
bias favouring recall of threatening information, in studies where they 
memorize threatening and non-threatening stimuli. 
It is still unclear 
whether these information-processing biases are correlates of anxiety or 
predispositions that confer vulnerability to anxiety disorders. 
Certain coping strategies are associated with anxiety disorders. In a 
meta-analysis, Aldao et al. (2010) found that anxiety disorders were 
associated with the use of rumination, avoidance and suppression as 
coping strategies. They also found negative correlations between 
anxiety and a number of adaptive coping strategies including problem- 
solving, acceptance and reappraisal. 
Psychoanalytic theories 
In anxiety disorders, according to classical psychoanalytic theory, 
defence mechanisms are used to keep unacceptable sexual or aggres- 
sive impulses and moral anxiety about their expression from entering 
consciousness (Busch et al., 2010). The unacceptable impulses and 
related moral anxiety become transformed into neurotic anxiety. In pho- 
bias, the unacceptable impulse is repressed and the neurotic anxiety 
into which it is transformed is displaced onto a substitute object which 
symbolizes the original object about which the unacceptable impulses 
were felt. The key defence mechanism is displacement. Thus, when 
people say that they are frightened of a particular object or situation, the 
psychoanalytic hypothesis is that they are frightened about something 
else, but have displaced their fear from the original taboo object or 
event onto a more socially acceptable target. In Freud’s original state- 
ment of this hypothesis, in the Little Hans case, where the boy had a 
horse phobia, he argued that the taboo fear was castration anxiety, and 
this fear of the father was displaced onto horses (Freud, 1909a). In 
generalized anxiety disorders, the defences break down and the person 
becomes overwhelmed with anxiety as the unacceptable impulses con- 
tinually intrude into consciousness and seek expression. Anxiety about 
taboo objects is displaced onto every available target. 
Within psychoanalytic theory it is proposed that the unacceptability of 
certain impulses, and habitual ways of defending against these, are 
learned early in childhood in relationships with parents. In adulthood 
these same defences and habitual ways of interacting with parents tend 
to be deployed in relationships with significant people in the person’s 
life (including partners, colleagues and therapists), a phenomenon 
referred to as transference. From a psychoanalytic perspective, OCD is 
explained as the sequelae of toilet training battles (Freud, 1909b). 
According to classical psychoanalytic theory, children evolve through 
oral, anal and phallic stages of development, with gratification being 
principally derived from these differing bodily areas as development 
151 

152 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
occurs. During the anal phase of development, according to psycho- 
analytic theory, children become angry with their parents’ insistence 
that they use the toilet in an appropriate way. Attempts to express these 
aggressive impulses are met with sanctions from the parents and so the 
aggression is repressed. When these repressed sexual—aggressive 
impulses attempt to find expression, this causes anxiety. The aggres- 
sive impulses and thoughts are displaced and substituted by less unac- 
ceptable thoughts or impulses. When these intrude into consciousness, 
they are experienced as ego-alien because they have been disowned 
or isolated. The anxiety is managed by carrying out a compulsive ritual 
to undo or cancel out the undesirable impulse. Because the source of 
this tendency towards compulsions is theorized to have arisen during 
the anal developmental phase, it has become commonplace in popular 
culture to refer to meticulous people as ‘anal’. 
In psychoanalytic treatment, the aim is to interpret the defence, the 
repressed forbidden feelings and the associated neurotic anxiety. 
These three elements (the defence, the hidden feeling, and the associ- 
ated anxiety) are referred to as the triangle of conflict (Ezriel, 1952). 
During psychoanalytic treatment attention is drawn to the parallels 
between the way in which the person manages current problematic 
relationships with other significant people in their lives such as their 
peers, work colleagues or partners; the current relationship with the 
therapist; and past relationships with the parents. These three sets of 
relationships are referred to as the triangle of person (Menninger, 1958). 
Because the tendency to replicate relationship patterns from childhood 
in adult life with friends, colleagues and therapists is referred to as 
transference, interpretations that point to these replications, within the 
triangle of person, are referred to as transference interpretations. The 
triangle of conflict and the triangle of person are presented in Figure 
5.5. Interpretations based on these are offered tentatively, at a stage in 
the therapy when a strong working alliance has been established, and 
within the context of a coherent psychodynamic case formulation 
(Malan, 1995; McCullough-Vaillant, 1997). 
The idea of displacement is clinically useful when working with 
anxious patients. In my clinical experience, people worried about one 
thing may say that they are worried about another. However, there is no 
evidence to support the idea that ail anxiety disorders represent 
displacement of anxiety associated with psychosexual developmental 
conflicts. There is some limited evidence from a small number of 
controlled trials that short-term psychodynamic therapy is effective for 
anxiety disorders (Leichsenring, 2009). For example, in a controlled 
trial, Milrod et al. (2007) found that panic-focused psychodynamic 
psychotherapy was more effective than applied relaxation training in the 
treatment of panic disorder, and in another controlled trial Leichsenring 
et al. (2009) found that short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy was 
as effective as cognitive-behavioural therapy in the treatment of 
generalized anxiety disorder. 

5 = ANXIETY DISORDERS 
153 
Ezriel’s Triangle of Conflict 
Menninger’s Triangle of Person 
Defence 
Anxiety 
Therapist 
Current Persons 
Behaviour patterns, || Guilt and shame due 
cognitive styles & 
to conflict between 
emotional states to || adaptive feelings and 
Partner, spouse, 
children, friends, 
colleagues, boss, 
manage conflict 
internal or societal 
between adaptive 
inhibitions 
feelings and anxiety 
authority figures 
Adaptive Feelings 
Past Persons 
Adaptive forms of anger, 
Parents, carers, teachers, 
sexual desire, attachment, 
siblings, significant relatives, 
positive feelings about the 
close childhood friends 
self, joy, excitement, 
interest, and grief 
Defences (D) are used to manage conflict between anxieties (A) about expression 
of adaptive feelings and impulses (F). These D-A-F patterns began with past persons (P), 
are maintained by interactions with current persons (C), and are re-enacted as 
transference with the therapist (T). 
Figure 5.5 Psychodynamic triangles of conflict and person (based on Ezriel, H. (1952). Notes on psychoanalytic group 
therapy: Il. Interpretation. Research Psychiatry, 15, 419. Menninger, K. (1958). Theory of Psychoanalytic Technique. 
London: Imago. Malan, D. (1995): Individual Psychotherapy and the Science of Psychodynamics. London: Amold. 
McCullough-Vaillant, L. (1997). Changing Character: Short-Term Anxiety Regulating Psychotherapy for Restructuring 
Defences, Affects and Attachments. New York: Basic Books.) 
Cognitive-behavioural theories 
Theories developed within the cognitive-behavioural tradition (which 
includes both behavioural and cognitive formulations) point to the 
importance of conditioning and cognitive learning processes in the 
development of anxiety disorders. 
Behavioural approaches 
Behavioural theories of anxiety disorders, such as Mowrer’s (1939) two- 
factor theory, propose that anxiety and associated avoidance of feared 
objects, situations or memories are learned though the processes of 
classical and operant conditioning. With classical conditioning, it is 

154 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
proposed that a person becomes frightened of a neutral object, situation 
or memory that was present during a trauma or exposure to a highly 
anxiety-provoking stimulus. The classically conditioned fear response 
to the previously neutral stimulus does not extinguish because the 
person’s avoidant behaviour is negatively reinforced each time the 
previously neutral stimulus is avoided. 
In behavioural psychology, 
negative reinforcement is the term used to describe the strengthening 
of aresponse that leads to escaping from an aversive situation, such as 
the experience of anxiety. 
Eysenck (1979) added the concepts of biological preparedness, 
incubation and constitutional 
vulnerability to Mowrer’s theory. He 
proposed that as a result of evolutionary processes, people are 
biologically prepared at. specific developmental stages to develop 
phobias through one-trial classical conditioning to specific classes of 
stimuli such as snakes, spiders, injuries and natural hazards (De Silva 
et al., 1977). He also proposed that conditioned fears are strengthened 
through incubation, a positive feedback process, in which fear itself 
reinforces fear of the phobic stimulus. That is, each time a person is 
briefly exposed to or briefly recalls the feared stimulus, or the trauma 
associated with it, the conditioned fear is strengthened, because the 
person becomes afraid of the experience of anxiety. This whole process 
occurs outside of cognitive control. Finally, Eysenck proposed that 
some people are constitutionally vulnerable to developing anxiety 
disorders through having high levels of neuroticism and introversion, a 
hypothesis supported by meta-analytic data from personality trait 
studies of people with anxiety disorders (Kotov et al., 2010). 
Behavioural treatment for anxiety disorders involves exposure to 
stimuli that elicit anxiety until habituation occurs and the anxiety 
response 
is extinguished 
(Moscovitch 
et al., 2009). Systematic 
desensitization and flooding (also referred to as implosion therapy) are 
two 
commonly 
used 
behavioural 
procedures. 
With 
systematic 
desensitization, a procedure developed by Joseph Wolpe (1969) in 
South Africa, clients in a deeply relaxed state are exposed to increasingly 
anxiety-provoking stimuli, with progression to the next stimulus occurring 
once habituation to the present one has occurred. With flooding (or 
implosion), a technique developed by Thomas Stampfl (Stampfl & 
Levis, 1968), clients are exposed for a prolonged period (often lasting a 
number of hours) to their most anxiety-provoking stimuli until anxiety 
responses are extinguished. With these exposure-based behavioural 
interventions, anxiety-provoking stimuli may be presented in vivo (real 
life), in virtual reality using computer simulations, or using mental 
imagery where the psychologist invites the client to close their eyes and 
imagine the feared object or situation. 
In all behavioural treatment programmes, prior to exposure clients are 
given detailed psychoeducation about their anxiety disorder, a formulation 
which explains how it developed and is maintained, the proposed 
exposure-based treatment plan, and training in relaxation skills or other 
coping strategies for use during exposure to help them tolerate exposure 
to the feared object or situation 
until their anxiety responses are 

5 * ANXIETY DISORDERS 
extinguished, although in Stampfi's original implosion therapy protocol he 
encouraged clients to feel maximum anxiety (Stampfl & Levis, 1968). For 
Separation anxiety disorders, children are exposed to separation from 
parents, usually through supported attendance at school. For phobias, 
exposure is arranged to feared objects or situations. For panic disorder, 
clients 
are exposed 
to physiological 
sensations 
of hyper-arousal 
(interopceptive exposure) by directing attention to their heart rate and 
respiration. If they have secondary agoraphobia, they are also exposed 
to public places that they typically avoid. For generalized anxiety disorder, 
clients are exposed to feared objects and situations and are also helped 
to plan and practise worrying to desensitize them to their fear of 
uncontrollable rumination. For PTSD, clients are exposed to cues that 
evoke flashbacks or to traumatic memories. For OCD, exposure treatment 
is referred to as exposure and response prevention, because clients are 
exposed to cues (such as dirt) that elicit obsessions, and are helped to 
prevent themselves from engaging in their anxiety-reducing compulsions 
until their anxiety responses extinguish. A large body of research supports 
the effectiveness of exposure-based treatment programmes for adults 
and children with anxiety disorders (Moscovitch et al., 2009; Olatunji 
et al., 2010; Rapee et al., 2009). 
Cognitive approaches 
According to Aaron T. Beck’s cognitive theory, anxiety disorders occur 
when threatening stressful life events reactivate danger-oriented cognitive 
schemas. It is proposed that these schemas were formed early in child- 
hood through exposure to traumatic 
or adverse experiences and 
parenting practices that sensitized the individual to threat, danger and 
personal vulnerability and encouraged avoidant coping (Clark & Beck, 
2010a). These threat-oriented schemas contain beliefs, attitudes and 
assumptions about threat and vulnerability relevant to personal safety 
such as ‘The world is dangerous, so | must continually be on guard’ or 
‘My health is ailing so any uncomfortable somatic sensation must reflect 
serious ill health’. These threat-oriented schemas also direct the identi- 
fication, interpretation and evaluation of experience and underpin anxiety- 
maintaining cognitive distortions such as minimizing safety-related 
events, maximizing threat-related negative events and catastrophizing 
about the future. These schemas dominate the biased, threat-sensitive 
way people with anxiety experience themselves in the world. 
Anxious people are more likely to attend to threat-oriented rather 
than safety-oriented objects, events and situations, and to interpret 
ambiguous situations in a threatening rather than a positive way 
(McNally & Reese, 2009). On a moment-to-moment basis this tendency 
finds expression through the experience of danger-oriented negative 
automatic thoughts. For example, a person with panic disorder who 
notices their heartbeat and respiration may have the negative automatic 
thought ‘These are signs that I’m going to have a panic attack, | must be 
going crazy’; or a person with OCD who notices a speck of dirt on their 
cutlery may think ‘That dirt contains germs, so if | use the cutlery | may 
155 

156 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
become infected and die’. These negative automatic thoughts cause 
anxious arousal, which in turn motivates avoidant coping that alleviates 
anxiety and reinforces avoidant coping. 
According to cognitive theory, over time, the repetition of these types 
of micro-event 
in which ambiguous stimuli evoke threat-oriented 
negative automatic thoughts that elicit anxiety and motivate avoidance 
strengthen threat-oriented schemas and weaken personal control over 
anxiety, particularly the capacity to access more adaptive non-threat- 
oriented schemas. 
Cognitive therapy helps clients challenge their negative automatic 
thoughts and underlying core beliefs, attitudes and assumptions about 
the dangerousness of the situations in which they feel anxiety. This 
involves clients monitoring fluctuations in anxiety levels in threatening 
situations, accessing the negative automatic thoughts and beliefs that 
underpin these fluctuations, and challenging these thoughts and beliefs 
by generating safe rather than danger-oriented interpretations of situ- 
ations and engaging in ‘behavioural experiments’ such as exposure 
to feared situations to check out whether the catastrophes they fear 
actually occur. 
Cognitive therapy, like behaviour therapy, uses exposure procedures 
to treat anxiety disorders, but explains their effectiveness in terms of their 
effects on threat-oriented schemas rather than extinction of conditioned 
responses. Beck’s theory is supported by evidence which shows that 
anxiety is associated with a threat-sensitive cognitive style (McNally & 
Reese, 2009) and also by the results of treatment outcome studies with 
adults and children which support the efficacy of cognitive-behavioural 
approaches to treatment (Olatunji et al., 2010; Rapee et al., 2009). 
In a meta-analysis of 108 studies of cognitive behaviour therapy 
involving all types of anxiety disorder, Norton and Price (2007) found 
that cognitive restructuring and exposure therapy alone, in combination, 
or combined with relaxation training were all equally effective treatments 
for anxiety disorders. Cognitive-behaviour therapy is as effective as 
medication such as SSRIs in the treatment of anxiety disorders. 
However, its effects are more enduring (Hollon et al., 2006). These 
more enduring effects are probably due to significant changes in 
psychological processes that maintain anxiety disorders such as the 
extinction of conditioned responses, the preferential accessing of non- 
threat-oriented schemas and the use of non-avoidant coping strategies. 
Attempts have been made to integrate the cognitive theory of anxiety 
disorders with current knowledge about the neurobiology of anxiety. 
Clark and Beck (2010b) have proposed that activation of negative 
cognitive schemas is subserved by amygdala hyperactivity and avoidant 
coping is subserved by hypoactivity of the frontal cortex. In contrast, the 
process of challenging negative automatic thoughts and actively coping 
with anxiety-provoking situations is subserved by increased activity in 
the frontal cortex and a gradual reduction in amygdala activity. There is 
some 
evidence 
that cognitive therapy gradually normalizes 
the 
neurobiological abnormalities that typify anxiety disorders (Frewen et 
al., 2008a). 

5 * ANXIETY DISORDERS 
Family systems theory 
Systemic theories of anxiety disorders propose that family interaction is 
central to the aetiology of anxiety disorders and that this provides a 
rationale for family therapy as a treatment for anxiety (e.g., Bloch et al., 
1994; Combrinck-Graham, 1986; Dadds et al., 1992; Perlmutter, 1996). 
According to this position, individuals develop anxiety disorders when 
they are socialized in families where parents (and other caregivers) 
elicit, model and inadvertently reinforce anxiety-related beliefs and 
behaviours. Furthermore, trauma, stressful life events and family life- 
cycle transitions in either the family of origin or the family of procreation 
precipitate the onset of anxiety disorders. These disorders are main- 
tained by patterns of family interaction that reinforce anxiety-related 
beliefs and avoidant behaviour. 
Family belief systems that promote anxiety involve ideas such as — 
unknown situations should be routinely interpreted as dangerous 
because it’s better to be safe than sorry; the future will probably entail 
many hazards, catastrophes and dangers; inconsequential events in 
the past will lead to dangerous threatening consequences at unexpected 
times 
in the future; fluctuations 
in autonomic arousal should be 
interpreted as the onset of full-blown anxiety attacks; minor symptoms 
are reflective of serious illness; and testing out the validity of any of 
these beliefs will lead to more negative consequences than continuing 
to assume that they are true. Through observing parents and other 
significant family members articulate these types of danger-oriented 
belief and engaging in family interactions premised on them, individuals 
come to internalize them and develop danger-saturated belief systems. 
Parental modelling of avoidant coping and inadvertent reinforcement 
of children’s danger-saturated beliefs and avoidant behaviour are the 
main behaviour patterns that promote anxiety. When children observe 
parents coping with perceived threats by avoiding rather than confronting 
them, they adopt similar coping strategy themselves. Such anxiety- 
related beliefs and avoidant coping are inadvertently reinforced when 
parents acknowledge their validity and do not challenge them. 
Family life-cycle transitions, such as starting school, moving house, 
birth of a sibling, having children, changing jobs and family stresses 
such as child abuse, marital discord, illness, injury or bereavement may 
precipitate the onset of anxiety disorders. 
In such situations, the 
individual interprets the transition or stress as a major threat and copes 
by engaging in avoidant behaviour. 
Parents (in the case of children) or partners (in the case of adults) 
may inadvertently maintain an individual’s anxiety-related beliefs and 
avoidant behaviour by sympathizing with their irrational fears, accepting 
their danger-saturated view of the situation, and condoning their avoid- 
ant behaviour as a legitimate coping strategy. Parents’ and partners’ 
own danger-saturated belief systems and personal adjustment prob- 
lems, if such are present, may prevent them from providing the person 
with the anxiety disorder with opportunities to develop the skills required 
to confront and master feared situations. So, for example, in families 
157 

158 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
where there are marital problems, parental depression, parental alcohol 
abuse or some other difficulty, the parents may avoid facing these dif- 
ficulties and focus their attention instead on reassuring an anxious child 
or arranging 
extensive 
medical 
investigations 
for anxiety-related 
somatic complaints. The patterns of family interaction that evolve in 
such situations may inadvertently maintain the child’s anxiety and rein- 
force the parents’ avoidance of their own marital or personal difficulties. 
Commonly, family members are not consciously aware of the 
secondary gains associated with these problem-maintaining patterns of 
interaction. Where adults develop anxiety disorders, their partners may 
become involved in rituals that help them avoid feared situations and 
this process may allow the couple to avoid dealing with unresolved 
marital conflicts over issues such as the distribution of power within the 
marriage. 
Family therapy for children with anxiety disorders aims to support 
parents and children in creating opportunities within which children can 
develop the skills required to confront and master feared situations. 
Couples therapy for cases in which one partner has an anxiety disorder 
involves helping the couple to work as a team and jointly enter situations 
that are increasingly anxiety-provoking for the person with the anxiety 
disorder, and remain in these until the anxiety subsides. The non- 
symptomatic partner’s role in such programmes is to provide support 
and encourage the symptomatic partner to engage in active coping 
strategies. Family therapy also aims to reduce danger-oriented family 
cultures by encouraging family members in their conversations and 
behaviour to focus more on bravery and positive accomplishments and 
less on danger and avoidance. 
There is substantial evidence, mainly from cross-sectional studies, 
that the parents of most children with anxiety disorders have anxiety 
disorders or other psychological problems themselves; that modelling 
plays an important role in the transmission of anxiety patterns from 
parents to children; that anxiety disorders are associated with an over- 
controlling parenting style, a negative or critical style and styles that 
foster insecure attachment, such as not responding to children’s distress 
signals; and that stressful family circumstances, especially child abuse 
and marital discord, are associated with anxiety (Bégels & Brechman- 
Toussaint, 2006; Degnan et al., 2010; Hudson & Rapee, 2009; Rapee 
et al., 2009; van der Bruggen et al., 2008). There is also evidence that 
in adulthood, anxiety disorders, notably PTSD, can lead to significant 
relationship difficulties, which in turn may reduce the support available 
to the partner with the anxiety disorder and thereby maintain it (Taft 
et al., 2011). 
Comparative trials have shown that family-based interventions are 
effective for childhood anxiety disorders, but are not always more 
effective than individual CBT (Bégels & Brechman-Toussaint, 2006: 
Rapee et al., 2009). In a review of 12 studies of couples-based treat- 
ment for panic disorder for agoraphobia, Byrne et al. (2004) concluded 
that couples-based exposure therapy was as effective as individually 
based CBT. 

5 * ANXIETY DISORDERS 
An integrative perspective 
In clinical practice an integrative approach to conceptualizing and 
treating anxiety disorders is useful. Distinctions may be made between 
predisposing, precipitating, maintaining and protective factors, and 
insights and related evidence associated with the various theories 
reviewed above may be integrated into this formulation framework. 
A range of personal and family factors may predispose people to 
develop anxiety disorders. Personal factors include a genetic vulnera- 
bility to anxiety, a behaviourally inhibited temperament, 
a threat- 
oriented cognitive bias, attachment insecurity and personality traits 
such as neuroticism, introversion, low conscientiousness, anxiety sen- 
sitivity, fear of negative evaluation, intolerance of uncertainty, perfec- 
tionism, thought—action fusion, and alexithymia. Family factors that may 
predispose people to develop anxiety disorders include growing up ina 
stressful family with anxious parents who adopt controlling or critical, 
unsupportive parenting styles and foster a threat-oriented family cul- 
ture, or families characterized by domestic violence and child abuse. All 
of these predisposing factors sensitize children to threat, and support 
the development of avoidant coping. 
The onset of anxiety disorders may be precipitated by trauma, life- 
cycle transitions or stressful life events that threaten the individual's safety 
or security. Once anxiety disorders occur they may be maintained by a 
range of processes. These include a threat-oriented cognitive style, 
hyper-vigilance, and ruminative and avoidant coping strategies and 
defence mechanisms. Avoidant coping maintains anxiety through the 
process of negative reinforcement (getting relief from avoiding feared situ- 
ations), and prevents individuals from testing out danger-oriented beliefs. 
Anxiety disorders may also be maintained by interacting with family mem- 
bers who support these processes and/or who adopt threat-sensitive 
belief systems and avoidant coping styles. Protective factors include per- 
sonal attributes and social relationships that support actively coping with 
feared stimuli, and challenging danger-saturated belief systems. 
Assessment 
Through careful clinical interviewing of clients and members of their 
families, the symptoms of anxiety, situations in which they occur and 
relevant history are obtained. A diagnosis is given in accordance with 
the criteria outlined in ICD-10 and DSM-IV-TR. A formulation explaining 
the symptoms entailed by the diagnosis may be developed in which the 
relevant predisposing, precipitating, maintaining and protective factors 
are outlined. A general clinical formulation model for anxiety disorders 
is given in Figure 5.6. 
The best available 
structured 
interview for assessing anxiety 
disorders is the Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-IV, for 
which both adult and child versions are available (ADIS, Brown et al., 
1994; Silverman & Albano, 1996). A range of standardized self-report 
instruments and rating scales may be used to assess specific anxiety 
159 

160 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Any developmental factors that sensitize a person to danger 
Personal factors — Genetic vulnerability to anxiety, inhibited temperament, 
neuroticism, introversion, low conscientiousness, threat-oriented cognitive bias, 
anxiety sensitivity, fear of negative evaluation, intolerance of uncertainty, 
perfectionism, thought-action fusion, alexithymia, attachment insecurity 
Family factors — Parental anxiety, over-controlling or critical parenting, family 
conflict and violence, threat-sensitive family culture 
MAINTAINING FACTORS 
Threat-oriented 
cognitive style, 
hyper-vigilance, 
ruminative & avoidant 
coping strategies 
Enmeshed family that 
PROTECTIVE FACTORS 
Good premorbid 
adjustment, personal 
strengths & 
achievements 
PRECIPITATING 
FACTORS 
Trauma, stresses or 
transitions that threaten 
safety or security 
Family members who 
foster courage 
models and reinforces 
threat sensitivity and 
avoidance 
School or workplace 
support 
Anxiety symptons 
interpreted as ‘medical’ 
problems 
Treatment refusal or 
failure 
Atos 
Peer group support 
nxie y 
Engagement in 
treatment 
Disorders 
Figure 5.6 General formulation model for anxiety disorders 
disorders or specific traits associated with them in children and adults 
(Carr, 2006a; Carr & McNulty, 2006; Hunsley & Mash, 2008). During the 
process of assessment and treatment, patients and family members 
may be invited to keep daily records of fluctuations in feelings of anxiety, 
related thoughts, related avoidant behaviours and the circumstances 
surrounding these fluctuations. 
Treatment 
The discovery that exposure therapies effectively alleviate anxiety is 
one of the most important contributions that psychologists have made 
to the treatment of anxiety disorders. Another important discovery is 
that briefly exposing patients with anxiety disorders to threatening 
stimuli sensitizes them to these stimuli and increases anxiety. Thus, 
non-directive permissive approaches to counselling people with anxiety 
disorders may actually exacerbate rather than alleviate their anxiety. 
Many of us who work clinically with people who suffer from anxiety 
come across clients whose anxiety has worsened as a result of 
participation in well-intentioned, non-directive counselling. 
Current best practice is to take a stepped-care approach to the 
treatment of anxiety disorders. For people with mild or non-chronic 
anxiety disorders, guided self-help approaches may be taken. Meta- 

5 * ANXIETY DISORDERS 
analyses of controlled trials have shown that both bibliotherapy and 
computer-based guided self-help are effective for people with anxiety 
disorders recruited through media advertisements (Andrews et al., 
2010; Cuijpers et al., 2010; Salloum, 2010). Fear Fighter is a particularly 
well researched computer-based programme for the treatment of panic 
disorder and phobias in adults (www.fearfighter.com). 
Psychological treatment may be offered to cases that do not respond 
to self-help. For all of the anxiety disorders, cognitive-behaviour therapy 
protocols have been developed and positively evaluated in adults 
(Barlow et al., 2007; Franklin & Foa, 2007; Najavits, 2007) and children 
(In-Albon & Schneider, 2007; Watson & Rees, 2008). While the evidence 
base for CBT anxiety disorder programmes is vast, there is also strong, 
though less extensive, evidence for the effectiveness of systemic 
therapy for a number of anxiety disorders including separation anxiety 
disorder and OCD in children, and panic disorder with agoraphobia in 
adults (Carr, 2009b, 2009c). There is some evidence from a small 
number of controlled trials for the effectiveness of psychoanalytic 
psychotherapy in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder and 
panic disorder in adults (Leichsenring, 2009). 
Process studies of a range of different types of psychotherapy for 
anxiety show that a better outcome occurs where there is a strong 
therapeutic alliance, a structured and intensive approach to treatment 
that involves psychoeducation, challenging danger-oriented beliefs, 
exposure to feared situations until habituation occurs, the provision of 
training in coping strategies, fostering social and family support and 
good 
compliance 
with 
exposure-based 
homework 
assignments 
between sessions (Stiles & Wolfe, 2006; Woody & Ollendick, 2006). A 
number of client characteristics influence the outcome of psycho- 
therapy for anxiety disorders (Newman, Crits-Christoph et al., 2006; 
Newman, Stiles et al., 2006). A poorer outcome is associated with more 
severe symptoms; comorbid depression, substance use, interpersonal 
problems and personality disorders; an external locus of control; a his- 
tory of problematic relationships with parents; low socio-economic sta- 
tus; and low expectations of therapeutic success. 
In adults, pharmacological therapy is appropriate where there is limited 
response to psychotherapy, or where patients express a preference for 
medication rather than psychological intervention. For most anxiety disor- 
ders, SSRIs are the medication of choice. Benzodiazepines, once popu- 
lar, are not now widely used except on a short-term basis, because of the 
potential for addiction. For chronic OCD that is unresponsive to both psy- 
chological and pharmacological intervention, psychosurgery that disrupts 
the cortico-striatal—thalamic circuit that subserves OCD symptomatology 
may be considered, because there is some evidence for its effectiveness 
(Aouizerate et al., 2006; Stewart et al., 2009; Zohar et al., 2009). 
Evidence from meta-analyses supports the effectiveness of SSRIs 
for childhood anxiety disorders (Bridge et al., 2007). However, because 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors may increase suicide risk, they 
should be used very cautiously, and only with frequent clinical monitoring 
in cases where there is no response to psychological intervention (Rudd 
et al., 2009). 
161 

162 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
This overall approach to the management of anxiety disorders in 
children and adults is consistent with international best practice guide- 
lines (American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 2007c, 
2009, 2010; American Psychiatric Association, 2004a, 2007, 2009; 
NICE, 2005a, 2005b, 2006b, 2011). 
Controversies 
There are many controversies 
in the scientific study and clinical 
treatment of anxiety disorders. The medicalization of fear and courage 
is one deserving particular mention (Breggin, 1991). Within ICD-10 and 
DSM-IV-TR, 
anxiety disorders 
are framed 
as medical 
conditions 
requiring treatment, and in practice in many instances pharmacological 
treatment is favoured because it is more convenient to offer than non- 
pharmacological alternatives. An alternative viewpoint is that this way of 
conceptualizing fundamental human experiences such as fear and 
courage further disempowers people who are already feeling frightened 
and powerless. For example, if a person has repeated panic attacks 
and develops a constricted lifestyle because they are afraid of having a 
panic attack while away from the safety of their home, it may lead them 
to believe that they are truly powerless to control their fear if their fear is 
defined as an illness requiring pharmacological treatment. A further 
aspect of this argument is that for many years addictive pharmacological 
treatments, such as diazepam (Valium) or other benzodiazepines, were 
routinely prescribed for anxiety disorders. 
Those who are critical of the medicalization of experiences such as 
fear and courage would argue that if a person can understand that panic 
attacks develop from the misinterpretation of bodily sensations and 
hyperventilation, then they may use this knowledge and their own cour- 
age to take control of their fear. In this way they are empowered to be 
courageous rather than disempowered by being defined as ill. Those 
who are critical of the medicalization of distress would argue, in the 
same vein, that a person given a diagnosis of PTSD and prescribed 
medication to manage the recurrent traumatic memories may also 
become disempowered. They may develop a belief that they are power- 
less to control recurrent traumatic memories of experiences such as 
road traffic accidents, assauit with a deadly weapon, or involvement in 
war or combat. In contrast, if they are helped to understand that trau- 
matic memories of life-threatening events must be repeatedly recalled, 
processed and integrated into people’s overall views of themselves, 
then this opens up a range of non-pharmacological procedures which 
trauma survivors may follow to help them take control of recurrent, intru- 
sive distressing memories. 
In order to further our understanding of apparently irrational fears, 
post-traumatic distress and courage, continued scientific study is 
essential. The use of diagnoses such as PTSD and panic disorder may 
be valuable in this context. However, it is also valuable to study fear, 
distress and courage as normal psychological process. It may be fruitful 
too to study the social processes that underpin the medicalization and 

5 * ANXIETY DISORDERS 
163 
the medical treatment of fear in clinical practice and to explore the 
degree to which these, and alternative conceptualizations of fear, 
empower clients to be courageous. 
Summary 
‘ Normal fear is an adaptive response to potential threats to 
safety while anxiety is a similar non-adaptive response to situ- 
ations that are not threatening. In DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10 a 
number of anxiety disorders are defined which differ in the 
stimuli that elicit anxiety and associated types of avoidant 
response. With separation anxiety, separation from parents 
elicits anxiety and is avoided. Consequently school refusal 
often occurs. For phobias specific creatures, events or situ- 
ations elicit anxiety and these circumscribed situations are 
avoided. With generalized anxiety disorder, many aspects of 
the environment elicit anxiety; the process of apparently uncon- 
trollable worrying also is experienced as anxiety-provoking; 
and a wide range of situations are avoided. In panic disorder, 
somatic sensations of arousal are perceived as a threatening 
prelude to a panic attack, and public situations in which panic 
attacks previously occurred are avoided, leading to secondary 
agoraphobia in many cases. With PTSD, cues that trigger 
flashbacks to traumatic events that precipitated the condition 
elicit anxiety; these cues are avoided; and recollections of the 
trauma are suppressed. With OCD, stimuli that evoke obses- 
sional thoughts (such as dirt) elicit anxiety, and compulsive 
behaviour (such as hand washing) alleviate this anxiety. 
At a clinical level anxiety disorders involve selective attention 
to potential threats, threat-oriented cognition, abnormal levels of 
physiological arousal, avoidance behaviour, and the disruption 
of interpersonal relationships so that the individual's lifestyle 
becomes constricted. In a major US study the lifetime preva- 
lence rate for all anxiety disorders was about 29%. With the 
exception of OCD, more females than males suffer from anxiety 
disorders. The typical age of onset of separation anxiety disor- 
der and specific phobias is in childhood, whereas other anxiety 
disorders typically first occur in adolescence or adulthood. Up to 
a third of people with one anxiety disorder also suffer from 
another. There is considerable comorbidity with other disorders, 
notably substance misuse, disruptive behaviour, and personality 
and eating disorders. Risk factors for anxiety disorders include a 
family history of anxiety disorders or psychopathology; a behav- 
iourally inhibited temperament; neuroticism; a personal history 
of psychopathology; a history of significant family conflict or vio- 
lence; and a history of stressful life events. 

164 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Theoretical explanations for anxiety disorders and related 
treatments have been developed within biological, trait theory, 
psychoanalytic, cognitive-behavioural, and family systems tra- 
ditions. Genetic studies show that anxiety disorders are about 
30-40% heritable. Candidate genes that affect the serotoner- 
gic and dopaminergic neurotransmitter systems partly explain 
this genetic vulnerability. With the exception of OCD, anxiety 
disorders are associated with overactivity within the limbic sys- 
tem, especially the amygdala, which subserves the processing 
of fear-related information, and inadequate inhibition of this by 
the frontal cortex, which subserves rational evaluation of poten- 
tially threatening situations. In OCD, overactivity of the prefron- 
tal cortex and thalamus subserves the initiation and maintenance 
of obsessional worrying, and overactivity of the basal ganglia 
subserves the repetition of compulsive behaviour patterns. In 
anxiety disorders there is dysregulation of neurotransmitter 
systems that facilitate communication between brain structures 
involved in these conditions. Pharmacological treatments such 
as SSRIs and benzodiazepines aim to rectify these dysregu- 
lated neurotransmitter systems. Dysregulation of neuropep- 
tides, notably CRF, also occurs in anxiety disorders and this is 
associated with HPA axis hyperactivity and the release of the 
stress steroid, cortisol. 
A variety of traits are associated with all anxiety disorders, 
including the temperamental characteristic behavioural inhibi- 
tion, neuroticism, conscientiousness and introversion. Asso- 
ciations have been found between specific cognitive traits and 
specific anxiety disorders including anxiety sensitivity and 
panic disorder; fear of negative evaluation and social phobia; 
intolerance of uncertainty and generalized anxiety disorder; 
perfectionism and OCD; thought-action fusion and OCD; and 
alexithymia and PTSD. People with anxiety disorders also 
show information processing biases favouring the detection 
and recall of threat-oriented material and the interpretation of 
ambiguous situations as threatening. 
Psychoanalytic theories propose that defence mechanisms, 
such as displacement and undoing, are used to keep unac- 
ceptable sexual or aggressive impulses and moral anxiety 
about their expression from entering consciousness. Treatment 
involves the interpretation of defences, related neurotic anxiety 
and repressed unacceptable unconscious impulses. Cognitive- 
behavioural theories of anxiety point to the role of conditioning, 
especially negative reinforcement, and cognitive learning pro- 
cesses, especially the development and elaboration of threat- 
oriented cognitive schemas, in the development of anxiety 
disorders. CBT for anxiety disorders involves exposure to 
feared stimuli 
until extinction of anxiety occurs, cognitive 
restructuring, and relaxation and coping skills training. Family 

5 * ANXIETY DISORDERS 
165 
systems theories highlight the roles of family belief systems 
and interaction patterns in the development and maintenance 
of anxiety disorder and the significance of family life-cycle tran- 
sitions in precipitating the onset of these conditions. Family 
therapy aims to reduce the danger-oriented family culture and 
facilitate parents (in the case of anxious children) and partners 
(in the case of anxious adults) in helping individuals with anxi- 
ety disorders enter feared situations and cope with these. 
In clinical practice an integrative approach to assessment 
and treatment of anxiety disorders may be taken. Assessment 
of anxiety symptoms and relevant personal and family history 
informs the development of a formulation that explains the aeti- 
ology and maintenance of the condition. This formulation 
guides treatment. A stepped care approach to treatment is 
considered best practice, with guided self-help being offered in 
the first instance and progression to evidence-based psycho- 
logical and/or pharmacological interventions where required. 
There is a substantial evidence base for the effectiveness of 
CBT, and a smaller evidence base for the effectiveness of sys- 
temic and psychoanalytic approaches for anxiety disorders. 
SSRIs are the pharmacotherapy of choice for most anxiety dis- 
orders and are as effective as psychotherapy in the short term, 
but their effects are not as enduring as those of psychological 
intervention. There is controversy about the medicalization of 
fear and courage. 
Questions 
e 
What are the main clinical features of separation anxiety, phobias, 
generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, posttraumatic stress 
disorder and obsessive compulsive disorder? 
e 
Howprevalent are anxiety disorders? 
What are the risk factors for anxiety disorders? 
e 
What are the main biological and psychological theories of anxiety 
disorders and the main research findings relevant to these theories? 
e 
What are the main evidence-based approaches to assessment and 
treatment of anxiety disorders? 
e 
Is the medicalization of fear justified? 
EEE 
FURTHER READING 
Professional 
« 
Antony, M. & Stein, M. (2009). Oxford handbook of anxiety and related 
disorders. New York: Oxford University Press. 
e 
Carr, A. (2006). Handbook of child and adolescent clinical psychology: 
A contextual approach (second edition). London: Routledge (Chapters 
12-13). 

166 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Carr, A. & McNulty, M. (2006). Handbook of adult clinical psychology: An 
evidence based practice approach. London: Brunner-Routledge (Chapters 
11-15). 
Clark, D. A. & Beck, A. T. (2010). Cognitive therapy of anxiety disorders. 
New York: Guilford Press. 
Ollendick, T. & March, J. (2003). Phobic and anxiety disorders in children 
and adolescents: A clinical guide to effective psychosocial and pharma- 
cological interventions. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Self-help 
Antony, M. & Swinson, R. (2000). The shyness and social anxiety 
workbook: Proven, step-by-step techniques for overcoming your fear. 
Oakland, CA: New Harbinger. 
Antony, M., Craske, M? & Barlow, D. (2006). Mastering your fears and 
phobias: Workbook (second edition). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Barlow, D. H. (2006). Master your anxiety and panic: Workbook (fourth 
edition). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Craske, M., & Barlow, D. (2006). Mastery of your anxiety and worry: 
Workbook (second edition). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Foa, E. B. & Wilson, R. (2001). Stop obsessing! How to overcome your 
obsessions and compulsions (revised edition). New York: Bantam Books. 
Herbert, C. & Wetmore, A. (1999). Overcoming traumatic stress: A self- 
help guide using cognitive behavioural techniques. London: Robinson. 
Last, C. (2006). Help for worried kids. New York: Guilford. 
Rapee, R., Spense, S., Cobham, V., & Wignal, A. (2000). Helping your 
anxious child: A step-by-step guide for parents. San Francisco: New 
Harbinger. 
WEBSITES 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry’s practice 
parameters for the treatment of anxiety disorders, PTSC and OCD: 
www.aacap.org/cs/root/member_information/practice_information/ 
practice_parameters/practice_parameters 
American Psychiatric Association's practice guidelines for treating panic 
disorder, PTSD and OCD: 
http://psychiatryonline.org/guidelines.aspx 
Anxiety Alliance, UK: 
www.anxietyalliance.org.uk 
Anxiety Disorders Association of America: 
www.adaa.org 
Anxiety UK: 
www. anxietyuk.org.uk 
Fearfighter computer-based CBT programme for anxiety: 
www. fearfighter.com 
National Institute for Clinical Excellence guidelines for treating anxiety 
disorders, PTSD and OCD: 
http://guidance.nice.org.uk/topic/mentalhealthbehavioural 
NHS: 
www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Anxiety/Pages/Introduction.aspx 

Depression 
Learning objectives 
After studying this chapter you will be able to: 
e give an account of the main clinical features of 
depression and distinguish it from normal sadness 
distinguish between major depressive disorder, 
bipolar disorder, dysthymia and cyclothymia 
summarize the epidemiology of depression 
list the risk factors for depression and for suicide 
outline the main biological and psychological 
theories of depression 
name the main evidence-based approaches to 
assessment and treatment of depression 
do the right thing if a friend is suicidal 
give a considered view on antidepressants, 
electroconvulsive therapy and gender differences in 
the prevalence of depression. 
Introduction 
Feelings of happiness and sadness are adaptive. Many behaviour pat- 
terns that lead to happiness, such as socializing with others, becoming 
absorbed in productive work and developing longstanding friendships, 
are important for the survival of the species. Sadness, which commonly 

168 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
follows loss of valued relationships, skills, personal characteristics, 
objects and events, may also be adaptive, in that it reminds us to take 
care of things we value in future so that we don’t lose them again. 
Sadness also signals to others that we require care and elicits support 
from others, which soothes our emotional pain. 
Extreme mood states such as mania and depression are less 
adaptive. There is no doubt that during periods of mania or hypomania 
some individuals with bipolar disorder, which 
is characterized by 
episodes of mania and depression, produce highly creative work (Silvia 
& Kaufman, 2010). However, this is done at a high cost. Inevitably 
people who suffer from bipolar disorder run the risk of dangerous risk- 
taking, dehydration and exhaustion during manic episodes. 
Seasonal affective disorder (or winter depression, as it is colloquially 
known) may be linked phylogenetically to hibernation and this may have 
been adaptive for our cave-dwelling ancestors (Montafiés et al., 2006). 
However, nowadays depression seems to fulfil no adaptive function. 
Despite this, it is a highly prevalent condition, affecting up to 25% of the 
population (Kessler & Wang, 2009). Because of its prevalence, the main 
focus in this chapter will be on major depressive disorder, although 
reference will be made to other mood problems such as bipolar disorder. 
From Table 6.1, in which the diagnostic criteria for a depressive 
episode from DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000) and 
TABLE 6.1 
Criteria for a major depressive episode 
DSM-IV-TR 
A. Five or more of the following symptoms have been present during 
the same 2-week period nearly every day and this represents a 
change from pervious functioning; at least one of the symptoms is 
either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure. 
Symptoms may be reported or observed. 
1. Depressed mood. In children and adolescents can be irritable 
OOnNOonst 
mood, 
. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in almost all daily 
activities. 
. Significant weight loss or gain (of 5% per month) or decrease or 
increase in appetite. In children consider failure to make 
expected weight gains. 
. Insomnia or hypersomnia. 
. Psychomotor agitation or retardation. 
. Fatigue or loss of energy. 
. Feelings of worthlessness, excessive guilt. 
. Poor concentration and indecisiveness. 
. Recurrent thoughts of death, suicidal ideation or suicide attempt. 
B. Symptoms do not meet criteria for mixed episode of mania and 
depression. 
C. Symptoms cause Clinically significant distress or impairment in 
social occupational, educational or other important areas of 
functioning. 
D. Symptoms not due to the direct effects of a drug or a general 
medical condition such as hypothyroidism. 
E. The symptoms are not better accounted for by uncomplicated 
bereavement. 
ICD-10 
In a typical depressive episode the 
individual usually suffers, for a 
period of at least 2 weeks, from 
depressed mood, loss of interest 
and enjoyment and reduced 
energy leading to increased 
fatiguability and diminished activity. 
Marked tiredness after only slight 
effort is common. Other common 
symptoms are: 
1. Reduced concentration and 
attention 
2. Reduced self-esteem and 
confidence 
3. Ideas of guilt and unworthiness 
4. Bleak and pessimistic views of 
the future 
5. Ideas or acts of self-harm or 
suicide 
6. Disturbed sleep 
7. Diminished appetite. 
The lowered mood varies little from 
day to day, is often unresponsive 
to circumstances and may show a 
characteristic diurnal variation as 
the day goes on. 
Note: Adapted from DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000), ICD-10 (WHO, 1992). 

6 » DEPRESSION 
ICD-10 (World Health Organization, 1992) are given, it may be seen 
that depression is not simply ‘feeling sad’. Major depressive disorder is 
a recurrent condition characterized by episodes of low mood and loss of 
interest in pleasurable activities along with other symptoms such as 
poor concentration, fatigue, pessimism, suicidal thoughts, and sleep 
and appetite disturbance. Depression is a major public health concern 
because it radically reduces quality of life, has huge economic costs in 
terms of reduced productivity of the national work force, and has 
adverse effects on the mental health and adjustment of children of 
depressed parents (Garber, 2010; Kessler & Wang, 2009). This chapter 
will consider the clinical features, epidemiology, risk factors, course, 
theoretical explanations, assessment and treatment of depression. Risk 
factors for suicide will also be discussed. 
Case example of major depression 
May, a single woman in her early thirties, was referred for counselling 
by her family doctor. She insisted on being seen by the psychologist at 
her house, since she had been bedridden for 2 years. May’s first episode 
of depression occurred in her mid-twenties, after her first and only 
significant romantic relationship ended. She said that her boyfriend, 
Rob, had ‘broken her heart’. This first depressive episode lasted almost 
a year. During this time May spent most of her days in bed. She had 
little energy and no desire to get up and engage with life. Unfortunately, 
during this depressive episode she lost her job as a teacher. 
May lived in a small maritime town about 250 miles from the village 
where she grew up. Her mother came to stay with her during her first 
episode of depression. At her family doctor’s suggestion, May attended 
a series of counselling sessions. These helped her to recover. Shortly 
after her recovery, May’s counsellor left the district. After a few months 
and a series of disappointing and unsuccessful attempts to rekindle old 
college friendships, May-relapsed. She spent most of the next 2 years 
in bed. Once again, her energy level dropped, she lost interest in all 
activities, felt very sad and empty, and believed that there was little 
point in trying to recover. For much of this period, May refused to see 
anyone except her mother and the family doctor. 
Personal and family history 
May was born and brought up until the age of 8 in a small rural village. 
She moved house when she was 8 years old and lost a number of close 
friends through the change of address. This was particularly stressful 
for her because she had difficulty making new friends, and felt lonely 
much of the time afterwards. Before moving house, May had relied on 
her childhood friends to make living with her parents bearable. When 
she lost this support, she felt very isolated. May’s home life was 
unbearably stressful because she and her mother were regularly beaten 
brutally by May’s father. Her mother would not talk to her about this, nor 
would she protect May from the beatings. May lived in this violent family 
169 

170 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
situation until she left home to go to college at the age of 18. During her 
childhood and teenage years May spent a lot of time studying to distract 
herself from the unhappy home atmosphere. 
On the positive side, May had a good relationship with her cousins 
and some happy childhood memories of staying at their seaside house. 
She made a couple of good friends at college with whom she went on 
holidays to Greece in her early 20s. When May left college, she began 
work as a teacher and loved her job. She got on well with children and 
was admired by her colleagues for this. 
Within May’s extended family there was a history of mood and 
alcohol problems. Her aunt and a cousin had suffered from depression. 
She also had an uncle with a drink problem, which may have been 
related to a difficulty with. mood regulation. 
Presentation 
May presented with profound feelings of sadness and emptiness, a loss 
of interest in her career and friendships and an inability to experience 
pleasure. Notable features of her behaviour were the fact that she lived 
a constricted housebound lifestyle, was unable to concentrate and com- 
plained of forgetfulness. May also experienced early morning waking, 
had diurnal variation of mood, with her mood being worse in the morn- 
ing, had little appetite and marked weight loss, and refused to take anti- 
depressant medication. From time to time she thought about killing 
herself, but never planned in a detailed way to end her life and never 
made a suicide attempt. 
She held a distinctly negative view of herself, the world and the future. 
She talked about herself in self-deprecating ways. For example, she said 
‘I’m no good as a teacher. I’ve lost my job because of this illness. I’m no 
good as a woman. I'll never be married. I’m no good as a person. I’m dirty 
and worthless and I’m rotting inside. | deserve to be hurt.’ She viewed the 
world as a bleak place. What follows are some of her beliefs about her 
world: ‘My father is no good. He beat me as a child and beat my mother. 
He is the reason why | am ill. | can’t change the past, so | will be ill forever. 
My mother is no good. | would recover if she were not here looking after 
me. She interferes in my life and tries to control me. | have no friends so 
there is no point in recovery. Other people deserve to be hurt. Whatever 
pleasant things | have experienced were few and far between. For 
example, my holiday in Greece. | had no control over either the good or 
bad things that happened to me, so | cannot control my recovery.’ 
May's view of the future was also dark. For example, she said: ‘There 
is no point in recovery because other people will only take advantage of 
me. You can’t trust anyone because they will abandon you. | have been 
unfortunate in the past, so | will always be unfortunate. There is no light 
at the end of the tunnel.’ 
Formulation 
May presented with the symptoms of major depressive disorder: low 
mood, diurnal variation in mood, loss of interest and pleasure in daily 
—

6 * DEPRESSION 
activities, poor concentration, appetite and sleep disturbance, energy 
loss, worthlessness, pessimism and suicidal ideation. She had experi- 
enced two episodes of major depression, each precipitated by the loss 
of valued relationships. The first episode was triggered by her losing her 
boyfriend and the second by her failing to renew old friendships, the 
loss of her counsellor and the loss of work relationships. For other 
people these types of event might not have led to depression, but for 
May the losses were particularly stressful because biological and 
psychological predisposing factors had rendered her especially vul- 
nerable to depression. 
May’s family history of mood disorders suggested that she might 
have had a genetic biological vulnerability to developing depression. 
Her negative childhood experiences of violence and loss of supportive 
friends after moving house probably rendered her psychologically 
vulnerable to developing depression, since these led her to view herself, 
other people and the future in a pessimistic way. Once May’s mood 
dropped, it was maintained by this negative way of interpreting events. 
In addition to this cognitive maintaining factor, at behavioural and 
interpersonal levels May’s constricted lifestyle also maintained her 
depression. Her lifestyle reduced opportunities for engaging in pleasant 
activities, forming relationships, and finding employment. The absence 
of these opportunities confirmed May’s negative view of herself, her 
world and her future. She was locked into a vicious cycle. 
Eventually this had taken its toll on May’s appetite, circadian rhythms 
and activity level. She slept poorly, awoke early, ate little and rarely 
exercised. These sleeping, eating and activity problems may also have 
maintained May’s depressed mood. However, there were protective 
factors in this case. May had a history of good premorbid adjustment, 
and strong support for her recovery from both her mother and her family 
doctor. This formulation is diagrammed in Figure 6.1. 
Intervention 
Following assessment, May was helped to understand this formulation. 
She engaged in a multimodal treatment programme involving cognitive- 
behavioural interventions, family therapy and antidepressant medica- 
tion. Behaviour therapy helped her alter her self-defeating patterns of 
behaviour; engage in regular exercise and pleasant activities; and 
expand her constricted lifestyle. Cognitive therapy helped her to chal- 
lenge her pessimistic thinking style and view the world in more positive 
terms. Family therapy helped May’s mother reduce her inappropriate 
over-involvement with May and her father apologize for the violence to 
which May had been subjected and exposed to as a child. 
Antidepressant medication aimed to normalize the dysregulated 
serotonergic neurotransmitter system that was presumed to underpin 
May’s depressive symptoms. Over a period of months she increased 
her activity level, developed a more positive thinking style, achieved 
greater autonomy from her parents and began to engage in a more 
normal lifestyle. 
171 

172 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Genetic vulnerability to depression 
Physical child abuse 
Separation from peer group 
Negative schemas 
MAINTAINING 
PRECIPITATING 
PROTECTIVE 
FACTORS 
FACTOR 
FACTORS 
Depressive cognitive 
Loss of boyfriend, other 
Good premorbid 
style 
friends & therapist 
adjustment 
Self-defeating 
behaviour 
Maternal support 
Support from family 
doctor 
Depression 
Figure 6.1 Formulation of a case of depression 
Major depression is a recurring episodic condition, so May was not 
‘cured’ by this multimodal programme. While she gradually began to 
enjoy a better quality of life, sne continued to struggle to maintain a posi- 
tive mood state and was vulnerable to relapse when faced with subse- 
quentlife stresses, particularly those involving loss of valued relationships. 
Clinical features 
Table 6.1 gives diagnostic criteria for episodes of major depression from 
DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000) and ICD-10 (World 
Health Organization, 1992). Within both systems depressive episodes 
may be classified in terms of severity and with respect to the presence or 
absence of melancholic or somatic features and psychotic features. 
Severity 
With regard to symptom severity, episodes of depression may be 
subclassified as mild, moderate or severe, depending on the number of 
symptoms present and the degree of impairment. 
Melancholia 
With regard to melancholic or somatic features, in severe depression 
where there is aloss of pleasure in all activities (referred to as anhedonia) 
oi

6° DEPRESSION 
173 
and a lack of reactivity to pleasant stimuli along with diurnal variation in 
mood, and sleep and appetite disturbance, the DSM codes such 
episodes as having melancholic features. In the ICD this presentation is 
referred to as the somatic syndrome. Historically there was a view that 
these symptoms reflected an ‘endogenous’, genetically determined and 
biologically based form of depression, as distinct from a ‘reactive’ 
depression 
arising 
from 
exposure 
to stressful 
life events 
and 
environmental adversity (Monroe et al., 2009). 
This distinction between endogenous and reactive depression has 
not been supported by research, which shows that all episodes of 
depression are preceded by stressful life events, and that in any given 
case some combination of genetic vulnerability and environmental 
adversity contributes to the development of depression (Parker, 2009). 
Psychotic depression 
In both DSM and ICD, if mood-congruent delusions and hallucinations 
are present, then depressive episodes are described 
as having 
psychotic features. 
Mood-congruent 
delusions 
are 
strongly 
held, 
extremely pessimistic beliefs that have no basis in reality, such as the 
belief of an innocent person that he or she is guilty of many wrongs and 
so deserves to die. In depression, mood-congruent hailucinations are 
usually auditory and involve hearing voices in the absence of external 
stimuli, which say depressing things, such as that the patient is a failure, 
guilty of wrongdoing, or evil. 
A range of clinical features of children, adolescents and adults with 
major depressive disorders have been identified through research and 
clinical observation (e.g., Bech, 2009; Brent & Weersing, 2008; Gotlib & 
Hammen, 2009; Nolen-Hoeksema & Hilt, 2009a). A classification of 
common Clinical features of depression into the domains of perception, 
cognition, mood, somatic state, behaviour and relationships is given in 
Table 6.2. When depressive episodes occur, clinical features may be 
linked by assuming that depressed individuals have usually suffered a 
loss of some sort: a loss of an important relationship, a loss of some 
valued attribute such as athletic ability or health, or a loss of status. 
Perception 
With respect to perception, having suffered a loss, depressed individuals 
tend to perceive the world as if further losses are probable. Depressed 
people selectively attend to negative features of the environment. This 
in turn leads them to engage in depressive cognitions and unrewarding 
behaviour patterns which further entrench their depressed mood. In 
severe depression, individuals may report mood-congruent auditory 
hallucinations. We may assume that this severe perceptual abnormality 
is present when individuals report hearing voices criticizing them or 
telling them depressive things, as noted above. Auditory hallucinations 
also occur in schizophrenia. However, the hallucinations that occur in 
schizophrenia are not necessarily mood-congruent. 

174 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
TABLE 6.2 
Clinical features of depression 
a 
Perception 
Perceptual bias towards negative events 
Mood-congruent hallucinationst 
Cognition 
Negative view of self, world and future 
Over-general memory 
Cognitive distortions 
Inability to concentrate 
Indecision 
Suicidal ideation 
Suicidal intention* 
Excessive guilt* 
Mood-congruent delusionst 
Mood 
Depressed mood 
Irritable mood 
Anxiety and apprehension 
Distinct quality of depressed mood* 
Loss of interest in pleasurable activities (anhedonia)* 
Lack of emotional reactivity” 
Somatic state 
Fatigue 
Diminished activity 
Loss of appetite or overeating 
Aches and pains 
Early morning waking* 
Diurnal variation of mood (worse in morning)* 
Change in weight* 
Loss of interest in sex* 
Behaviour 
Psychomotor retardation or agitation* 
Depressive stuport 
Relationships 
Deterioration in family relationships 
Withdrawal from peer relationships 
Poor work or educational performance 
*These features are associated with melancholic depression and are referred to as vegetative 
features or the somatic syndrome. tThese features occur in psychotic depression. 
Cognition 
With respect to cognition, depressed individuals describe themselves, 
the world and the future in negative terms. They evaluate themselves as 
worthless and are critical of their occupational and social accomplish- 
ments. Often this negative self-evaluation is expressed as guilt for not 
living up to certain standards or letting others down. They see their world, 
including family, friends and work or school as unrewarding, critical and 
hostile or apathetic. They describe the future in bleak terms and report 
little if any hope that things will improve. Where they report extreme hope- 
lessness and this is coupled with excessive guilt for which they believe 
they should be punished, suicidal ideas or intentions may be reported. 
Extremely negative thoughts about the self, the world and the future may 
be woven together in severe cases into depressive delusional systems. 
In addition to the content of the depressed individual’s thought being 
bleak, they also display logical errors in their thinking and concentration 

6 
* DEPRESSION 
problems. Errors in reasoning are marked by a tendency to maximize 
the significance and implications of negative events and minimize the 
significance of positive events. They also have over-general autobio- 
graphical memories. 
That is, they have difficulty remembering specific 
happy events in detail (which might lighten their mood), but rather 
remember both positive and negative past episodes in their lives in 
global over-general ways. In addition they have concentration, attention 
and decision-making problems that lead to difficulties managing occu- 
pational, academic or leisure activities demanding sustained attention 
and decisiveness. 
Affect 
With respect to affect, low mood, diurnal variation in mood and anhedo- 
nia are key features of depression. Depressed mood is usually reported 
as a feeling of sadness, emptiness, loneliness or despair. Diurnal vari- 
ation in mood is particularly common in severe depression, with mood 
being worse in the morning. During an episode of major depression as 
a person moves from mild to moderate to severe depression, the 
increasing number and intensity of symptoms may lead to intense anxi- 
ety. That is, fears are experienced such as ‘Will this get worse? Am | 
stuck in this living hell for ever? Will | ever be myself again? Will | be 
able to prevent myself from committing suicide to escape?’ Irritability 
may also occur, with the person expressing anger at the source of their 
loss, for example anger at a deceased loved one for abandoning the 
grieving person, or anger at health professionals for being unable to 
alleviate the depression. 
Somatic state 
Changes in somatic state associated with depression include loss of 
energy, disturbances of sleep and appetite, weight loss or failure to 
make age-appropriate weight gain, pain symptoms and loss of interest 
in sex. Typically, depressed people have difficulty sleeping and eat little 
due to appetite loss. These symptoms are referred to as vegetative 
features. With regard to sleep disturbance, depressed people may have 
difficulty going to sleep, wake frequently during the night, or suffer from 
early-morning waking. Usually, they report having racing thoughts and 
engaging in depressive rumination when they can't sleep. In atypical 
cases of depression people may sleep too much due to constant 
feelings of exhaustion and eat excessively due to increased appetite or 
because eating may temporarily reduce their distress. 
Headaches and medically unexplained chest, back or abdominal 
pain are other somatic features of depression. For some patients, these 
pain symptoms are the first to be reported to their family doctors, and 
only when medical investigations of these complaints are negative is 
depression considered as a possible diagnosis. All of the somatic fea- 
tures of depression mentioned above are consistent with research find- 
ings, discussed below, that dysregulation of neurobiological, endocrine 
175 

176 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
and immune functions is associated with depression and that sleep 
architecture is also affected. 
Behaviour 
At a behavioural level, depressed individuals may show either reduced 
and slowed activity levels (psychomotor retardation) or increased but 
ineffective activity (psychomotor agitation). They typically fail to engage 
in activities that would bring them a sense of achievement or connect- 
edness to family or friends. Where individuals become immobile, this is 
referred to as depressive stupor. Fortunately this is rare. 
One risky behavioural complication of depression is self-harm. A dis- 
tinction is made between suicidal behaviour and non-suicidal deliberate 
self-harm. With suicidal behaviour, self-harm is primarily motivated by 
the intention to end one’s life. With non-suicidal deliberate self-harm, 
there are other motivations. People may cut or burn themselves to dis- 
tract themselves from their depressive feelings. They may take non- 
lethal overdoses to elicit care from family or friends or to gain admission 
to hospital and remove them from stressful situations. 
Relationships 
At an interpersonal level, depressed individuals report a deterioration in 
their relationships with family, friends, colleagues, school teachers and 
other significant figures in their lives. They describe themselves as 
lonely and yet unable or unworthy to take steps to make contact with 
others. Ironically, when depressed people try to overcome their loneli- 
ness by talking to others, they tend to drive them away through their 
pessimistic, self-centred talk and depressive behaviour. 
Classification 
In DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10, mood disorders are primarily classified in 
terms of polarity (unipolar versus bipolar conditions) and course 
(episodic versus continuous conditions). Distinctions are made between 
e 
major depressive disorder 
e 
bipolar disorder 
e 
dysthymia 
e 
cyclothymia. 
Major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder are episodic conditions, 
with the former characterized by episodes of low mood, negative 
cognition, and sleep and appetite disturbance and the latter characterized 
in addition by episodes of mania in which elation, grandiosity, flight of 
ideas and expansive behaviour occur. Dysthymia and cyclothymia are 
less severe non-episodic chronic and continuous conditions, with 
dysthymia being characterized by depressive symptomatology and 
cyclothymia being characterized by similar but less extreme mood 
fluctuations than bipolar disorder. 
a 

6 
* DEPRESSION 
177 
The distinctions between unipolar and bipolar conditions and between 
episodic and persistent disorders that are central to the classification of 
mood disorders in ICD-10 and DSM-IV-TR have subordinated earlier 
classification systems, which made primary distinctions between psy- 
chotic and neurotic, endogenous and reactive, and overt and masked 
depression (Farmer & McGuffin, 1989; Kendell, 1976; Parker, 2009). 
With the psychotic/neurotic and endogenous/reactive classification sys- 
tems, it was assumed that psychotic and endogenous depressions were 
more severe than neurotic and reactive depressions, with the more 
severe conditions being due to genetic and biological factors and requir- 
ing treatment with medication or electroconvulsive therapy, and the less 
severe conditions being due to environmental factors and requiring 
treatment with psychotherapy (Parker, 2009). However, evidence from 
stressful life-event research shows that all “épisodes of depression, ~ 
regardless of qualit 
are-p 
a 
\ 
and in 
that sense are 
reactive (Monroe et 
al., 2009). Treatment outcome 
own that only about two out of three.cases 
of depres- 
_sion respond to available treatments; 
that symptom type or severity 
does not always predict which patients will respond to physical or psy- 
chological interventions; and that for most patients multimodal therapy 
involving a combination of medication and psychotherapy is most effec- 
tive (Paykel & Scott, 2009). The older psychotic/neurotic and endog- 
enous/reactive distinctions have been incorporated into DSM-IV-TR and 
ICD-10, insofar as depressive episodes 
may be specified as having 
either psychotic features or melancholic/somatic features, typical of 
what formerly was referred to as endogenous depression. 
With regard to the overt/masked distinction, this was introduced to 
take account of adults whose depression was masked by medically 
unexplained symptoms such as headaches and chest pains (Hoogenhout 
et al., 2010) or children whose depression was masked by conduct 
problems (Carlson & Cantwell, 1980). Adult cases that would formerly 
have been described as having masked depression are classified in 
DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10 as having a somatoform disorder, a condition 
characterized by multiple medically unexplained symptoms. What would 
formerly have been referred to as masked depression in children is clas- 
sified as comorbid depression and conduct disorder in DSM-IV-TR and 
as depressive conduct disorder in ICD-10. 
Epidemiology, course and risk factors 
Major depression is the most common mood disorder, with a lifetime 
prevalence rate of 6-25% in international community studies (Kessler & 
Wang, 2009). In the US National Co-morbidity Survey Replication the 
lifetime prevalence of DSM-IV major depression was 16.6%, whereas 
the lifetime prevalence of dysthymia was 2.5% and of bipolar disorder 
was 3.9% (Kessler et al., 2005). Depression is less common among 
prepubertal children than adolescents and adults (Brent & Weersing, 
2008). In children, equal numbers of boys and girls have depression, 
but this changes in adole 
adult 
ared with men, 

178 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
about twice as many women have depression (Nolen-Hoeksema & Hilt, 
2009b). 
Comorbid disorders occur in most cases of depression. In the US 
National Comorbidity Replication Survey, 59% of depressed participants 
had comorbid anxiety disorders and 24% had comorbid substance use 
disorders (Kessler & Wang, 2009). In clinical samples of depressed 
patients, comorbid personality disorders occur in 50-85% of inpatients 
and 20-50% of outpatients (Klein et al., 2009). The highest level of 
comorbidity occurs with cluster C personality disorders (avoidant, 
dependent, and obsessive compulsive personality disorders). 
Depression follows a chronic relapsing course, with up to 80% of 
people having recurring episodes, and in community samples the 
median duration of episodes is about 5 or 6 weeks (Kessler & Wang, 
2009). In clinical samples episodes typically last for 5-6 months; the 
majority of cases recover from a depressive episode within a year; 
about half of all patients continue to have fluctuating residual symptoms 
between episodes; for less than 10% recovery does not occur and 
chronic depressive symptoms persist; and most cases relapse within 5 
years (Angst, 2009; Boland & Keller, 2009). 
As more depressive episodes occur, there are decreases in inter- 
episode intervals and a reduction in the amount of stress required to 
trigger the onset of further depressive episodes, an issue discussed 
below under stress theories (Boland & Keller, 2009). 
Risk factors for depression include a family history of mood disor- 
ders, female gender, low socio-economic status involving economic 
and educational disadvantage, an adverse early family or institutional 
environment, a depressive temperament, a negative cognitive style, 
deficits in self-regulation, high levels of life stress, and low levels of 
social support from family and friends (Garber, 2010; Hammen et al., 
2010). 
Risk factors for recurrent major depressive episodes identified in the 
US Collaborative Depression Study of over 500 patients include a his- 
tory of three or more prior episodes, comorbid dysthymia (often called 
double depression), comorbid anxiety and substance use disorders, 
long duration of individual episodes, poor control of symptoms by anti- 
depressant medication, onset after 60 years of age, a family history of 
mood disorder, and being a 
single female (Boland & Keller, 2009). 
For a subgroup of people who suffer from depression, deficits in 
visually processing light and the season of the year are risk factors for 
depression (Rosenthal, 2009). These people, who experience regularly 
recurring depressive episodes in the autumn and winter, with remission 
in the spring and summer, are said to have seasonal affective disorder. 
They develop symptoms in the absence of adequate light and respond 
favourably to enhanced environmental lighting, often referred to as ‘light 
therapy’ (Golden et al., 2005). 
In community samples about 3.4% of people with a major depressive 
disorder commit suicide; the rate in clinica 
mples is about 15%; and 
about 60% of completed suicides 
are depressed (Berman, 2009). 

6» DEPRESSION 
179 
Aetiological theories 
Theoretical explanations for depression and related treatments have 
been developed within biological, psychoanalytic, cognitive-behavioural 
and family systems traditions. Much research on depression has been 
guided by these theories. In addition, research on depression has been 
informed by psychological constructs such as stress, temperament, 
personality traits, cognitive biases, coping strategies and interpersonal 
styles. A number of influential theories, hypotheses and related treat- 
ments and research findings from these areas will be briefly reviewed 
below. 
Biological theories 
Biological theories of depression point to the role of genetic factors in 
rendering people vulnerable to the development of mood disorders, and 
to the role of structural and functional brain abnormalities; dsysrequla- _ 
tion_of neurotransmitter, neuroendocrine and immune systems; and 
Sleep architecture and circadian rhythm abnormalities in the aetiology 
—f 
depression. 
There 7s considerable support for biological theories from 
neuroimaging, pharmacological, psychophysiological and other neuro- 
biological studies, although current knowledge of these abnormalities is 
incomplete (Davidson et al., 2009; Hamilton et al., 2011; Levinson, 
2009; Sullivan et al., 2000; Thase, 2009). However, there is a consen- 
sus about certain aspects of the neurobiology of depression which will 
be presented below. 
Genetics 
The genetic hypothesis proposes that depression develops where a 
person with an inherited vulnerability to mood disorders is exposed to 
stressful life events. Results of twin, adoption and family studies show 
that a predisposition to depression is genetically transmitted. Major 
depression is about 40% heritable (Sullivan et al., 2000), whereas bipo- 
lar disorder is about 70% heritable (Edvardsen et al., 2008). Precisely 
what biological characteristics are genetically transmitted and the 
mechanis 
rgely unknown. However, results 
of studies on structural and functional brain abnormalities, neurotrans- 
mitter dysregulation, endocrine abnormalities, immune system dysfunc- 
tion, sleep architecture and circadian rhythm abnormalities in some 
cases suggest that a biological vulnerability to dysregulation of one or 
more of these systems is probabh inherited. It is also probable that the 
V8 
vulnerability ig polygenetically transmitted, since the results of family 
. 
studies cannot easily be accounted for by simpler models of genetic 
transmission. 
Many candidate genes for depression have been investigated; few 
have been identified; and where significant associations between can- 
didate genes and depression have been found, very few consistent rep- 
lication studies are available (Levinson, 2009; Shyn & Hamilton, 2010). 
The search for candidate genes has focused in large part on those 

180 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
whose products affect neurotransmitters thought to be involved in the 
aetiology of mood disorders, notably serotonin and noradrenaline. 
One candidate gene that affects the serotonin system deserves 
mention because consistent support has been found for the link between 
it and vulnerability to depression. A common polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) 
in the promoter region of the serotonin transporter gene (SHTT or 
SLC6A4) regulates gene expression. In a large meta-analysis, Karg et 
al. (2011) found that the short (rather than the long) allele variant of the 
5-HTTLPR polymorphism increases the risk of developing depression 
under stress, particularly in the case of child abuse and severe medical 
problems. This increased stress sensitivity for these types of life event 
probably occurs 
because 
of decreased 
serotonin 
re-uptake and 
increased amygdala neuronal activity in response to stress. The vulner- 
ability associated with the short allele variant of the 5-HTTLPR polymor- 
phism is not specific to depression. It also renders people vulnerable to 
PTSD and borderline personality disorder. This is because the seroton- 
ergic neurotransmitter system subserves a range of stress-related emo- 
tional processes including both depression and anxiety. 
The limbic system and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 
Depression is associated with abnormalities in the functioning of brain 
structures that subserve the experience and expression of emotions, 
primarily the limbic system (which includes the amygdala, hippocampus, 
insula and parts of the anterior cingulate cortex), and those that 
subserve self-regulation, primarily the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. In 
depressed people the limbic system (especially the amygdala and 
anterior cingulate cortex) is overactive, while the dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex is underactive (Hamilton et al., 2011). The overactive limbic 
system probably subserves the ongoing experience of intense negative 
emotions, while the underactive dorsolateral prefrontal cortex probably 
subserves a deficit in regulating these negative emotional experiences 
through reappraisal and purposeful problem-solving. 
There is some preliminary evidence that successful psychological 
and pharmacological treatments normalize these abnormalities in dif- 
ferent ways. Psychological interventions such as cognitive therapy 
probably ameliorate depression by increasing activity in the prefrontal 
cortex, whereas antidepressant medication probably alleviates depres- 
sion by decreasing limbic system overactivity (Clark & Beck, 2010; 
Thase, 2009). 
Neurotransmitters 
There is evidence for hypoactivity of the serotonergic and noradrener- 
gic neurotransmitter systems in neuroanatomical centres associated 
with depression (Thase, 2009). Originally depletion of serotonin and 
noradrenaline was thought to cause depression, but now a more com- 
plex dysregulation of these systems involving a reduction in the sensi- 
tivity of postsynaptic receptor sites is hypothesized to be the critical 
difficulty. The efficiency of these neurotransmitter systems is reduced in 
depression, and increased by antidepressant drugs (Gitlin, 2009). 
—

6 
+ DEPRESSION 
Four main classes of antidepressant medication have been devel- 
oped: tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
(MAOIs), selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), and novel or 
‘dual action antidepressants (Gitlin, 2009). TCAs such as imipramine 
(which has the trade name Tofranil) increase the sensitivity of dysfunc- 
tional receptor sites to serotonin and noradrenaline. MAOIs such as 
phenelzine (which has the trade name Nardil) prevent the enzyme — 
monoamine oxidase — from breaking down neurotransmitters in the 
synaptic cleft and lead to an increase in neurotransmitter levels. 
TCAs and MAOls were developed in the 1950s and were widely 
used until the 1980s, when they were largely replaced in clinical practice 
by SSRIs and novel or dual-action antidepressants. SSRIs such as 
fluoxetine (which has the trade name Prozac) prevent serotonin from 
being reabsorbed into the presynaptic membrane and so increase 
levels of this neurotransmitter. Novel and dual action antidepressants 
operate in a variety of ways. For example venlafaxine (with the trade 
name Effexor), which is a dual-action antidepressant, prevents both 
noradrenaline and serotonin from being reabsorbed into the presynaptic 
membrane and so increases levels of both of these neurotransmitters. 
Results of meta-analyses of controlled trials show that for severe 
depression the positive effects of antidepressants are substantial, but 
for mild or moderate depression their effects are negligible (Fournier et 
al., 2010). Furthermore, there is no evidence that the newer antidepres- 
sants, such as the SSRIs, are any more effective than the older ones, 
such as the TCAs, although some have fewer side-effects (Gitlin, 2009). 
Antidepressant side-effects are discussed below in the section on con- 
troversies. There is consistent evidence that genetic vulnerability to 
depression involves genes whose action affects the efficiency of the 
serotonin neurotransmitter system, which is associated with depres- 
sion, as was noted above in the discussion of genetic factors. 
Neuroendocrine and immune systems 
Hypothalamic-pituitary—adrenal (HPA) axis overactivity is a central 
aspect of the stress response. The HPA axis is a major part of the 
neuroendocrine system3 involving the hypothalamus, the pituitary 
gland located below the hypothalamus, and the adrenal glands (located 
on top of the kidneys), which controls stress reactions and other 
processes including the immune system, sexuality and digestion. The 
HPA axis is activated by noradrenaline and inhibited by serotonin 
neurotransmission. 
There is evidence for the dysregulation of neuropeptides, notably 
corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), in the limbic system of depressed 
people. CRF is released in response to stress and is associated with 
HPA axis hyperactivity. CRF release and increased HPA axis activity 
result in elevated levels of the stress steroid cortisol and disruption of 
normal cortisol circadian rhythms (Thase, 2009). Elevated cortisol 
arising from HPA axis overactivity in turn compromises the efficiency of 
the immune system, rendering depressed patients more susceptible to 
inflammatory diseases including arthritis and atherosclerosis (Glassman 
181 

182 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
> 
& Miller, 2007). Such illnesses in turn are additional stresses that may 
maintain or exacerbate depression. 
Sleep architecture and circadian rhythms 
Depression is associated with a disruption of sleep architecture and 
circadian rhythms. Sleep disturbance, which includes difficulty falling 
asleep, broken sleep and early-morning waking, is a core symptom of 
depression. Psychophysiological studies show that abnormal sleep 
architecture underpins depressive sleep disturbance (Thase, 2009). 
Depressed people spend more time in rapid eye movement (REM) 
sleep and less time in slow-wave sleep. They also show shorter REM_ 
onset latency. Up to 60% of depressed people temporarily recover fol- 
lowing sleep deprivation, although they relapse after even a brief sleep 
(Hemmeter et al., 2010). Antidepressants regularize abnormal sleep 
architecture, probably by normalizing serotonin and noradrenaline 
neurotransmitter systems, which are dysregulated in depression and 
regulate sleep architecture. Light therapy, which artificially extends 
exposure to daylight during short winter days to the duration of long 
summer days is an effective treatment for seasonal affective disorder, 
suggesting that seasonal depression is associated with disrupted 
circadian rhythms (Monteleone et al., 2010). 
In summary, there is considerable support for a neurobiological the- 
ory of depression. Major depressive disorder is about 40% heritable. 
Vulnerability to depression is probably polygenetic, and so far the only 
candidate gene for which there is consistent evidence is one that affects 
the efficiency of the serotonegic neurotransmitter system. Dysreguiations 
of this system and the noradrenergic system occur in depression. Both 
neurotransmitter systems are involved in a range of other neurobiologi- 
cal features of depression including overactivity of the limbic system 
and underactivity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; HPA axis overac- 
tivity, elevated cortisol levels and reduced immune system efficiency; 
and disturbed sleep architecture characterized by increased REM and 
reduced slow-wave sleep. These neurobiological abnormalities occur 
more commonly in severe depression. Antidepressant medication, 
which is effective for severe but not mild or moderate depression, allevi- 
ates depression by increasing the efficiency of serotonergic and 
noradrenergic neurotransmitter systems. 
Stress theories 
Stress theories propose that depression develops following exposure to 
stress. There are variations on this theme, for example diathesis—stress 
theories propose that depression only follows exposure to stress in 
people who have specific biological or psychological attributes that 
render them vulnerable to stressful life events, and the most vulnerable 
require the least stress for depression to occur (¢.g., Joiner & Timmons 
2009; Joormann, 2009; Levinson, 2009). Stress-generation theory pro- 
poses that people with certain personal attributes inadvertently generate 
excessive stress, which in turn leads to depression (Liu & Alloy, 2010). 

6 » DEPRESSION 
A substantial body of research shows that the onset, course and 
severity of depression are associated with stress, including acute and 
chronic stressful life events and. recent and early life adversity and loss 
(Goodman & Brand, 2009; Hammen, 2009; Harkness & Lumley, 2008; 
McLeod et al., 2007; Monroe et al., 2009). Early life stress such as 
rejection and hostility, child abuse, parental depression and parental 
death may cause childhood depression and render people vulnerable to 
further episodes of depression in adulthood. 
In adulthood loss of 
important relationships, roles and resources may precipitate 
initial 
episodes of depression and relapse in recovered patients, or may delay 
recovery during treatment. Higher levels of stress are associated with 
more severe depressive symptoms. 
As the number of episodes of depression increases, the amount of 
stress required to precipitate a relapse decreases (Boland & Keller, 
2009). This may be due to the neurobiological process of kindling 
(Monroe & Harkness, 2005) and the cognitive process of rumination 
(McLaughlin & Nolen-Hoeksema, 2011). According to cognitive theory, 
minor stresses, which might normally lead to small negative mood 
changes, may give rise to chronic rumination and catastrophizing in 
people who have previously had depressive episodes, 
and this 
rumination and catastrophizing may lead to major negative mood 
changes and the onset of further episodes of depression. According to 
kindling theory, multiple episodes of depression probably render the 
neurobiological systems that maintain depression more vulnerable to 
depressogenic changes in response to minor stresses. 
Depressed people are not passive recipients of environmental stress, 
but play an active role in stress generation. Available research indicates 
that those more likely to generate stress leading to depression are 
female, have been exposed in early life to child abuse or chronic 
adversity and have depressive cognitive styles (discussed below in the 
section on cognitive and behavioural theories) (Liu & Alloy, 2010). 
Temperament, traits, cognitive biases, coping 
strategies and interpersonal styles 
Hypotheses that variables such as temperament, personality traits, 
cognitive biases, coping strategies and interpersonal style render 
people vulnerable to depression when they encounter stress and 
adversity, or maintain depression, will be considered below. 
Temperament 
The Temperament and Character Inventory has been used in much of 
the research on temperament and depression (Cloninger et al., 1993). 
This instrument 
includes four dimensions 
of temperament: 
harm 
avoidance, reward dependence, novelty seeking and persistence. The 
structure of temperament in this model has been inferred from genetic 
studies of personality. Three of the temperamental dimensions are 
183 

184 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
hypothesized to be related to specific neurotransmitter systems of the 
brain. It is proposed that harm avoidance is subserved by the serotonin 
system; reward dependence by the noradrenaline system; and novelty 
seeking by the dopamine system. In a meta-analysis, Kampman and 
Poutanen 
(2011) found 
that the harm avoidance temperamental 
dimension was strongly associated with current depressive symptoms, 
and improvements in harm avoidance occurred in treatment studies of 
major depressive disorder. This finding is consistent with evidence for 
the central role of dysregulation of the serotonergic neurotransmitter 
system in depression. 
In Watson and Clark’s model of temperament a distinction is made 
between positive and negative emotionality. They have found that 
depressed people tend to have high levels of negative emotionality and 
low levels of positive emotionality (Watson, 2009). In this model negative 
emotionality 
is the temperamental 
dimension 
that underpins the 
personality trait neuroticism, whereas the personality trait extraversion 
is underpinned by the temperamental dimension of positive emotionality. 
The role of these personality traits in depression will now be considered. 
Personality traits 
In a major meta-analysis, Kotov et al. (2010) investigated correlations 
between depression and the ‘Big 5’ personality traits: neuroticism, 
extraversion, conscientiousness, openness and agreeableness. They 
found that neuroticism was the personality trait most strongly associ- 
ated with major depressive disorder. There were significant but smaller 
negative correlations between depression and both extraversion and 
conscientiousness. Thus, the typical personality trait profile of people 
with major depressive disorder was characterized by a high level of 
neuroticism (which entails negative emotionality and distress), introver- 
sion (which involves social withdrawal and a lack of positive emotional- 
ity) and low conscientiousness (where there is a tendency not to follow 
through on plans). It is not clear whether this personality profile predis- 
poses people to depression, whether it occurs as a result of depression, 
or whether depression and the personality profile are the result of some 
independent factor. 
Within both the psychoanalytic and cognitive-behavioural traditions 
there are hypotheses about the association between specific personality 
dimensions and vulnerability to depression when one is faced with spe- 
cific types of stressor. Within the psychoanalytic tradition, Blatt (2004) 
has proposed that distinctions may be made between dependent and 
self-critical, perfectionistic forms of depression. Within the cognitive- 
behavioural tradition, Beck et al. (1983) distinguished between socio- 
tropic and autonomous depressives. In these formulations it is proposed 
that people with high levels of dependence or sociotropy have strong 
needs for relatedness and so are vulnerable to depression when faced 
with loss of important relationships, whereas people with high levels of 
perfectionistic self-criticism or autonomy have strong needs for self- 
definition through achievement and so are vulnerable to depres- 
sion when faced with failure. Extensive research has shown that the 

6 » DEPRESSION 
personality traits of dependence/sociotropy and self-criticism/autonomy 
are correlated with depression (Klein et al., 2009; Luyten et al., 2005). 
A number of lower-order traits have been found to correlate with 
depression. These include low self-esteem (Orth et al., 2008), perfec- 
tionism (Egan et al., 2011), shame and guilt (Kim et al., 2011). 
Cognitive biases 
Research from experimental psychopathology has consistently found 
that people with depression show a range of information-processing 
biases before, during and between depressive episodes at the levels of 
attention, memory and reasoning that render them vulnerable to depres- 
sion and maintain low mood during depressive episodes (Joormann, 
2009). People with depression are more likely to selectively attend to, 
and remember, negative information about the self and the world 
(Peckham et al., 2010; Phillips et al., 2010). Over-general autobio- 
graphical memory — the tendency to remember generalities but not spe- 
cific details of past events — is also a well established characteristic of 
depression, with greater over-general memory being predictive of more 
severe future depressive symptoms (Sumner et al., 2010). In depres- 
sion there is also a bias towards pessimistic interpretations of situ- 
ations, known as depressive cognitive style (Haeffel et al., 2008). 
Depressive cognitive style and its relationship to helplessness will be 
discussed below under cognitive and behavioural theories. 
Alongside depression-specific cognitive biases that confer vulnera- 
bility to depression, a number of general cognitive deficits arise as a 
result of depression. 
In a meta-analysis, McDermott and Ebmeier 
(2009) found significant correlations between depression severity and a 
range of cognitive functions including processing speed, episodic mem- 
ory and executive function, but not semantic or visuo-spatial memory. 
Coping strategies 
Certain coping strategies are associated with depression. In a meta- 
analysis, Aldao et al. (2010) found that depression was strongly associ- 
ated with the use of rumination as a coping strategy. With rumination, 
depressed people repeatedly recycle negative and depressive thoughts 
and have difficulty disengaging from them. Depression was also corre- 
lated, although less strongly, with the use of avoidance and suppres- 
sion as coping strategies. Aldao et al. (2010) found negative correlations 
between depression and a number of adaptive coping strategies includ- 
ing problem-solving, acceptance and reappraisal. 
Interpersonal styles 
Distinctive interpersonal styles are associated with the development 
and maintenance of depression. In line with Bowlby’s (1980) attachment 
theory, there is evidence that depression is associated with an insecure 
attachment style arising from child-rearing experiences that interfered 
with the development of attachment security, such as parental rejection, 
185 

186 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
child abuse and neglect, and loss of a parent through bereavement 
(Bakermans-Kranenburg & van lJzendoorn, 2009; Dozier et al., 2008). 
Depressed people tend to have higher levels of dependency and 
sociotropy, both of which are associated with strong needs for interper- 
sonal closeness, as noted above in the section on personality traits 
(Klein et al., 2009). 
Compared with non-depressed people, depressed people have 
social skills deficits (Joiner & Timmons, 2009). In both quality and con- 
tent their speech is more negative. They talk more slowly and quietly 
and with less modulation about more negative things, with a greater 
focus on the self and a reduced focus on the concerns of others. Their 
non-verbal behaviour is more negative. They engage in less eye con- 
tact, show fewer positive emotional facial expressions and more ani- 
mated 
negative 
facial 
expressions. 
They also engage 
in more 
eassurance 
seeking and negative feedback seeking than people with- 
out depression. Some of these skills deficits predate the onset of 
depressive episodes and remain after remission. 
The interpersonal styie of depressed people has a number of conse- 
quences (Joiner & Timmons, 2009). It leads to low mood and distress in 
others who interact with depressed people (known as the depression 
contagion effect). This in turn may lead others to avoid them, or act in 
critical, hostile and blaming ways towards them. This negative response 
involving criticism and hostility, or responding in an over-involved way 
towards a depressed family member, is referred to as expressed emo-_ 
tion. Depressed people who live in family situations characterized by 
high levels of expressed emotion, which is very stressful for the 
depressed person, have been found to relapse more rapidly than those 
whose families respond to them in a low-key way (Hooley, 2007). 
Psychoanalytic theories 
Of the many psychoanalytic theories of depression that have been 
developed, reference will be made here to Freud’s (1917) original posi- 
tion, Bibring’s (1965) ego-psychological model and Blatt’s (2004) object 
relations formulation. These theories have been selected because they 
are illustrative of psychodynamic explanations, and Blatt’s model has 
been singled out for attention because, unlike many psychodynamic 
theories, considerable effort has gone into empirically testing it. 
Freud's classical psychoanalytic theory 
In Freud’s (1917) psychoanalytic theory he proposed that depression 
arose from seif-directed anger which occurred in response to loss of a 
valued person or attribute. He argued that following a major loss in adult 
life such as bereavement (referred to as object loss), regression to the 
earliest stage of development —the oral stage — occurs. In this regressed 
state the person functions psychologically like an infant and so a 
distinction between the self and the lost object is not made. The lost 
object is introjected and experienced as part of the self. In depression, 

6 * DEPRESSION 
aggression at the introject of the lost object for bringing about a state of 
abandonment is experienced as self-directed anger or the self-criticism 
that characterizes depressed people. 
People whose primary caregivers either failed to meet their depend- 
ency needs during the oral phase and so neglected them, or were over- 
indulgent and so did not provide them with opportunities to learn 
self-sufficiency, are predisposed to developing depression according to 
this model. When they lose a loved one, they feel the loss more acutely 
than others and are more likely to regress, introject the lost object and 
experience retroflexive anger. Freud proposed that the loss of valued 
personal attributes (such as career status) as well as the loss of valued 
people could symbolize object loss. In Freud’s structural personality 
theory he distinguished between the unconscious id, which represented 
sexual and aggressive instincts; the superego, which represented the 
internalization of societal norms and standards; and the ego, which rep- 
resented conscious functions that attempted to reconcile and balance 
the instincts of the id, the standards set by the superego and the 
demands of day-to-day life. 
In depression, the superego is the psychological structure that directs 
anger at the ego. Because the superego, which is not fully developed in 
children, is the psychological structure necessary for directing anger at 
the ego, the traditional psychoanalytic position entails the view that 
children are unable to experience depression. This view is unsupported 
by available epidemiological data. However, Freud’s position was 
important in drawing attention to the significance of loss in depression, 
a hypotheses that has been supported by subsequent research 
(Goodman & Brand, 2009; Monroe et al., 2009). 
There is also good evidence that self-directed anger, in the form of 
guilt and shame, is strongly associated with depression (Kim et al., 
2011). Finally, Freud pointed out the importance of early life experi- 
ences in creating a vulnerability to depression, an idea that is central to 
modern psychodynamic, attachment and cognitive theories of depres- 
sion, and one that has considerable empirical support (Bakermans- 
Kranenburg & van lJzendoorn, 2009; Blatt, 2004; Goodman & Brand, 
2009; Joormann, 2009). 
Bibring’s ego-psychology theory 
Bibring (1965), a later psychodynamic ego psychologist, explained 
depression as the outcome of low self-esteem which resulted from per- 
ceiving a large discrepancy between the self as it is and the ideal self. 
Internalization of harsh, critical parental injunctions or perfectionistic 
parental injunctions during early childhood accounted for the develop- 
ment of a particularly unrealistic ego-ideal, which in psychoanalytic 
theory is an aspect of the superego. A substantial body of evidence 
supports the view that low self-esteem is an important correlate and in 
some instances a precursor of depression, and in some but not all 
cases this is associated with a history of critical or punitive parenting 
(Blatt, 2004; Orth et al., 2008). 
187 

188 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Blatt’s psychoanalytic theory of two types of depression 
It was noted in the section on personality traits that Blatt (2004) distin- 
guished between two types of depression associated with two distinct 
types of early parent-child relationships that engender vulnerability to 
depression when faced with two distinct types of stress in later life. A 
vulnerability to stresses involving loss of attachment relationships is 
central to the anaclitic or dependent type of depression, and this has its 
roots in early experiences of neglectful parenting or loss of parents. A 
vulnerability to stresses involving loss of autonomy and control is cen- 
tral to the introjective or self-critical perfectionistic type of depression, 
and this has its roots in early experiences of critical, punitive parenting. 
This distinction between depression associated with disruption of 
interpersonal relationships and that associated with threats to master- 
ing important achievement-oriented tasks has been made by many 
theorists, but has found its clearest articulation in Blatt’s work. Dependent 
and self-critical types of depression may be assessed with Blatt’s 
Depressive Experiences Questionnaire. A growing body of evidence 
using this instrument has shown that in adults, these subtypes of 
depression are associated with the recall of different childhood experi- 
ences, which have led to the development of different types of depres- 
sive object-relations that are typically activated in later life by different 
types of stressful life event, and lead to the use of different types of 
defence mechanism (Blatt, 2004). 
Children who experience either neglectful parenting or the loss of a 
parent develop internal working models for later life relationships in 
which expectations of abandonment are a central feature. For such indi- 
viduals, denial and repression are the most common defence mecha- 
nisms employed to deal with perceived threats. These individuals are 
particularly vulnerable in later life to stressful events that involve the 
disruption of relationships such as rejection or bereavement. When they 
develop a mood disorder it is characterized by a preoccupation with the 
themes of abandonment, helplessness and a desire to find someone 
who will provide love. On the other hand, children exposed to critical 
and punitive parenting develop internal working models for relation- 
ships in which the constructs of success and failure or blame and 
responsibility are central organizing features. Projection or reaction for- 
mation are the most common defences used by such individuals. In 
teenage years and adulthood they are particularly vulnerable to experi- 
ences of criticism, failure or loss of control. Their mood disorders are 
characterized by a sense of self-criticism, inferiority, failure, worthless- 
ness, anger and guilt. 
Psychodynamic treatment of depression 
Short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy and long-term psychoanalysis 
are the principal treatments that have been developed within the psycho- 
analytic tradition. In short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy, which 
may last for about 20 sessions, the focus is on the main depression- 

6 * DEPRESSION 
maintaining, self-defeating defences and the therapist plays quite an 
active role in facilitating therapeutic change. In long-term psychoanalysis 
the focus is less circumscribed, and the therapist takes a less active 
stance, which encourages the development to transference. 
Certain practices are common to most psychoanalytic approaches to 
depression (Blatt, 2004; McCullough-Vaillant, 
1997). Self-defeating 
defences repeatedly used by patients to regulate anxiety associated 
with unacceptable unconscious feelings are explored. (The triangle of 
conflict in Figure 5.5 in Chapter 5 guides the exploration of defences, 
anxiety and repressed impulses.) Blatt’s twin themes of dependency 
and self-criticism typically emerge as central to these repetitive self- 
defeating and depression-maintaining patterns. 
Therapists point out the parallels between the way patients repeat 
these patterns which were learned in early parent-child attachment 
relationships with important people in their current lives and with the 
therapist. (The triangle of person in Figure 5.5 in Chapter 5 guides the 
exploration of parallels between relationships with parents, the therapist 
and significant others.) This process is referred to as transference inter- 
pretation, because it involves interpreting how patterns learned in one 
context are transferred to other contexts. Through repeated transfer- 
ence interpretations patients learn to mentalize — that is, to understand 
the mental state of themselves and others — in these depression- 
maintaining repetitive patterns (Allen et al., 2008). The analytic relation- 
ship also provides patients with a forum within which they can repeatedly 
work through the intense depressive and angry feelings, and related 
anxieties that underpin their problematic defences and ways of manag- 
ing relationships, rooted in their early attachment experiences. 
Developing skill at mentalizing and working through previously unac- 
ceptable unconscious feelings frees patients to explore more adaptive 
ways of living their lives. This may involve developing more realistic 
standards for self-evaluation and/or more trusting ways of engaging in 
relationships. 
In a meta-analysis of 23 studies involving over 1300 cases, Driessen 
et al. (2010) found that short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy was 
an effective treatment for depression in an outpatient context. It is as 
effective at one-year follow-up as other therapeutic approaches, includ- 
ing CBT, which has the largest evidence base and is often popularized 
as the only effective psychotherapy for depression. In the UK, Lemma 
et al. (2011) have developed a manual for short-term psychodynamic 
psychotherapy for depression — dynamic interpersonal therapy (DIT) — 
which integrates practices used in previous trials that support the effec- 
tiveness of short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy. 
Cognitive and behavioural theories 
Of the many behavioural theories of depression, Lewinsohn’s (Lewinsohn 
& Gotlib, 1995) is particularly important because it has led to a consider- 
able amount of research on the effectiveness of behavioural treatments 
189 

199 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
for depression. Cognitive theories of depression developed by Beck et 
al. (1979) and Abramson et al. (1978) are among the most important and 
influential in the field. They have spawned an extraordinary amount of 
research on psychological processes in depression and the effective- 
ness of cognitive therapy. For these reasons, the theories of Lewinsohn, 
Beck and Abramson will be considered in this section. 
Lewinsohn’s behavioural theory 
In Lewinsohn’s behavioural theory, he proposes that depression is 
maintained by a lack of response-contingent positive reinforcement 
(RCPR) (Lewinsohn & Gotlib, 1995). This occurs because people with 
depression lack the social skills for eliciting rewarding interactions from 
others. In the 12-session, group-based Coping with Depression pro- 
gramme based on this model, clients learn social skills necessary for 
increasing the rate of response-contingent positive reinforcement in 
their lives. In addition they learn to arrange their lives so that they are 
more active, engage in more pleasant events and have more opportuni- 
ties for using social skills to obtain RCPR. The Coping with Depression 
programme also includes relaxation and coping skills training so that 
clients are better able to deal with negative emotions arising from 
stressful events. A meta-analysis of the programme supports its effec- 
tiveness with outpatient adolescents and adults (Cuijpers et al., 2009a). 
Beck's cognitive theory 
According to Beck’s cognitive theory, depression occurs when life 
events involving loss occur and reactivate negative cognitive schemas 
formed. early in childhood as a result of early loss experiences (Beck, 
2005, 2008; Beck et al., 1979). These negative schemas entail negative 
assumptions such as ‘| am only worthwhile if everybody likes me’. 
Negative assumptions may be assessed with the Dysfunctional Attitudes 
Scale (Weissman & Beck, 1978). When activated, depressive schemas 
underpin the occurrence of negative automatic thoughts, such as ‘No 
one here likes me’, and cognitive distortions, such as ‘all-or-nothing 
thinking’. When a depressed person experiences a drop in mood in a 
particular situation, according to Beck’s theory, this mood change is due 
not to the situation but to the negative automatic thought that the 
situation elicited. The low mood and related depressive behaviour that 
occur in such situations make it more likely that similar situations will 
recur. These episodes also reinforce depressive schemas. A diagram 
of Beck’s model is presented in Figure 6.2. 
Negative schemas have their roots in loss experiences in early 
childhood, including 
e 
loss of parents or family members through death, illness or separation 
e 
loss of positive parental care through parental rejection, criticism, 
severe punishment, over-protection, neglect or abuse 
e 
loss of personal health 

6 - DEPRESSION 
Early Life Stress 
Long separation from parent in early childhood 
lays foundation for schema 
SCHEMA 
Core Belief 
I’m worthless 
If people don’t like 
me, I’m worthless 
Sadness, withdrawal 
and lethargy confirm 
core belief 
Recent Life 
Stress 
Bereavement 
activates 
latent schema 
(A) Activating 
event 
Sadness 
Behavioural 
(B) Automatic 
(C) Consequences 
thought 
Withdrawal 
He didn’t say 
I’m no good, 
hello 
he doesn’t 
Physiological 
like me 
Lethargy 
Sadness, withdrawal and lethargy set up 
more activating events 
Figure 6.2 Cognitive-behavioural model of depression 
e 
loss of positive peer relationships through bullying or exclusion from 
peer groups 
e 
the expectation of loss, for example where a parent was expected to 
die of chronic illness. 
According to Beck, two negative schemas that contain latent attitudes 
about the self, the world and the future are of particular importance in 
depression. The first relates to interpersonal relationships and the 
second to personal achievement. He referred to these as sociotropy 
and autonomy, as mentioned earlier in the section on personality traits. 
Individuals who have negative self-schemas where sociotropy is the 
central organizing theme define themselves negatively if they perceive 
themselves to be failing to maintain positive relationships. Thus their 
core assumption about the self may be ‘If | am not liked by everybody, 
then | am worthless’. Individuals who have negative self-schemas 
where autonomy is the central organizing theme define themselves 
191 

192 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
negatively if they perceive themselves to be failing in achieving work- 
related goals. Thus their core assumption about the self may be ‘If | am 
not a success and in control, then | am worthless’. 
When faced with life stresses, individuals vulnerable to depression 
because of early loss experience and the related development of nega- 
tive self-schemas become prone to interpreting ambiguous situations in 
negative, mood-depressing ways. The various logical errors that they 
make are referred to as cognitive distortions and include the following. 
e 
All-or-nothing thinking (or dichotomous thinking). Thinking in extreme 
categorical terms. For example, ‘Either I’m a success or a failure’. 
e 
Mental filter (or selective abstraction). Filtering out positive aspects 
of the situation, selectively focusing on the negative aspects of a 
situation, and drawing conclusions from these. For example, ‘I made 
a mistake earlier today so everything | did today was wrong’. 
e 
Over-generalization. Generalizing from one instance to all possible 
instances. For example, ‘I failed that stats exam so I'll never be any 
good at stats’. 
e 
Magnification or minimization. Exaggerating or under-emphasizing 
the significance of events. For example, ‘He said she didn’t like me 
so that must mean she hates me’, or ‘He said he likes me, but he 
probably doesn’t mean it’. 
e 
Personalization. Attributing negative feeling of others to the self. For 
example, ‘He looked really angry when he walked into the room, so 
| must have done something wrong’. 
e 
Emotional reasoning. Taking feelings as facts. For example, ‘I feel 
like the future is black so the future is hopeless’. 
e 
Discounting the positives. Believing that positive personal charac- 
teristics or achievements do not count in overall self-evaluation. For 
example. ‘I passed that exam, but that was just good luck, I’m really 
no good at stats’. 
e 
Mind reading. Assuming that others are reacting negatively to you 
without having evidence for this. For example, ‘Her silence means 
that she doesn't like me’. 
e 
Fortune telling. Predicting that things will turn out badly without hav- 
ing evidence to support this. For example, ‘| will probably not enjoy 
the party’. 
e 
Catastrophizing. Erroneously predicting extreme distress on the 
basis of limited evidence. For example, ‘My heart is racing. | must be 
going to have a heart attack’. 
e 
Labelling. \dentifying completely with situational shortcomings. For 
example, ‘I didn’t just make a mistake, | proved that I’m a complete 
fool’. 
e 
‘Should’ and ‘must’ statements. Making absolute statements about 
how the self or others ought to be. For example, ‘Il should always be 
perfect and he should be loving’. 
Depressed individuals interpret situations in terms of their negative 
cognitive schemas and so their automatic thoughts are characterized 
by these depressive cognitive distortions. Automatic thoughts are self- 

6 
» DEPRESSION 
statements that occur without apparent volition when an individual 
attempts to interpret a situation so as to respond to it in a coherent way. 
In cognitive therapy, clients learn to monitor situations where nega- 
tive mood changes occur; to identify negative automatic thoughts that 
lead to these decreases in mood; to generate alternative positive inter- 
pretations of situations in which negative mood changes occur; and 
to evaluate the validity of these positive and negative views of mood- 
altering situations. This may involve reflecting on available evidence, or 
generating evidence by carrying out behavioural tasks and checking the 
impact of these. For example, attempting to complete successfully a 
task where failure is expected. 
Meta-analyses have shown that with adults, cognitive therapy is as 
effective as antidepressant medication in alleviating depressive symp- 
toms, and more effective in relapse prevention (Butler et al., 2006; 
Hollon et al., 2006), and that CBT is effective in treating depressed ado- 
lescents (Harrington, 1998; Maag et al., 2009). Meta-analyses also 
show that CBT self-help programmes involving either bibliotherapy or 
computer-based interventions are effective for treating mild to moderate 
depression (Andrews et al., 2010; Gregory et al., 2004). 
Beck (2008) has proposed a neurobiological explanation for the 
effectiveness of CBT. He argues that the generation of negative auto- 
matic thoughts is subserved by overactivity in the limbic system, par- 
ticularly the amygdala, and underactivity of the prefrontal cortex. This 
pattern of underactivity and overactivity of these brain regions arises 
from both genetic factors and loss experiences in early life. Cognitive 
therapy alleviates depression by facilitating an increase in activity in the 
prefrontal cortex (by encouraging patients to reappraise situations in 
which they have negative mood changes) which in turn downregulates 
the overactive limbic system. 
Learned helplessness theory 
According to learned helpless theory, depression arises when a person 
repeatedly fails to control the occurrence of aversive stimuli or has 
repeated experiences of failure at valued tasks and adopts a cognitive 
style that involves making internal, global, stable attributions for these 
failures 
and 
external, 
specific, 
unstable 
attributions 
for success 
(Abramson et al., 1978). For example, saying ‘I failed an exam because 
I've always been useless at school’ is an internal, global, stable attribu- 
tion for failure. On the other hand, saying ‘I failed the exam because the 
questions were unexpected and | was tired that day’ involves attributing 
failure to partially external, specific and unstable factors. 
Attributional style is assessed with the Attributional Style Ques- 
tionnaire (Peterson & Villanova, 
1988). The Penn Resiliency Programme, 
in which young people are trained in learned optimism, is based on the 
learned helplessness model (Gillham et al., 2008). In this programme, 
participants learn to attribute success to internal, global, stable factors, 
and failure to specific, unstable factors that may be changed by using 
coping and problem-solving skills that are included in the programme 
193 

194 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
curriculum. The Penn Resiliency Programme rests on the assumption 
that if people can develop an optimistic cognitive style, they will be less 
vulnerable to depression. A meta-analysis has confirmed the effective- 
ness of this programme in preventing depression in at-risk young 
people (Brunwasser et al., 2009). 
Family systems theory 
Family systems theories of depression highlight the importance of 
family-based stress, support, belief systems and interaction patterns in 
the aetiology and maintenance of depression. What follows is one 
example of such a theory that | have elaborated in greater detail 
elsewhere (Carr, 2006b): Both genetic and environmental factors con- 
tribute to the development of depressive conditions. The amount of 
stress required to precipitate the onset of an episode of depression is 
proportional to the genetic vulnerability. That is, little stress may pre- 
cipitate the onset of an episode in individuals who are genetically vul- 
nerable to the condition, whereas a great deal of stress may be 
necessary to precipitate the disorder in individuals without a family his- 
tory of depression. 
A variety of family factors may predispose people to developing 
depression. Both loss experiences and exposure to stresses in early life 
that prevent needs for safety and security from being met may render 
individuals vulnerable to developing depression in adolescence and 
adulthood. Loss experiences include death of a parent, unsupported 
lengthy separations from parents, and parental psychological absence 
for extended periods, for example through parental depression. Stresses 
that prevent needs for safety and security from being met include child 
abuse,. neglect, multiplacement experiences, parental conflict and 
violence, family disorganization and long-term exposure to a pessimistic 
family culture. 
Episodes of major depression may be precipitated by stressful family 
life-cycle transitions, such as the birth of children, bereavements or 
divorce. Loss experiences associated with the disruption of significant 
relationships or failure to achieve valued goals may precipitate episodes 
of depression. For example, family relationships may be disrupted 
through conflict and criticism, threats of separation, violence, infidelity 
and violations of trust. Failure to achieve valued goals include exam 
failure, work-related performance difficulties, unemployment, and seri- 
ous illnesses or injury. 
Depression may be maintained by particular types of personal and 
family belief systems, notably those characterized by a preoccupation 
with past losses, a negative view of the self as valueless and powerless, 
and pessimism and hopelessness about the future. Such depressive 
belief systems may lead to a reduction in activities and an avoidance of 
participation in relationships that might disprove these depressive 
beliefs or lead to a sense of pleasure and optimism. 
Depression may be maintained by particular patterns of family inter- 
action. Where a teenager becomes depressed, parents may take 

6 » DEPRESSION 
conflicting positions on how best to respond, with one parent treating 
the adolescent as an ill child and the other treating the young person as 
a disobedient teenager, and the.parents engaging in repetitive conflicts 
about how best to deal with their adolescent. This triangulation process 
prevents parents from jointly supporting their teenager’s recovery. 
Where an adult becomes depressed and behaves in increasingly help- 
less ways, their partner may respond by increasingly engaging in care- 
taking, so that the entire relationship becomes dominated by interactions 
involving helplessness and caregiving. This process disrupts the 
couple’s capacity to meet each other’s needs for desired levels of 
intimacy and autonomy. 
This family systems conceptualization of depression is supported by 
evidence on the role of genetic factors and early life stress in predisposing 
people to developing depression; recent life stress in precipitating the 
onset of depressive episodes; and both pessimistic belief systems and 
negative patterns of family interaction in maintaining depression (Beach 
et al., 2009; Garber, 2010; Hammen et al., 2010; Joiner & Coyne, 1999; 
Kaslow et al., 2009). 
Effective systemic interventions for depression help family members 
understand how episodes of depression develop and the role of family 
belief systems and patterns of family interaction in maintaining depres- 
sion. They also empower family members to develop more adaptive 
belief systems and supportive interaction patterns. Systemic interven- 
tions include family therapy, where therapists conduct sessions with 
whole families; couples therapy, where marital or cohabiting partners 
attend therapy sessions together; and individual interpersonal therapy, 
where interpersonal issues are the central focus of therapy conducted 
with depressed individuals. Evidence from controlled trials and meta- 
analyses support the effectiveness of these various approaches to sys- 
temic therapy (Beach et al., 2009; Carr, 2009a, 2009b; Kaslow et al., 
2009). 
An integrative approach 
In clinical practice an integrative approach to conceptualizing depression 
is useful. Distinctions may be made between predisposing, precipitating, 
maintaining and protective factors. 
Insights and related evidence 
associated with the various theories reviewed above may be integrated 
into the following formulation framework. 
A range of personal, family and community-based factors may pre- 
dispose people to developing depression. Personal factors include a 
genetic vulnerability to depression and a depressive temperament; loss 
and failure experiences and related depressive cognitive schemas, low 
self-esteem and a depressive cognitive style; attachment insecurity, a 
depressive interpersonal style and social skills deficits; and personality 
traits, particularly perfectionism, neuroticism, introversion and low con- 
scientiousness. Family factors that predispose to depression include 
separations and bereavements, child abuse, excessive parental criti- 
cism, family adversity, and growing up in a family where parents suffer 
195 

196 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
from depression or other psychopathology. With respect to the commu- 
nity and the wider social context, socio-economic status and social and 
educational disadvantage are important predisposing factors for depres- 
sion. All of these personal, family and community-based predisposing 
factors sensitize individuals to loss. 
The onset of depression may be precipitated by stressful life events, 
particularly those that involve loss or failure. Once an episode of depres- 
sion occurs it may be maintained by a range of processes including a 
depressive cognitive style; self-defeating behaviour and a lifestyle with 
few opportunities for pleasant events or positive reinforcement; rumina- 
tive and avoidant coping; and problematic relationships with family, 
friends and colleagues. Protective factors in cases of depression include 
personal attributes and*social relationships that support developing 
a more active and positive lifestyle and challenging pessimistic belief 
systems. 
Assessment 
Through careful clinical interviewing of individuals and members of their 
families, the symptoms of depression and relevant history are obtained. 
A diagnosis is given in accordance with the criteria outlined in ICD-10 
and DSM-IV-TR, and a formulation explaining the symptoms entailed 
by the diagnosis may be given in which the relevant predisposing, 
precipitating, maintaining and protective factors are outlined. A general 
clinical formulation model is given in Figure 6.3. 
Validated structured interviews for diagnosing depression that may 
be used in clinical practice include the mood disorders module of the 
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis | Disorders (SCID, First et 
al., 1996) for adults and the depression module of the Development and 
Well-Being Assessment (DAWBA, Goodman et al., 2000) for children. 
Depressive symptom severity may be rated with the Hamilton Rating 
Scale (HRS, Hamilton, 1967) and the Children’s Depression Rating 
Scale (CDRS, Polanski & Mokros, 1999). Self-reported symptom 
severity may be assessed with the Beck Depression Inventory II 
(BDI-li, Beck et al., 1996) and the depression scale of the Beck Youth 
Inventories II (BYI-Il, Steer et al., 2005). A range of standardized self- 
report instruments and rating scales may be used to assess personal 
characteristics such as cognitive style, and environmental factors such 
as stressful life events in adults and children (Dougherty et al., 2008; 
Persons & Fresco, 2008). During the process of assessment and 
treatment patients and family members may be invited to keep daily 
records of fluctuations in mood, related thoughts and behaviour, and 
the circumstances preceding and following these fluctuations. 
Suicide risk 
A central concern when evaluating depression is the assessment of 
suicide risk (Hawton & Fortune, 2008; Hawton & Taylor, 2009). This is 
because depression is one of the most important risk factors for suicide. 

6 
* DEPRESSION 
197 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Any developmental factors that sensitize a person to loss of significant 
relationships or esteem 
Personal factors — Genetic vulnerability to depression, loss and failure experiences, 
depressive temperament, neuroticism, introversion, low conscientiousness, 
depressive cognitive schemas & style, low self-esteem, perfectionism, 
attachment insecurity, social skills deficits, depressive interpersonal style 
Family factors — Separations and bereavements, child abuse, excessive criticism, 
family adversity, parental depression or psychopathology 
Community factors — Low SES, social & educational disadvantage 
MAINTAINING FACTORS 
PROTECTIVE FACTORS 
Depressive cognitive 
PRECIPITATING 
Good premorbid 
style, self-defeating 
FACTORS 
adjustment, personal 
behaviour, ruminative & 
strengths & 
: 
: 
Stresses 
involvi 
; 
avoidant coping 
apelin 9 
achievements 
and failure 
Lack of family support 
Family support 
Lack of school or 
School or workplace 
workplace support 
support 
Lack of peer support 
| 
Depression 
Peer-group support 
Treatment refusal, non- 
Engagement in 
adherence or failure 
treatment 
Figure 6.3 General formulation model for depression 
In conducting this type of risk assessment, interviews are conducted 
with the depressed person and members of their family to develop an 
understanding of their current circumstances, and the extent to which 
the risk factors listed in Table 6.3 are present. 
A key feature of suicide risk assessment is determining whether the 
person is actively planning to end their life (referred to as suicidal inten- 
tion) or alternatively is experiencing thoughts of their own death, without 
planning how to bring this about (referred to as suicidal ideation). 
Suicidal intention is the most important risk factor for suicide and may 
be assessed with the Beck Scale for Suicide Ideation (Beck & Steer, 
1991). Where it is judged that a person is at risk of suicide, international 
best practice guidelines advise that arrangements be made for constant 
supervision of the person until their level of risk decreases (American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 2001; American Psy- 
chiatric Association, 2003; NICE, 2004b). This supervision may be pro- 
vided by the family in the home or, where that is not possible, in a 
hospital. If a person judged to be at high risk of suicide refuses to be 
admitted to hospital (and that is the only viable option for ongoing super- 
vision), then they may be involuntarily admitted to hospital. Legislation 
and practical procedures for involuntary hospital admission vary from 

198 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN 
TABLE 6.3 
INTRODUCTION 
Risk and protective factors for suicide 
Risk factors 
e Suicidal intention 
e Advanced planning 
e Precautions against discovery 
e Lethal method 
e Absence of help-seeking 
e A final act 
Availability of lethal methods 
e Loss of parents or partner by death, 
separation or illness 
e Conflict with parents or partner 
e Involvement in judicial system 
e Severe personal illness 
e Major exam failure 
e Unwanted pregnancy 
e Imitation of other suicides 
Suicide attempted to serve the function of: 
e escaping an unbearable psychological 
state or situation 
gaining revenge by inducing guilt 
inflicting self-punishment 
gaining care and attention 
sacrificing the self for a greater good 
High level of hopelessness 
High level of perfectionism 
High level of impulsivity 
High levels of hostility and aggression 
Inflexible coping style 
Depression 
Alcohol and drug abuse 
Conduct disorder 
Antisocial personality disorder 
Borderline personality disorder 
Epilepsy 
Chronic painful illness 
Multiple comorbid chronic disorders 
eeeeeeeee® 
Previous suicide attempts 
Loss of a parent in early life 
Previous psychiatric treatment 
Involvement in the juvenile justice 
system 
Domain 
Suicidal 
intention and 
ideation 
Method 
lethality 
Precipitating 
factors 
Motivation 
Personality- 
based factors 
Disorder- 
related 
factors 
Historical 
factors 
Protective factors 
e Suicidal ideation (not intention) 
e Acceptance by adolescent of no-suicide 
contract 
e Acceptance by parents and carers of 
suicide monitoring contract 
Absence of lethal methods 
e Resolution of interpersonal conflict with 
’ 
parents or partner that precipitated 
attempted suicide 
e Acceptance and mourning of losses that 
precipitated attempted suicide 
e Physical and psychological distancing 
from peers or others who precipitated 
imitative attemptive suicide 
Capacity to develop non-destructive 
coping styles or engage in treatment to be 
better able to: 
e regulate difficult psychological states 
modify painful situations 
express anger assertively 
resolve conflicts productively 
mourn losses 
manage perfectionistic expectations 
solicit care and attention from others 
cope with family disorganization 
Low level of hopelessness 
Low level of perfectionism 
Low level of impulsivity 
Low levels of hostility and aggression 
Flexible coping style 
Absence of psychological disorders 
Absence of physical disorders 
Absence of multiple comorbid chronic 
disorders 
Capacity to form therapeutic alliance 
and engage in treatment for 
psychological and physical disorders 
¢ No history of previous suicide attempts 
¢ No history of loss of a parent in early life 
¢ No history of previous psychiatric 
treatment 
No history of involvement in the juvenile 
justice system 

6 * DEPRESSION 
199 
Weak religious commitment 
Risk factors 
Domain 
Protective factors 
° Family history of suicide attempts 
Family factors» No family history of suicide attempts 
e Family history of depression 
¢ No family history of depression 
e Family history of drug and alcohol abuse 
e No family history of drug and alcohol 
e Family history of assaultive behaviour 
abuse 
e Disorganized unsupportive family 
e No family history of assaultive behaviour 
e Family deny seriousness of suicide 
e Well-organized supportive family 
attempts 
e Family has low stress 
¢ Family has high stress and crowding 
e Family has high social support 
e Family has low social support and is 
socially isolated 
e Male 
Demographic 
 e Female 
e Social class 5 
factors 
e Social class 2, 3 or 4 
e White (not black) in US 
e Black (not white) in US 
e 
e Early summer 
e Strong religious commitment 
————————————— 
= 
eee 
country to country. In the UK and Ireland such admissions are usually 
made by a psychiatrist. 
If you have a friend who you think may be at risk of suicide, the most 
useful thing you can do is to help them contact their family doctor (or 
staff at their university health centre) to talk about the things that are 
bothering them. 
Treatment 
Research on the psychological treatment of depression has shown that 
relatively brief structured interventions of up to 20 sessions over 6 
months are effective in helping about two-thirds of adolescents and 
adults recover from a depressive episode (Carr, 2009a). Comparative 
trials and meta-analyses have shown that CBT, psychodynamic and 
systemic interventions are equally effective, although both the drop-out 
rate and the evidence base for CBT are larger (Cuijpers et al., 2008). 
The development of a strong therapeutic alliance and the adoption of 
an approach that modifies depression-maintaining factors underpin 
effective psychotherapy for depression (Castonguay et al., 2006; Follette 
& Greenberg, 2006). There is evidence from meta-analyses that guided 
self-help with books, or computer-based instruction on CBT approaches 
to mood management and simple interventions that lead to increased 
activity and physical exercise levels, often referred to as behavioural 
activation, can effectively reduce depressive symptoms, especially in 
people with mild to moderate depression (Andrews et al., 2010; Daley et 
al., 2009; Gregory et al., 2004; Mazzucchelli et al., 2009). 
In the short term, psychotherapy and antidepressant medication are 
equally effective in patients with moderate depression, but in the Jong 
term relapse rates are lower for psychotherapy and multimodal pro- 
grammes that include psychotherapy (Vittengl et al., 2007). This is prob- 
ably because through psychotherapy people learn relapse prevention 
skills. Multimodal programmes, which may be offered by multidisciplinary 

200 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
teams including clinical psychologists and physicians, that combine psy- 
chotherapy and medication are more effective than either intervention 
alone (Cuijpers et al., 2009b). 
Mindfulness-based 
cognitive therapy, which combines cognitive 
behavioural methods with mindfulness meditation, is particularly effec- 
tive at delaying relapse in people with a history of chronically relapsing 
depression (Baer, 2003). This is probably because through mindfulness 
training people learn to ‘let go’ of negative thoughts and avoid ruminat- 
ing about them. For patients with seasonal affective disorder, light 
therapy — where the day is artificially lengthened by placing bright lights 
in the home —has been shown in a meta-analysis to be effective (Golden 
et al., 2005). For patients who do not wish to use conventional anti- 
depressants there is some evidence for the effectiveness of St John’s 
wort (Hypericum), although meta-analytic results are inconclusive 
(Linde et al., 2005). 
About a third of people with moderate to severe depression do not 
respond to routine psychological intervention or medication. Evidence 
for the effectiveness of combining various pharmacological interventions 
to treat these patients is mixed, although this practice is widespread 
(Zajecka & Goldstein, 2009). For severe treatment-resistant depression, 
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is widely used, although there is 
controversy (discussed below) about this because of its negative impact 
on memory and the relatively brief duration 
of its effectiveness 
(Carpenter et al., 2009; Read & Bentall, 2010). 
Current best practice is to take a stepped-care approach to the treat- 
ment of depression. For people with mild to moderate depression, a 
guided self-help approach may initially be taken. Brief structured CBT, 
psychodynamic or systemic psychological treatment may be offered to 
cases that do not respond to self-help. This may be offered alone or in 
combination with antidepressants, depending on patient preferences. 
Fluoxetine may be effective for depression in children and adolescents, 
although it is less effective in young people than in adults (Bridge et al., 
2007). Because SSRIs may increase suicide risk, they should be used 
very cautiously with young people, and only with frequent clinical moni- 
toring in cases where there is no response to psychological intervention 
(Rudd et al., 2009). For chronic relapsing depression, mindfulness- 
based CBT may be offered to delay or prevent relapse. For severe 
depression, hospitalization may be necessary. 
This overall approach to the management of depression in young 
people and adults is consistent with international best practice guide- 
lines (American Academy of Child and Adolescent,Psychiatry, 2007d; 
American Psychiatric Association, 2010; NICE, 2005c, 2009a). 
Controversies 
There are many controversies in the scientific study and clinical treat- 
ment of mood disorders. Three that deserve mention here concern the 
use of antidepressants and ECT as well as explanations given for the 
high rate of depression in women compared with men. 

6 
* DEPRESSION 
201 
Antidepressants 
Antidepressant medication, while widely used, is controversial because 
of its questionable efficacy and side-effects. Initial enthusiasm for SSRIs 
as a panacea for depression was tempered by results of Turner et al.’s 
(2008) meta-analysis, which showed that the high level of effectiveness 
of antidepressants reported in academic journals was largely the result 
of journals publishing only trials with positive results and rejecting 
studies in which antidepressants were shown to be no more effective 
than placebos. Subsequent meta-analyses showed that compared with 
placebos, the effects of TCAs and SSRIs were negligible for mild to 
moderate depression; however, for severe depression their effects are 
substantial (e.g., Fournier et al., 2010). 
Antidepressants may have negative side-effects, some of which are 
troublesome while others are risky or dangerous. Loss of sexual desire 
and impotence, weight gain, nausea, sedation or activation, and dizzi- 
ness are some of the more troublesome, with different types of anti- 
depressant having different side-effect profiles (Gitlin, 2009). For de- 
pressed pregnant women, antidepressant treatment may create health 
risks for their offspring (Udechuku et al., 2010). MAOIs are particularly 
dangerous antidepressants, and are used only with conscientious 
patients who can follow strict dietary instructions, because patients on 
MAOIs develop high blood pressure and suffer hypertensive crises if 
they do not exclude foods that contain thyramine (such as cheese) from 
their diets. Antidepressants may increase suicide risk in patients under 
25 years, although results of meta-analyses suggest that the benefits 
may outweigh the risks (Bridge et al., 2007). 
Electroconvulsive therapy 
ECT is controversial because of the brevity of its antidepressant effects 
and its negative side-effects on memory functioning. In ECT seizures 
are induced by briefly passing an electric current through the brain via 
electrodes applied to the scalp. ECT is conducted under general anaes- 
thetic, and muscle relaxants are used to prevent body spasms. A typical 
course of ECT involves 6—12 twice-weekly sessions. Low-dose and 
brief-pulse ECT applied to the non-dominant cerebral hemisphere is 
sometimes used as an alternative to high-dose bilateral administration 
to reduce the negative effect of ECT on memory and other cognitive 
functions. 
In a large meta-analysis, Carney et al. (2003) found that ECT was 
more effective than a placebo (simulated ECT) and antidepressants. 
They also found that the most effective form was bilateral and high dose 
rather than unilateral and low dose. However, it was precisely this type 
of ECT that they found led to greatest memory loss. ECT led to short- 
term disorientation and temporary loss of memory for recent events 
(anterograde amnesia) and also for distant autobiographical memories 
(retrograde amnesia). 
A more recent meta-analysis concluded that ECT’s effects on 
cognitive function are not all negative. Semkovska and McLoughlin 

202 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
(2010) found that after 15 days, processing speed, working memory, 
anterograde memory, and some aspects of executive function improved 
beyond baseline levels. The current ‘mainstream’ position reflected in 
international best practice guidelines for psychiatrists is that ECT is the 
treatment of choice for severe depression that does not respond to 
antidepressants and psychotherapy (American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 2004; American Psychiatric Association, 2001a; 
NICE, 2009a; Royal College of Psychiatrists; 2005). In deciding on the 
frequency, dosage, and unilateral or bilateral administration, the benefits 
in terms of effectiveness must be balanced against the costs in terms of 
memory impairment. 
In contrast to this ‘mainstream’ position, Read and Bentall (2010) 
propose that ECT should never be used. They conducted a thorough 
review of studies on the effectiveness of ECT and its side-effects. They 
found that ECT is effective only for a brief duration, and then only for 
some patients when ratings of effectiveness are made by psychiatrists 
who have a vested interest in showing that ECT is effective. They also 
found that ECT leads to retrograde and anterograde amnesia and a 
slight but significant increased risk of death. In view of this cost-benefit 
analysis of ECT, they concluded that its use cannot be scientifically 
justified. In a qualitative study of patients’ negative experiences of ECT, 
Johnstone (1999) concluded that for some patients ECT leads to fear, 
shame and humiliation and reinforces experiences of worthlessness 
and helplessness associated with depression. 
Gender and depression 
The finding that twice as many women as men are diagnosed with 
depression, whereas in childhood the prevalence of depression is the 
same for boys and girls, has led to a variety of conflicting explanations 
(Nolen-Hoeksema & Hilt, 2009b). One view is that the higher rate of 
depression in women arises from the societal inequalities that favour 
men over women and the oppressive sex-roles into which women fall 
when they enter long-term heterosexual relationships. A second view is 
that with the transition to adolescence, females undergo biological 
changes that render them vulnerable to depression. A third view is that 
women are more likely than men to acknowledge and report personal 
distress and so receive a diagnosis of depression. 
This controversy about the reasons for high rates of depression in 
women has led to the development of complex explanations, and a 
wealth of empirical data, which show that multiple personal and 
contextual predisposing, precipitating and maintaining factors account 
for the gender difference in depression (Nolen-Hoeksema & Hilt, 2009b; 
Shibley-Hyde et al., 2008). Results of twin studies show that different 
genetic factors render teenage girls vulnerable to depression compared 
with boys. Also, girls have higher levels of the personality trait — 
neuroticism — that is a vulnerability factor for depression. 
Both biological and environmental factors precipitate the onset of 
depression in females, and the nature and patterning of these is different 

6 * DEPRESSION 
203 
for females compared with males. With regard to biological precipitating 
factors, uniquely female hormonal changes associated with puberty, 
the menstrual cycle, the postpartum period and the menopause trigger 
depression in genetically vulnerable women, mainly by affecting oestro- 
gens that in turn affect the serotonin neurotransmitter system which 
subserves mood regulation. With regard to environmental precipitating 
factors, females experience more independent stressful life events than 
males and elicit more stressful life events (such as interpersonal rejec- 
tion) from others. With regard to maintaining factors, females ruminate 
more than males and interpret stressful events in a more pessimistic 
way than males. Also, female social roles within society are more 
oppressive than male roles and this may maintain depression. Collec- 
tively, the aggregation of these factors may partly explain the higher 
rates of depression in women. 
Summary 
Major depressive disorder is arecurrent condition, characterized 
by episodes of low mood and loss of interest in pleasurable 
activities along with other symptoms such as poor concentration, 
fatigue, pessimism, suicidal thoughts and sleep and appetite 
disturbance. Depressive episodes can vary in severity from 
mild to severe, and melancholic or psychotic symptoms may 
be present in severe cases. 
The clinical features of depression include selective attention 
to negative features of the environment, a pessimistic cognitive 
style, low mood, somatic symptoms, psychomotor retardation 
or agitation and a deterioration in relationships. Loss is often 
the core theme linking these clinical features: loss of an 
important relationship, loss of some valued attribute such as 
health, or loss of status, for example through unemployment. 
Major depression is distinguished from bipolar disorder, where 
there are also episodes of elation, and from dysthymia, which 
is a milder, non-episodic mood disorder. 
Depression is a relatively common disorder with a lifetime 
prevalence of about 17%. More adults than children and more 
women than men suffer from depression. It follows a chronic 
relapsing course, with up to 80% of people having recurring 
episodes. About 3.4% of people with a major depressive disor- 
der commit suicide. 
Theoretical explanations for depression and related treat- 
ments have been developed within biological, psychoanalytic, , 
cognitive-behavioural and family systems traditions. Biological 
theories of depression point to the role of genetic factors in 
rendering people vulnerable to the development of mood 

204 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
disorders, and to the role of structural and functional brain 
abnormalities; dsysregulation of neurotransmitter, neuroendo- 
crine and immune systems; and sleep architecture and circa- 
dian rhythm abnormalities 
in the aetiology of depression. 
Psychoanalytic theories of depression, from Freud’s initial for- 
mulation to the present time, point to the role of loss of valued 
relationships, self-directed anger, self-criticism, and low self- 
esteem in the aetiology of depression. Behavioural theories 
propose that a lack of response-contingent positive reinforce- 
ment causes depression. Cognitive theories propose that 
depression arises when stressful life events reactivate depres- 
sive schemas that developed. as a result of early loss experi- 
ences. Systemic theories point to the role of family factors in the 
aetiology and maintenance of depression. 
Research on stress shows that depression develops follow- 
ing exposure to stress and that people with certain personal 
attributes inadvertently generate excessive stress, which in 
turn leads to depression. Temperamental characteristics such 
as harm avoidance, high negative emotionality and low posi- 
tive emotionality; personality traits such as high neuroticism, 
low extraversion and low conscientiousness; a pessimistic 
cognitive style; the use of rumination, avoidance and suppres- 
sion as coping strategies; and an interpersonal style character- 
ized by limited social skills, attachment insecurity, reassurance 
seeking and negative feedback seeking all play a role in the 
aetiology of depression. 
Assessment of depression should address depressive symp- 
toms; relevant predisposing, precipitating and maintaining fac- 
tors; and suicide risk. A stepped-care approach to treatment is 
usually taken, Patients who do not respond to guided self-help 
may be offered multimodal programmes by multidisciplinary 
teams which include antidepressant and psychological therapy. 
Evidence-based 
psychodynamic, 
cognitive-behavioural 
and 
system approaches are equally effective. There are controver- 
sies about the effectiveness of antidepressants, the use of ECT 
for severe depression, and the reasons for the large gender dif- 
ferences in depression. 
Questions 
e 
ls depression the same as feeling sad? 
What are the main clinical features of depression? 
e Whatare the differences between major depressive disorder, bipolar 
disorder, dysthymia and cyclothymia? 
e 
How prevalent is depression in men and women? 

6 * DEPRESSION 
What is your view on the controversy about explanations for gender 
differences in depression? 
What are the risk factors for. depression? 
What are the risk factors for suicide? 
What are the main biological and psychological theories of depres- 
sion and the main research findings relevant to these theories? 
What are the main evidence-based approaches to assessment and 
treatment of depression? 
_ What should you do if you think your friend is suicidal? 
Is the use of antidepressants justified in all cases of depression? 
What are the arguments for and against the use of electroconvulsive 
therapy for treatment-resistant depression? 
205 
FURTHER READING 
Professional 
Gotlib, H. & Hammen, C. (2009). Handbook of depression (second edi- 
tion). New York: Guilford Press. 
Nolen-Hoeksema, S. & Hilt, L. M. (2009). Handbook of depression in 
adolescents. New York: Routledge. 
Self-help 
Burns, D. (1999). Feeling good: The new mood therapy. New York: 
Avon. 
Burns, D. (1999). The feeling good handbook (revised edition). New 
York: Plume. 
Gilbert, P. (2000). Overcoming depression: A self-help guide using cog- 
nitive behavioural techniques (revised edition). London: Robinson. 
Greenberger, D. & Padesky, C. (1995). Mind over mood: Changing how 
you feel by changing the way you think. New York: Guilford. 
Williams, M., Teasdale, J., Segal, Z. & Kabat-Zinn, J. (2007). The mind- 
ful way through depression: Freeing yourself from chronic unhappiness. 
New York: Guilford. 
WEBSITES 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry’s practice param- 
eters for the treatment of depression, bipolar disorder and suicidal behav- 
iour in young people: 
www.aacap.org/cs/root/member_information/practice_information/ 
practice_parameters/practice_parameters 
American 
Psychiatric Association’s 
practice guidelines for treating 
depression and bipolar disorder: 
http://psychiatryonline.org/guidelines.aspx 
Beating the Blues computer-based CBT programme for depression: 
www.beatingtheblues.co.uk 
Depression Alliance (UK): 
www.depressionalliance.org 

206 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
e 
Depression and Bipolar Support Alliance (USA): 
www.dbsalliance.org 
e 
NICE. National Institute for Clinical Excellence guidelines for treating 
depression and bipolar disorder: 
http://guidance.nice.org. uk/topic/mentalhealthbehavioural 

Schizophrenia 
Learning objectives 
After studying this chapter you will be able to: 
e give an account of the main clinical features of 
schizophrenia and distinguish it from the popular 
conception of a ‘split personality’ 
e distinguish between paranoid, hebephrenic, 
catatonic and undifferentiated schizophrenia in 
terms of their clinical features 
e summarize the epidemiology of schizophrenia 
e 
list the risk factors for schizophrenia 
e outline the main biological and diathesis—stress 
theories of schizophrenia 
e name the main evidence-based approaches to 
assessment and treatment of schizophrenia 
e describe some of the controversial issues concerning 
schizophrenia. 
Introduction 
The term schizophrenia refers to a collection of seriously debilitating 
conditions characterized by positive and negative symptoms and 
disorganization (Mueser & Jeste, 2008). Hallucinations and delusions 
are the principal positive symptoms of schizophrenia. 

208 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Hallucinations involve experiencing sensations in the absence of 
external stimuli. For example, with auditory hallucinations — which are 
the most common type in schizophrenia — people report hearing voices 
that others cannot hear. Delusions are strongly held, unfounded, cultur- 
ally alien beliefs. For example, with persecutory delusions, individuals 
may believe that a group of people are conspiring to harm them. 
The negative symptoms of schizophrenia include flattened affect, 
alogia and avolition. With flattened affect there is limited emotional 
expression. With alogia there is impoverished thought which is inferred 
from speech. Brief, concrete replies are given to questions (referred to 
as poverty of speech), or speech production is normal but it conveys 
little information due to repetition, or being overly concrete or overly 
abstract (referred to as poverty of content). With avolition there is a lack 
of goal-directed behaviour. Negative symptoms typically give rise to a 
restricted lifestyle involving little activity, little social interaction with 
others and little emotional expression. In schizophrenia, disorganization 
may affect both speech and behaviour. Disorganized, illogical, incoher- 
ent speech reflects an underlying formal thought disorder. Disorganized 
catatonic behaviour in schizophrenia includes the virtual absence of 
spontaneous activity or excessive purposeless activity. 
The diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia are given in Table 7.1. From 
the criteria it is clear that schizophrenia is a debilitating condition that 
compromises the capacity to carry out normal activities. Schizophrenia 
is a chronic relapsing disorder with incomplete remission between epi- 
sodes (Hafner & an der Heiden, 2008). The symptoms of schizophrenia 
typically first appear in late adolescence or early adulthood, wax and 
wane over the life course, and have a profound long-term effect on 
patients and their families. 
Schizophrenia is the most debilitating of all psychological disorders, 
affecting people’s capacity to live independently, make and maintain 
satisfying relationships, engage in family life, parent children effectively, 
work productively and enjoy leisure activities. Rates of unemployment, 
homelessness and imprisonment are very high among people with 
schizophrenia. Although just under 1% of people suffer from schizo- 
phrenia, the World Health Organization has ranked it as second only to 
cardiovascular disease in terms of overall disease burden internation- 
ally (Murray & Lopez, 1996). 
Despite these gloomy facts, scientific advances in our understanding 
of schizophrenia, and advances in both pharmacological and psycho- 
logical approaches to treatment, are making it increasingly possible for 
people with schizophrenia to live far more productive lives than were 
previously possible (Mueser & Jeste, 2008). In this chapter there will be 
a consideration of the clinical features, epidemiology, risk factors, 
course, theoretical explanations, assessment and treatment of schizo- 
phrenia. First, however, let us consider a case example. 
Case example of schizophrenia 
Julian was referred for assessment and advice by his family doctor. His 
parents were worried about him because he had been behaving 

7 
* SCHIZOPHRENIA 
209 
TABLE 7.1 
DSM-IV-TR 
A. Characteristic symptoms. Two or more of the 
following, each present for a significant portion 
of time during a 1-month period (or less if 
successfully treated): 
(1) delusions 
_ (2) hallucinations 
(3) disorganized speech (e.g. frequent 
derailment or incoherence) 
(4) Grossly disorganized or catatonic behaviour 
(5) Negative symptoms, affective flattening, 
alogia or avolition 
Only one criterion A symptom required if 
delusions are bizarre or hallucinations consist of 
a voice keeping up a running commentary on the 
person’s behaviour or thoughts or two or more 
voices conversing with each other 
B. Social/occupational dysfunction. For a 
significant portion of the time since the onset of 
the disturbance, one or more major areas of 
functioning such as work, interpersonal 
relations, or self-care are markedly below the 
level achieved prior to onset or with children a 
failure to achieve the expected level of 
interpersonal, academic or occupational 
achievement 
C. Duration. Continuous signs of the disturbance 
persist for at least 6 months 
D. Not due to schizoaffective or mood disorder 
E. Not due to substance use or general medical 
condition 
F. If there is autism or a pervasive developmental 
disorder, then prominent delusions and 
hallucinations of 1 month’s duration must be 
present. 
Diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia 
ICD-10 
A minimum of one very clear symptom (or two or more 
of less clear-cut) belonging to any one of the groups 
(a) to (d) and at least two of the symptoms (e) to (h) 
should have been present most of the time during a 
period of 7 month or more. 
(a) thought echo, thought insertion or withdrawal and 
thought broadcasting 
(b) delusions of control, influence, or passivity, clearly 
referred to body or limb movements or specific 
thoughts 
(c) hallucinatory voices giving a running commentary 
on the patient’s behaviour, or discussing the patient 
among themselves, or other types of hallucinatory 
voice coming from some part of the body 
(d) persistent delusions of other kinds that are 
culturally inappropriate and completely impossible, 
such as religious or political identity, or 
superhuman powers and abilities 
(e) persistent hallucinations in any modality, when 
accompanied either by fleeting or half-formed 
delusions without clear affective content, or by 
persistent overvalued ideas, or when occurring 
every day for weeks or months on end 
(f) breaks or interpolations in the train of thought, 
resulting in incoherence or irrelevant speech or 
neologisms 
(g) catatonic behaviour, such as excitement, posturing, 
or waxy flexibility, negativism, mutism or stupor 
(h) negative symptoms such as marked apathy, 
paucity of speech, and blunting or incongruity of 
emotional responses, usually resulting in social 
withdrawal and lowering of social performance 
(i) a significant and consistent change in the overall 
quality of some aspects of personal behaviour, 
manifest as loss of interest, aimlessness, idleness, 
a self-absorbed attitude and social withdrawal 
Note: Adapted from DSM-IV-TR (APA, 2000) and ICD-10 (WHO, 1992, 1996). 
strangely since returning to his rural home after studying in London for 
a year. Julian had failed his exams and said he came home to ‘sort his 
head out’. Since his return, Julian’s parents had noticed that he lacked 
concentration and his conversation was incoherent much of the time. 
Also, his behaviour was erratic and unpredictable. 
His parents became particularly concerned when he went missing 
some weeks prior to the referral. After searching for a few hours, they 
found him 35 miles from their home, exhausted, dehydrated: and 
dressed in only his sports shorts, singlet and running shoes. Apparently 
Julian believed he had to complete a secret mission in the east. While 
jogging that morning, he headed eastwards towards the rising sun. He 
thought he might jump onto the car ferry when he reached the coast, 
cross the sea to Holland, and continue east towards India on his secret 

210 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
mission. According to the family doctor, Julian’s account of this episode 
was not coherent. 
Since the episode, Julian has spent much of the time in his room 
muttering to himself, often becoming quite distressed. When his parents 
spoke to him, they found it hard to make sense of what he said. 
Family history 
Julian was the 19-year-old son of a prominent farmer in a rural English 
village. The family lived in a large mansion on an extensive estate. 
Julian’s father managed the farm; he had a traditional authoritarian 
manner and a positive, if distant, relationship with Julian. While he was 
centrally involved in the search for Julian, once he found his son, 
Julian’s father returned to work and left the care of Julian to his wife. 
Julian’s mother was an artist. She dressed flamboyantly, behaved in 
a theatrical manner and held eccentric, unconventional beliefs. For 
example, she held conspiracy theories about many issues, was inter- 
ested in eastern mysticism and believed that faith healing and alterna- 
tive medicine were preferable to traditional western medicine. This 
personal style affected how she treated Julian after the ‘running east’ 
episode. She engaged him in intense conversations about the mystical 
meaning of the psychotic experiences that led to him trying to make his 
way to India on foot. Rather than taking Julian to the accident and emer- 
gency department of the local hospital for assessment, she brought him 
to a faith healer and then a homeopathist. It was only after these inter- 
ventions failed to soothe his distress that she brought Julian to the fam- 
ily doctor, who made the referral to the community mental health team. 
In the preliminary assessment interview that we conducted with Julian 
and both of his parents, Julian’s mother responded to him with intense 
emotional overinvolvement (an index of high expressed emotion asso- 
ciated with relapse in schizophrenia; Hooley, 2007). 
With regard to the extended family, according to Julian’s parents 
there was no family history of psychological disorder. However, some 
members of the mother’s well-to-do family were odd or eccentric, 
especially her brother, Sedrick, and her uncle, William Junior. William’s 
eccentricities led him into serious conflict with his father, and Sedrick’s 
odd behaviour underpinned his highly conflictual, childless marriage. 
Developmental history 
Julian grew up on the family farm and went to school locally. His devel- 
opment was essentially normal. His academic performance at school 
was above average. He had many friends in his local village, and was a 
popular child and adolescent. Julian was excellent at cricket. He had no 
psychological problems before going to university in London at 18. 
Julian's first term at college was successful academically and 
socially. However, the occasional experimental cannabis use that 
had begun the summer before going to college turned to regular use 
once Julian moved to London. During his time at university Julian also 

7 * SCHIZOPHRENIA 
211 
experimented with LSD on a few occasions. In the final term of his first 
year at college, Julian developed an intense fear of exam failure. He 
began to have difficulty studying effectively and often had difficulty 
sleeping. He stopped attending classes regularly and increasingly spent 
time alone. Julian was relieved to return home after sitting his exams. 
His parents described him as quiet and thoughtful during the time he 
spent at home prior to the ‘running east’ episode. 
Presentation 
Julian presented with delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech 
and anxiety. He was reluctant to be interviewed because he believed he 
had urgent business to attend to in Holland and further afield in India. 
He showed signs of being anxiously distressed throughout the interview. 
He explained that his path was to the east. He believed he was being 
called there by an unknown source. He knew this because of the sign 
he had seen while out jogging on the morning of the ‘running east’ 
episode. The way an old cart wheel caught the sunlight and cast a 
shadow on the red-brick wall of a barn against which it leaned made a 
distinctive pattern. This pattern was a special sign for him indicating that 
he should go east, first to Holland and then all the way to India. When 
he questioned this idea, a clear authoritative voice said that he should 
leave at once. 
At this point in his narrative, he stopped in mid-sentence. He showed 
thought blocking, and lost the thread of what he was saying. When 
asked to continue his story, he began to giggle. When asked what was 
amusing, he said that he could hear someone say something funny. 
Julian then spoke about a number of unconnected topics in an incoherent 
way before experiencing thought blocking again. 
Later he said that he must go soon because people would try to 
prevent him. He had heard them talking about him the day before. Julian 
said they had tried to put bad ideas into his head. He described being 
frightened by this and by periodic sensations that everything was too 
loud and too bright and coming at him. He said ‘it was like doing acid 
[LSD] all the time ... a really bad trip’. 
Formulation 
Julian presented with auditory hallucinations, delusions, thought disor- 
der, anxiety and a significant deterioration in social and occupational 
functioning which had been present for more than a month — symptoms 
consistent with an ICD-10 diagnosis of schizophrenia. He also showed 
a complete lack of insight. He was unable to appreciate that the voices 
he heard were hallucinations and his delusional beliefs were unfounded. 
Among the important precipitating factors were the experience of 
recent exam pressure and Julian’s transition from living at home to 
living in London and attending college. The principal predisposing 
factors were a possible genetic vulnerability to psychosis and a history 
of hallucinogenic drug use. We suspected that there was a genetic 

212 CLINICAL 
P SYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Genetic vulnerability to psychosis 
Hallucinogenic drug use over 3 years 
PRECIPITATING 
FACTORS | 
Exam pressure 
MAINTAINING 
Transition from home 
PROTECTIVE 
FACTORS 
to London & college 
FACTORS 
Exposure of high 
Good premorbid 
expressed emotion 
adjustment 
Maternal inadvertent 
Family support 
reinforcement of 
delusions 
Schizophrenia 
Figure 7.1 Formulation of a case of schizophrenia 
vulnerability in this case because of the odd, eccentric behaviour of his 
mother and uncles, suggestive of a high level of the trait schizotypy 
(Lenzenweger, 2010). 
His condition was maintained, we suspected, by a high level of 
maternal expressed emotion characterized principally by emotional 
over-involvement. Also, his mother inadvertently reinforced his delu- 
sions through engaging him in long conversations about them. Protective 
factors in this case were good premorbid adjustment and strong family 
support. This formulation is diagrammed in Figure 7.1. 
Treatment 
The treatment plan included antipsychotic medication and family work 
to reduce parental expressed emotion, with an initial brief period of hos- 
pitalization. Julian did recover from this first psychotic episode. With 
medication, his hallucinations and delusions decreased considerably. 
Through family psychoeducation, his parents developed an under- 
standing of his condition and of his need for a ‘low-key’ approach to 
interacting with him as he recovered. 
However, there were obstacles to this multimodal treatment pro- 
gramme being as effective as possible. Julian did not like the side- 
effects of his medication, especially weight gain and reduced sexual 
functioning, and so had poor medication adherence. He also became 
depressed during remission, when he thought about the many losses 

7 * SCHIZOPHRENIA 
that followed from his condition. He was unable to continue his university 
education, and so could not pursue the career in law he had dreamed 
of. He found it difficult to maintain friendships or to commit to engaging 
regularly in sports. When he felt low, Julian would smoke cannabis to lift 
his spirits. 
Julian’s mother found it difficult to accept his diagnosis, and continued 
to believe that there was a spiritual or mystical explanation for his 
psychotic symptoms. She said she sometimes thought he was not an ill 
young man, but a gifted seer or a ‘chosen one’. She often engaged 
Julian in intense, distressing conversations about these issues. In the 
years that followed his initial assessment, poor medication adherence, 
ongoing cannabis use and exposure to high levels of expressed emotion 
led Julian to relapse more frequently than might otherwise have been 
the case. 
Clinical features 
A range of clinical features associated with schizophrenia have been 
identified through research and clinical observation (Mueser & Jeste, 
2008). A classification of these in the domains of perception, cognition, 
emotion, behaviour, social adjustment and somatic state is given in 
Table 7.2. 
TABLE 7.2 
_€linical features of schizophrenia 
Perception 
e Breakdown in perceptual selectivity 
e Hallucinations 
Cognition 
e Delusions 
e Confused sense of self 
e Lack of insight 
e Formal thought disorder 
¢ Cognitive impairment (IQ, attention, memory, executive 
function, psychomotor speed) 
- 
Emotion 
¢ Prodromal anxiety and depression 
¢ Inappropriate, flattened or blunted affect 
e Postpsychotic depression 
Behaviour 
e Prodromal excitation (sleeplessness, impulsivity, 
overactivity, compulsivity) 
e Impaired goal-directed behaviour 
Excited or retarded catatonic behaviour 
e Poor self-care and hygiene 
e Poor educational or work performance 
e Withdrawal from peer relationships 
e Deterioration in family relationships 
Social adjustment 
Somatic state 
- 
e Comorbid substance use 
e Comorbid health problems (CPOD, obesity, heart 
disease, HIV/AIDS, Hepatitis B & C) 
e Unhealthy lifestyle (poor diet, obesity, little exercise, 
smoking) 
213 

214 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
Perception 
At a perceptual level, individuals with schizophrenia describe a break- 
down in perceptual selectivity, with difficulties in focusing on essential 
information or stimuli to the exclusion of accidental details or back- 
ground noise. Everything seems to be salient, and it is difficult to distin- 
guish figure from ground. During an acute psychotic state, internal 
stimuli such as verbal thoughts are experienced as auditory hallucina- 
tions that have the same sensory quality as the spoken word. 
Auditory hallucinations may be experienced as loud thoughts, as 
thoughts being repeated by another person aloud (thought echo), as 
voices speaking inside the head or as voices coming from somewhere 
in the outer environment. Auditory hallucination may occur as a third- 
person commentary on the patient’s action, as a voice speaking in the 
second person directly to the patient, or as two or more people talking 
or arguing. Patients may perceive voices to vary along a number of 
dimensions. Voices may be construed as benign or malevolent, control- 
ling or impotent, all-knowing or knowing little about the person, and the 
person may feel compelled to do what the voice says or not. 
Hallucinations that are perceived to be malevolent, controlling, all- 
knowing and which the individual feels compelled to obey are far more 
distressing than those that are not construed as having these attributes. 
While auditory hallucinations are the most common in schizophrenia, 
hallucinations may occur in other sensory modalities. Somatic halluci- 
nations often occur in schizophrenia, with patients reporting feelings of 
electricity in their body or things crawling under their skin. These may 
be given delusional interpretations. For example, a patient reported that 
the television was activating a transmitter in her pelvis and she could 
feel the electricity from this causing insects to grow and move around 
under her skin. Visual hallucinations — seeing visions — are relatively 
rare in schizophrenia, but common in temporal lobe epilepsy. 
Cognition 
Delusions are the most prominent cognitive clinical features of schizo- 
phrenia. Delusions are false, idiosyncratic, illogical and stubbornly 
maintained erroneous inferences drawn to explain unusual experi- 
ences, such as hallucinations. For example, a patient with auditory 
hallucinations in which she heard an authoritative voice giving her 
commands to gather the children to her inferred that she had been 
chosen by God to prepare all children for the second coming of Christ. 
Delusions may arise not only from hallucinations, but also from un- 
usual feelings associated with psychosis. Persecutory delusions may 
develop from feelings of being watched. Delusions of thought insertion 
or thought withdrawal may develop as explanations for feelings that 
thoughts are not one’s own, or that one’s thoughts have suddenly dis- 
appeared. Factor analyses show that delusions fall into three broad 
categories: delusions of influence (including thought withdrawal or in- 
sertion, and beliefs about being controlled); delusions of self-significance 
(including delusions of grandeur or guilt); and delusions of persecution 

7 * SCHIZOPHRENIA 
215 
(Vahia & Cohen, 2008). Delusions may vary in the degree of convic- 
tion with which they are held (from great certainty to little certainty), 
the degree to which the person.is preoccupied with them (the amount 
of time spent thinking about the belief), and the amount of distress 
they cause. 
Particular sets of delusions may entail a confused sense of self, 
particularly paranoid delusions where individuals believe that they are 
being persecuted or punished for misdeeds, or delusions of control 
where there is a belief that one’s actions are controlled by others. 
During a psychotic episode there is usually lack of insight and 
impaired judgement. That is, patients believe that the content of their 
hallucinations and delusions is legitimate, and they have difficulty enter- 
taining the idea that these experiences and beliefs arise from a clinical 
condition. Between psychotic episodes, 
insight may improve and 
patients may move towards accepting that their hallucinations and delu- 
sions are symptoms of schizophrenia. 
The speech of patients with schizophrenia is difficult to understand 
because of abnormalities in the underlying form of thought. Formal 
thought disorder is characterized by tangentiality, derailment, incoher- 
ence, thought blocking, loss of goal and neologisms. With tangentia- 
lity, answers given to questions are off the point. With derailment, 
sentences make sense, but little meaning is conveyed by sequences of 
sentences because there is a constant jumping from one topic to 
another, with very loose associations between topics and little logic 
to what is said. With incoherence, sentences are incorrectly formed so 
they do not make sense. With thought blocking, the person abruptly 
stops in mid-sentence and is unable complete their train of thought. 
With loss of goal there is a difficulty in following a logical train of thought 
from A to B. With neologisms, new words are made up that have an 
idiosyncratic meaning for the patient. 
Cognitive impairment or deterioration occurs in schizophrenia. This 
may be either general or specific. With general cognitive deterioration, 
there is a reduction in overall |Q with many cognitive functions nega- 
tively affected. With specific cognitive impairment one or more of the 
following functions may be impaired: attention, memory, cognitive flex- 
ibility, social cognition and executive function, particularly the capacity 
to follow through on a planned course of action. Cognitive impairment is 
a better predictor of disability and vocational functioning than positive 
symptoms. 
Emotions 
At an emotional level, during the prodromal phase, before an acute 
psychotic episode, anxiety or depression may occur in response to 
initial changes in perceptual selectivity and cognitive inefficiency. A key 
part of relapse prevention is for patients to learn how to identify and 
manage prodromal changes in affect. 
During acute psychotic episodes, anxiety or depression may occur in 
response to hallucinations, delusions, formal thought disorder and other 

216 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
distressing symptoms. Inappropriate affect may be present particularly 
in hebephrenic schizophrenia, where the individual responds not to the 
external social context but to internal stimuli such as auditory hallucina- 
tions, for example by laughing wildly. Flattened or blunted affect may 
occur, particularly in chronic cases. During remission following an epi- 
sode of psychosis, the sense of loss that comes with increased insight 
into the reality of the condition may give rise to post-psychotic depres- 
sion. 
‘ 
Behaviour 
At a behavioural level, prodromal excitation may occur prior to an acute 
psychotic episode, characterized by sleep disturbance, impulsive be- 
haviour, and overactivity which may include compulsive behaviour. 
During acute psychotic episodes, avolition occurs, with impairment of 
goal-directed behaviour. 
In chronic cases catatonic behaviour may occur, with impairment in 
the capacity to initiate and organize voluntary movement and posture. 
Catatonia may be either retarded or excited. Excessive purposeless 
motor activity is the hallmark of excited catatonia and may include 
stereotypies (repetitive actions), echolalia (repeating words said by 
others) or echopraxia (imitating the actions of others). With retarded 
catatonic behaviour there is a marked reduction in purposeful activity. 
Patients may show immobility, mutism, adopt unusual postures for long 
periods of time, and display waxy flexibility (allowing one’s limbs to be 
manipulated like a warm candle) or negativism (resisting attempts to 
have one’s limbs moved). 
Social adjustment 
In schizophrenia there a marked deterioration in social adjustment. The 
capacity for self-care, dressing appropriately, grooming and personal 
hygiene deteriorates, so that people with schizophrenia often look 
dishevelled and unkempt. A significant decline in performance in 
educational and work settings occurs. There is a withdrawal from 
regular socializing with friends and difficulty in making and maintaining 
new relationships. A deterioration in relationships with family members 
also occurs. Schizophrenia has a negative impact on parent-child, 
marital and sibling relationships. 
Somatic state 
About half of all people with schizophrenia have comorbid substance 
use disorders and almost three-quarters have significant health prob- 
lems. The most common health problems include chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPT), which is usually due to smoking; heart 
disease and diabetes due to obesity; HIV/AIDS and hepatitis B and C 
due to unsafe sex and intravenous drug use. The substance use and 
medical problems so common in schizophrenia are essentially lifestyle 

7 * SCHIZOPHRENItA 
217 
problems. On the positive side, schizophrenia 
is associated 
with 
reduced rates of cancer and rheumatoid arthritis (Tandon et al., 2008a). 
Classification 
To take account of the marked variability in symptomatology among 
people with schizophrenia, various subtypes have been defined. Also, 
a number of psychotic conditions that closely resemble schizophrenia 
have been identified, and referred to as schizophrenia spectrum 
disorders. Schizophrenia subtypes and spectrum disorders are consid- 
ered in this section. In ICD-10 (World Health Organization, 1992) and 
DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000), four main sub- 
types of schizophrenia are distinguished: 
e 
paranoid 
e 
catatonic 
e 
hebephrenic or disorganized 
e 
undifferentiated. 
Where paranoid delusions predominate, a diagnosis of paranoid schiz- 
ophrenia is given. Cases in which either retarded or excited catatonic 
behaviour is the principal feature are classified as having catatonic 
schizophrenia. Cases are classified as hebephrenic in the ICD-10 and 
disorganized in the DSM-IV-TR when inappropriate or flat affect is the 
principal feature and where there is disorganized behaviour and speech. 
In both ICD-10 and DSM-IV-TR, when cases do not fall into any of the 
three categories just mentioned, they are classified as undifferentiated. 
While distinctions between the four main subtypes of schizophrenia 
have been useful for describing different clinical presentations and date 
back to Emil Kraepelin’s (1899) work, research has shown that these 
subtypes are not consistently differentiated by family history, course, 
prognosis or treatment response. 
In contrast to the lack of success in validating subtypes of schizophre- 
nia, there has been considerable progress in identifying other conditions 
that share a very similar pattern of family history, course, prognosis and 
treatment response to schizophrenia. These include disorders that have 
the same symptomatology as schizophrenia, but are of briefer duration 
(such as schizophreniform disorder); those with the same symptomatol- 
ogy as schizophrenia in addition to the symptoms of a mood disorder 
(schizoaffective disorder); and those characterized by chronic mild 
schizophrenia-like symptoms (such as schizotypal, schizoid and para- 
noid personality disorders). These conditions, along with schizophrenia, 
constitute schizophrenia spectrum disorders (Mamah & Barch, 2011). 
Research on the shared aetiology, course and treatment response of 
these disorders and factor analytic studies of their symptomatology 
suggest that the distribution of psychotic symptoms within the population 
more closely approximates dimensions than disease-like categories. 
The three principal dimensions are those involving positive symptoms, 
negative symptoms and disorganization, mentioned in the opening 
paragraph of this chapter (Rietkerk et al., 2008). 

218 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
Epidemiology, course, outcome and risk factors 
Reviews of international epidemiological studies allow a number of 
conclusions to be drawn about the epidemiology of schizophrenia. 
Under 1% of the population suffer from schizophrenia, and the lifetime 
risk of this condition is about 0.7% (Saha et al., 2005). More men than 
women suffer from schizophrenia: the male-female ratio is about 1.4:1 
(McGrath et al., 2004). The onset of schizophrenia is earlier in males 
(20-28 years) than in females (28-32 years) (Murray & Van Os, 1998). 
The rates of schizophrenia are similar across countries and cultures 
when similar diagnostic criteria are used (Mueser & Duva, 2011). 
Schizophrenia follows a distinctive course although there is consid- 
erable variability across cases (Jablensky, 2009; Jobe & Harrow, 2010; 
Mueser & Duva, 2011, Tandon et al., 2009). The onset of schizophrenia 
typically occurs in late adolescence or early adulthood and may be 
acute or insidious. Typically the onset takes place over 5 years, starting 
with negative and depressive symptoms, followed by cognitive and 
social impairment and finally positive symptoms. Longitudinal studies 
suggest that there is an early deterioration phase that extends over 
5-10 years, a stabilization phase and a final gradual improvement 
phase. For 50-70% of cases the condition follows a chronic relapsing 
course, typically with incomplete remission between episodes. However, 
up to 40% of patients show one or more periods of complete recovery 
with good adjustment for at least a year, and 4-20% show complete 
remission. 
Psychotic episodes may last from 1 to 6 months, although some 
extend to a year. They are usually preceded by a prodromal period of a 
number of weeks. Psychotic episodes may be shortened and the 
severity of symptomatology ameliorated through early detection and the 
use of pharmacological and psychological treatment as outlined below. 
Inter-episode functioning may vary greatly, and better inter-episode 
functioning is associated with a better prognosis. The duration of 
remission between episodes may be lengthened through the use of 
maintenance medication and psychosocial interventions to reduce 
stress and improve coping and illness management. 
With treatment, 
usually positive symptoms 
(hallucinations and 
delusions) abate between episodes but negative symptoms (blunted 
affect, alogia and avolition) are relatively enduring and are more likely 
to persist during remission. In the stabilization phase of schizophrenia 
positive symptoms becoming less prominent, while negative symptoms 
and cognitive deficits become more prominent. The lifespan of people 
with schizophrenia is about 9 years shorter than that of the general 
population, and this is partly accounted for by the high rate of suicide 
during the first 10 years of the disorder and the high rate of comorbid 
medical disorders mentioned earlier. About half of all people with 
schizophrenia attempt suicide or self-harm, and about 10% commit 
suicide (Heisel, 2008; Schennach-Wolff et al., 2011). 
Risk factors for schizophrenia are listed in Table 7.3 (Lenzenweger, 
2010; Murray & Castle, 2009; Tandon et al., 2008b). The greatest risk 

7 
* SCHIZOPHRENIA 
219 
TABLE 7.3 
Risk factors for schizophrenia 
Genetic factors 
Positive family history of psychosis 
Personality 
Schizotypy 
Prenatal and perinatal factors 
Maternal flu infection or malnutrition in first or second trimester 
Father over 35 years 
Obstetric complications (low birth weight, prematurity, resuscitation) 
Birth in late winter or early spring 
Demographic factors 
Male 
Unmarried 
Urban dwelling 
Migrant 
Low SES 
Life history factors 
Trauma history 
Cannabis use 
factor for schizophrenia is a family history of psychosis. This probably 
finds subclinical expression as schizotypy, a personality trait in which 
the central feature is a disorganized thinking style similar to (although 
much milder than) that shown in schizophrenia (Lenzenweger, 2010). 
Other risk factors make a small but significant contribution to overall 
risk within the context of that associated with genetic vulnerability. 
However, at present there is no consensus on how these risk factors 
operate. Prenatal and perinatal risk factors, such as maternal flu infec- 
tion and obstetric complications, probably have a negative direct or indi- 
rect effect on the development of the nervous system in line with the 
neurodevelopmental hypothesis mentioned below, rendering those 
genetically predisposed even more neurobiologically vulnerable to psy- 
chosis (Murray & Lewis, 1987). Trauma exposure and most demo- 
graphic risk factors (being an unmarried, low-SES urban migrant) are 
associated with higher levels of stress and lower levels of social 
support, which increase the risk of psychosis in the genetically vulner- 
able according to diathesis—stress conceptualizations of the condition 
(Zubin & Spring, 1977). It is probable that the mechanism by which can- 
nabis use affects schizophrenia is neurobiological rather than social— 
environmental (Barkus & Murray, 2010). 
In the short term, relapse is more likely in cases where there is heavy 
cannabis use, poor treatment adherence, frequent contact with family 
members who display high expressed emotion (criticism, hostility and 
emotional over-involvement) and exposure to acute stressful life events 
(Jablensky, 2009). 
Longitudinal studies show that the risk factors listed in Table 7.4 are 
associated with poorer outcome (Bota et al., 2011; Jablensky, 2009; 
Jobe & Harrow, 2010). A poor outcome is associated with substance 

220 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
TABLE 7.4 
Risk factors for a poor outcome in schizophrenia 
id a a fa 
a «eee 
ee Se ERE eee 
Early stage 
Early age of onset 
Insidious onset 
Poor premorbid adjustment 
Longer duration of untreated psychosis 
Substance use 
i 
Lack of an identifiable precipitating stressor prior to hospitalization 
Personality traits 
Trait anxiety (and HPA axis hyperactivity) 
External locus of control 
Symptom profile 
Severe negative symptoms (blunted affect, alogia, avolition) 
Severe cognitive impairment 
Lack of depressive symptoms 
Lifestyle 
Poor treatment adherence 
Substance use 
Social context 
Single 
Few friends 
Stressful life events 
Frequent contact with family members who display high expressed emotion 
(over-involvement and criticism) 
Living in a developing country 
use and a longer period of untreated psychosis in people who have 
poor premorbid adjustment and an early insidious onset with no clear 
stressful life event preceding their first treated episode. A high level of 
trait anxiety, which is probably subserved by hypothalamic-pituitary— 
adrenal (HPA) axis overactivity and an external locus of control, is the 
main personality trait associated with poor outcome. People with this 
stress-sensitive 
profile are more 
reactive to stressful 
life-events, 
including those associated with living in a developing country, and 
family-based stress associated with high levels of expressed emotion, 
all of which are also risk factors for poor outcome. A poorer outcome 
occurs for those who are single and have few friends — factors which 
suggest low levels of social support. The symptom profile predictive of 
a poor outcome is marked by severe negative symptoms, cognitive 
impairment and lack of depressive symptoms. 
A favourable outcome in schizophrenia is associated with a range of 
factors (Bota et al., 2011). These include good premorbid adjustment, 
and a brief duration of untreated psychosis characterized by an acute 
onset in response to precipitating stressful life events. A family history 
of affective disorder (rather than schizophrenia) or little psychopathology 
and a personal symptom profile in which there are affective as well as 
psychotic features are also predictive of a good prognosis. A better 
outcome occurs for those who have a favourable life situation to return 
to following discharge from hospital. 

7 
* SCHIZOPHRENIA 
221 
Aetiological theories 
Historically, research on schizophrenia has followed from two principal 
traditions founded by the German psychiatrist Emile Kraepelin (1899) 
and the Swiss psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler (1911). Kraepelin defined the 
condition, which he named ‘dementia praecox’, as principally character- 
ized by a constellation of observable symptoms (such as delusions, 
hallucinations and thought disorder) and a chronic course due to an 
underlying degenerative neurological condition. In contrast, Bleuler, 
who coined the term ‘schizophrenia’, conceptualized the condition as a 
disturbance in a circumscribed set of inferred psychological processes. 
He speculated that the capacity to associate one thought with another, 
to associate thoughts with emotions, and to associate the self with real- 
ity were impaired or split. Hence the term ‘schizophrenia’ (from the 
Greek words for split and mind). 
Bleuler proposed that the four primary symptoms of schizophrenia 
were loosening of associations (difficulty in thinking straight), incongru- 
ous or flattened affect, impaired goal-directed behaviour or ambiva- 
lence due to conflicting impulses, and autism or social withdrawal. The 
emphasized words in the last sentence are sometimes referred to as 
Bleuler’s ‘four As’. Bleuler argued that positive symptoms such as delu- 
sions and hallucinations were secondary to these central psychological 
difficulties. For Bleuler, the symptoms of schizophrenia such as delu- 
sions and hailucinations represented the person’s attempt to cope with 
the world despite disruption of central psychological processes. While 
Kraepelin conceptualized schizophrenia as being distributed within the 
population as a discrete disease-like category, Bleuler viewed the dis- 
turbed psychological processes that he proposed underpinned schizo- 
phrenia as on a continuum with normal psychological functioning. These 
different views were precursors of the modern categorical and dimen- 
sional approaches to understanding schizophrenia (Linscott & Van Os, 
2010). 
Up to the late 1970s, Bleuler’s tradition, associated with a broad 
definition of schizophrenia, predominated in the US whereas in the UK, 
Ireland and Europe, Kraepelin’s narrower definition held sway. Following 
the landmark US-—UK diagnostic study (US-UK Team, 1974) that 
highlighted the extraordinary differences between the way schizophrenia 
was defined in America and Britain, there has been a gradual move 
towards developing an internationally acceptable set of diagnostic 
criteria. The narrowing of the gap between the North American and 
European definitions of schizophrenia 
is reflected 
in the marked 
similarity between the diagnostic criteria for the disorder contained in 
current versions of the ICD and DSM presented in Table 7.1. 
Modern research on schizophrenia has also been guided by two 
broad groups of theories. The first, in the tradition of Kraepelin, has 
been concerned largely with the role of biological factors in the aetiol- 
ogy and maintenance of the disorder. The second group of theories, 
in the tradition of Bleuler, has addressed the role of psychological fac- 
tors in schizophrenia. In the following section, biological theories of 

222 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
schizophrenia and related research findings will be considered. This will 
be followed by a consideration of the stress-vulnerability or diathesis— 
stress approaches to conceptualizing pale Alia and research find- 
ings of relevance to this position. 
Biological theories 
Biological theories of schizophrenia point to the role of genetic and 
neurodevelopmental factors in rendering people vulnerable to the 
development of psychosis, and to the role of structural and functional 
brain abnormalities; dsysregulation of neurotransmitter systems; and 
sleep architecture and eye movement abnormalities in the aetiology of 
schizophrenia. There is considerable support for biological theories 
from neuroimaging, pharmacological, psychophysiological and other 
neurobiological studies, although current knowledge of these abnor- 
malities is incomplete (Bora et al., 2011; Downar & Kapur, 2008; Eyler, 
2008; Fatemi & Folsom, 2009; Glatt, 2008; Harrison, 2009; Hollis, 2008; 
Keshavan et al., 2008; Murray & Castle, 2009; Ritsner & Gottesman, 
2011; Stewart & Davis, 2008). However, there is a consensus about 
certain aspects of the neurobiology of schizophrenia, which will be pre- 
sented below. 
Genetics 
The genetic hypothesis proposes that schizophrenia arises primarily 
from an inherited vulnerability to psychosis. Results of twin, adoption 
and family studies show that a predisposition to schizophrenia spectrum 
disorders is genetically transmitted. Schizophrenia is about 80% heri- 
table (Glatt, 2008; Sullivan et al., 2003). The lifetime risk for developing 
schizophrenia is proportional to the number of shared genes. For 
monozygotic twins the risk is 48%; for dizygotic twins the risk is 17%; for 
children of an affected parent the risk is 13%; for grandchildren the risk 
is 5%; and for members of the general population the risk is about 1% 
(Ritsner & Gottesman, 2011). It is also probable that the vulnerability is 
polygenetically transmitted, since the results of family studies cannot 
easily be accounted for by simpler models of genetic transmission. 
Many candidate genes for schizophrenia have been investigated; 
some have been identified; and where significant associations between 
candidate genes and schizophrenia have been found, a growing number 
of consistent replication studies are available (Harrison, 2009; Ritsner & 
Gottesman, 2011). Candidate genes for which consistent evidence is 
available affect the growth and organization of neurones in the brain, 
the development of synapses, and glutamate and dopamine neuro- 
transmission. 
Candidate genes include neurreulin 
1 (NRG1) and 
disrupted-in-schizophrenia-1 
(DISC1), 
which 
have 
multiple 
roles 
in brain development, synapse formation and synaptic signalling; 
catechol-O-methyltransferase 
(COMT), which 
regulates dopamine 
signalling 
in the frontal 
cortex; 
D-amino 
acid oxidase 
activator 
(DAOA) and dysbindin (DTNBP1), which affect glutamate signalling; 

7 * SCHIZOPHRENIA 
223 
regulator of G-protein signalling 4 (RGS4) and calcineurin (PP3CC), 
which affect dopamine and glutamate neurotransmission. The mecha- 
nisms by which candidate genes give rise to the symptoms of schizo- 
phrenia through altering the structure and functioning of the nervous 
system are currently a focus for intensive research internationally 
(Bertram, 2008). 
Despite evidence for the role of genetic factors in schizophrenia, many 
people who develop schizophrenia have no relatives that suffer from the 
condition, and some people with a genetic predisposition to schizophrenia 
do not develop psychotic symptoms. Itis therefore likely that environmental 
factors also contribute to the development of schizophrenia. 
Neurodevelopment and neuropathology 
The neurodevelopmental hypothesis proposes that prenatal and peri- 
natal factors (often referred to as obstetric complications) interact with a 
genetic vulnerability to psychosis to give rise to atypical neuroanatomi- 
cal development initially in infancy, and later in adolescence, and this 
culminates in the emergence of schizophrenia (Fatemi & Folsom, 2009; 
McGlashen & Hoffman, 2000; Murray & Lewis, 1987). 
In normal development, 
synaptic connections 
within the brain 
increase up to 2 years, decline gradually before puberty and then 
decrease markedly in adolescence. This sharp decline is due to synap- 
tic pruning, which involves the elimination of superfluous synapses. It 
coincides with the emergence of sophisticated cognitive skills in early 
adolescence such as the capacity for abstract reasoning. According to 
the neurodevelopmental hypothesis, the synaptic pruning process is 
excessive in schizophrenia, leading to a fragmented brain and conse- 
quent psychotic symptoms (McGlashen & Hoffman, 2000). Excessive 
pruning is expected to have a more profound effect where fewer syn- 
apses were formed during early brain development due to an adverse 
intrauterine environment associated with obstetric complications. 
Obstetric complications 
A growing body of evidence supports the link between obstetric com- 
plications and schizophrenia (Ellman & Cannon, 2008). Obstetric 
complications that have been investigated with reference to the neuro- 
developmental hypothesis include maternal infection with influenza or 
rubella during early pregnancy, maternal malnutrition during early preg- 
nancy, diabetes mellitus, smoking during pregnancy, bleeding during 
pregnancy, problematic labour or delivery, anoxia or asphyxia at birth, 
low birth weight, small head circumference, and congenital malforma- 
tions. About 20-30% of patients with schizophrenia have a history of 
obstetric complications, compared with 5—10% of the unaffected popula- 
tion. Lack of oxygen to the foetus — foetal hypoxia — is involved in many 
obstetric complications associated with psychosis. Cases with a history 
of obstetric complications show an earlier onset of schizophrenia and 
more pronounced neuroanatomical abnormalities, as predicted by the 
neurodevelopmental hypothesis. 

224 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
Neuroanatomy 
In support of the neurodevelopmental hypothesis, five neuroanotomical 
abnormalities have consistently emerged in neuroimaging and post- 
mortem studies of schizophrenia (Bora et al., 2011; Keshavan et al., 
2008; Stewart & Davis, 2008). The first abnormality is reduced overall 
brain volume and enlargement of the cerebral ventricles (particularly 
the left ventricle) associated with brain atrophy. The second abnormal- 
ity concerns the reduced size of, and activation within, the frontal lobes. 
The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is particularly affected, where there is 
also increased neuronal packing density. This abnormality may under- 
pin cognitive deficits (l1Q, executive function, attention and memory). 
The third abnormality is reduced temporal lobe volume including reduc- 
tions in the size of the amygdala and hippocampus, structures that sub- 
serve emotional processing and memory. The fourth abnormality is 
decreased thalamic volume, and disorganization of the thalamocortical 
pathways. The thalamus plays a central role in attention, and in filtering 
and relaying information to various areas of the brain including the pre- 
frontal cortex. The fifth abnormality is disorganization of white matter 
tracts and reduced connectivity between many areas of the brain. 
A detailed understanding of how these neuroanatomical abnormalities 
give rise to the symptoms of schizophrenia is a focus of ongoing 
research. Many of the structural brain abnormalities listed here precede 
the onset of psychosis, and in some cases they progress over the 
course of the schizophrenia (Chan et al., 2011). 
Psychophysiology 
Results of studies which show that schizophrenia is associated with 
abnormalities in a number of psychophysiological indices reflective of 
abnormal neurobiological processes also support the neurodevelop- 
mental hypothesis (Javitt et al., 2008; Keshavan et al., 2008). Sleep 
architecture assessed by electroencephalogram (EEG) is abnormal in 
schizophrenia. Total sleep time and time during non-rapid eye move- 
ment (REM) sleep is reduced, as is REM sleep latency. Evoked poten- 
tials, which are detected with scalp electrodes during visual or auditory 
tasks, are abnormal in schizophrenia, indicating impairments in neuro- 
biological processes subserving visual and auditory perception and 
information processing. Eye movements, especially those involved in 
smooth pursuit tracking of a moving target, are abnormal in schizophre- 
nia, indicating impairments in neurobiological processes subserving 
occulomotor control. These evoked potential and eye movement abnor- 
malities are highly heritable and present prior to the onset of acute 
psychosis. 
Neurotransmitters 
Neurotransmitter 
dysregulation 
hypotheses 
attribute 
psychotic 
symptoms to neurotransmission problems. Dysregulations of the dopa- 
mine and glutamate neurotransmitter systems have been found in 

7 * SCHIZOPHRENIA 
225 
schizophrenia (Downar & Kapur, 2008). Genes that affect both of these 
neurotransmitter systems have been implicated in the aetiology of the 
condition, as was noted above in the section on genetics. 
Dopamine 
The dopamine hypothesis arose from observations that medications, 
such as chlorpromazine, that block dopamine D, receptors alleviate 
psychotic symptoms; and amphetamines, which release dopamine, 
induce paranoid psychosis (Seeman, 2011). The original dopamine 
hypothesis, which attributed psychotic symptoms to an excess of 
dopamine, has inspired extensive research and the development of a 
range of antipsychotic medications for schizophrenia; over time it has 
been supplanted by more sophisticated formulations. 
Available evidence indicates that overactivity of the mesolimbic 
dopamine pathway subserves positive symptoms (hallucinations and 
delusions), and underactivity of the mesocortical dopamine pathway 
subserves negative symptoms (blunted affect, alogia and avolition) and 
cognitive impairment (Downar & Kapur, 2008). First-generation anti- 
psychotic medications such as chlorpromazine, which block dopamine D,, 
receptors, alleviate positive symptoms in most cases, but have no effect 
on negative symptoms. 
In contrast, newer second-generation anti- 
psychotic medications, such as clozapine, block dopamine D, receptors 
in the mesolymbic but not the mesocortical pathway, and so alleviate 
positive symptoms and some negative symptoms. 
Downar and Kapur (2008) have proposed the following explanation 
to link dysregulation of the dopamine system to psychotic symptoms. 
Dopamine is the neurotransmitter that gives salience to neural networks 
associated with thoughts or perceptions. Overactivity of the mesolimbic 
dopamine pathway probably results in many thoughts and perceptions 
being misinterpreted as highly salient or important. Thus, thoughts are 
misinterpreted as ‘voices’, and fleeting ideas that might otherwise be 
ignored are misinterpreted as being very important and so are developed 
into delusional belief systems. Antipsychotic medications that block 
dopamine D, receptors reduce this tendency to misinterpret unimportant 
perceptions and thoughts as highly salient. However, delusions that 
have already formed may need to be re-evaluated, which is what occurs 
in cognitive therapy. 
In contrast to the overactive mesolymbic dopamine pathway, the 
underactive mesocortical dopamine pathway reduces the salience with 
which certain perceptions, thoughts, feelings and motives are experi- 
enced. This accounts for the negative symptoms (blunted affect, alogia 
and avolition) and cognitive impairment that occur in schizophrenia. 
Glutamate 
The glutamate hypothesis proposes that underactivity of N-methyl-D- 
asparate (NMDA) glutamate receptors underpins the symptoms and 
cognitive impairment shown in schizophrenia (Downar & Kapur, 2008; 
Harrison, 2009; Lin et al., 2011). Low glutamate levels have been found 
in the cerebrospinal fluid of people with schizophrenia. Drugs that 

226 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
reduce the efficiency of NMDA glutamate receptors (such as phencycli- 
dine (PCP) or ‘angel dust’) induce psychotic symptoms. Drugs that 
increase the efficiency of NMDA glutamate receptors, such as glycine, 
alleviate psychotic symptoms, particularly negative symptoms. 
Glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the central 
nervous system and NMDA receptors play a central role in attention, 
perception and cognition. Reduced glutamate activity in the prefrontal 
cortex may account for negative symptoms and cognitive impairment in 
schizophrenia. The NMDA glutamate receptor also plays an important 
role in the development of the nervous system, for example by influenc- 
ing synaptic pruning, mentioned earlier in the section on neurodevelop- 
ment. Thus, dysfuncticn of NMDA glutamate receptors may account for 
some of the neuroanatomical abnormalities associated with schizo- 
phrenia. 
From a theoretical perspective, the dopamine and glutamate theo- 
ries are not sophisticated enough to account for all of the symptoms of 
schizophrenia and its response to antipsychotic medication. Contrary to 
predictions derived from the dopamine and glutamate hypotheses, 
antipsychotic medication does not immediately reduce symptoms, 
although it immediately affects neurotransmission. About a third of 
patients do not respond to antipsychotic medication. No antipsychotic 
medication eliminates all symptoms. Dopamine-2 antagonists primarily 
affect positive symptoms and have little impact on negative symptoms. 
Drugs that increase the efficiency of NMDA glutamate receptors prima- 
rily affect negative symptoms. 
Current 
neurotransmitter-based 
hypotheses 
will 
ultimately 
be 
replaced by more complex and integrated formulations involving a 
number of neurotransmitter systems, which can explain the anomalies 
listed above. 
Two-syndrome hypothesis 
In an attempt to integrate results from diverse clinical, genetic and 
neurobiological studies, Crow (1985) proposed the two-syndrome 
hypothesis. He argued that a distinction may be made between type 1 
schizophrenia, which is a genetically inherited disease marked by a 
dysregulation of the mesolimbic dopamine system and characterized by 
positive symptoms, and type 2 schizophrenia, which is a neurodevelop- 
mental disorder arising from prenatal or perinatal insults, resulting in 
neuroanatomical abnormalites and marked by chronic negative symp- 
toms. Type 1 schizophrenia, he proposed, has an acute onset, clear 
precipitants, predominantly positive symptoms, a good response to 
antipsychotic medication and good inter-episode adjustment. Type 2 
schizophrenia, he argued, is characterized by poor premorbid function- 
ing, an insidious onset, a chronic course, neuropsychological deficits, 
predominantly negative symptoms and a poor response to medication. 
The two-syndrome hypothesis fits a good proportion of available data 
but is probably an oversimplification, since many cases show aspects of 
both syndromes. 

7 * SCHIZOPHRENIA 
227 
Antipsychotic medication 
The most widely used and most effective pharmacological treatments 
for psychosis are dopamine-2 antagonists. A distinction 
is made 
between first- and second-generation, or typical and atypical anti- 
psychotic medication. Both are dopamine-2 antagonists. Treatment 
with second-generation antipsychotic medications such as risperidone, 
olanzapine and clozapine is currently the first-line approach to pharma- 
cological intervention for psychotic conditions, although clozapine is 
reserved for treatment-refractory cases due to its problematic side- 
effects detailed below (Kutscher, 2008; Tandon et al., 2010). 
First- and second-generation antipsychotics are equally effective, 
but they differ in their side-effect profiles (Dolder, 2008). With regard to 
effectiveness, about half to two-thirds of patients respond to anti- 
psychotics, and their main effects are on positive symptoms, with 
limited effects on negative symptoms and cognitive impairment. With 
regard to side-effects, rates of extrapyramidal side-effects (such as 
parkinsonism) and tardive dyskinesia (an irreversible neurological 
movement disorder) are lower for second-generation antipsychotic 
medication. However, for second-generation antipsychotics, obesity, 
raised cholesterol and risk of diabetes are more common. In schizo- 
phrenia, ideally the lowest possible dose of medication should be used 
in order to reduce side-effects and enhance quality of life. 
Clozapine is an extremely effective second-generation antipsychotic, 
and has a positive impact on suicidal and aggressive behaviour as well 
as psychotic symptoms (Sajatovic et al., 2008). However, because of its 
dangerous side-effects, clozapine is reserved for use in treatment- 
refractory cases or those where there are high risks of suicide or 
aggression. Clozapine may cause a severe reduction in white blood cell 
count (agranulocytosis), and this can result in severe infections that 
may be fatal. For patients on clozapine, routine monitoring of white 
blood cell count is best practice. 
Typically patients with schizophrenia continue to take antipsychotic 
medication throughout their lives. Where patients show low adherence 
in taking oral medication daily, they may be administered long-lasting 
slow-release depot injections (Cunningham-Owens & Johnstone, 2009; 
Leucht et al., 2011). 
Stress-vulnerability theory 
Stress-vulnerability or diathesis—stress theories propose that schizo- 
phrenia occurs when 
neurobiologically vulnerable 
individuals 
are 
exposed to psychosocial stress (Walker et al., 2008; Zubin & Spring, 
1977). Neurobiological vulnerability may be due to genetic and/or pre- 
natal and perinatal factors that impact on the integrity of the central 
nervous system. 
A substantial body of research shows that the onset, course and 
severity of schizophrenia are associated with psychosocial stress and 
trauma (Bebbington & Kuipers, 2008; Phillips et al., 2007; Tandon et al., 

228 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
2008b; Walker et al., 2008). Physical and sexual child abuse, family 
violence and serious injury render people vulnerable to the develop- 
ment of psychosis and there is a dose-response relationship, with 
greater levels of trauma being predictive of more severe symptoms 
(Shevlin et al., 2008). Low socio-economic status, migration to a new 
country and living in an urban rather than a rural setting all confer risk 
for the development of schizophrenia, and all entail increased stressful 
demands on coping resources. 
The onset of schizophrenia is typically trighered by a build-up of 
stressful life events (illness, injury, life transitions, loss, etc.). Following 
the onset of schizophrenia, a number of stresses associated with the 
experience of psychosis and the response of others to it may compromise 
recovery. 
For most patients psychotic symptoms 
are _ intrinsically 
stressful, both as they are occurring and later, during remission, when 
insight develops and patients realize that their psychotic symptoms 
were due to a major and often life-long psychological disorder. 
Highly emotional family responses to psychosis involving criticism 
and hostility on one hand or excessive sympathy and emotional over- 
involvement on the other (referred to as expressed emotion) are very 
stressful and have been shown 
in numerous 
studies to reduce 
significantly the time to relapse in patients stabilized on antipsychotic 
medication (Hooley, 2007). Social stresses resulting from psychosis 
including the loss of friendships, the development of a constricted 
lifestyle, the experience of stigma and consequent social isolation may 
all compromise recovery. Occupational impairment due to psychosis 
may lead to a reduction in financial resources and SES, and recovery 
may be impeded by these factors. Higher levels of stress are associated 
with more severe psychotic symptoms. 
HPA axis overactivity is a central aspect of the stress response. The 
HPA axis is a major part of the neuroendocrine system involving the 
hypothalamus, the pituitary gland located below the hypothalamus, and 
the adrenal glands (located on top of the kidneys), which controls stress 
reactions and other processes 
including the immune system. 
In 
schizophrenia, dysregulation of the HPA axis has been found, for 
example, in studies of cortisol levels (Bradley & Dinan, 2010; Walker et 
al., 2008). Raised cortisol levels indicative of HPA axis hyperactivity are 
more common in first-episode psychosis. 
Heightened physiological arousal associated with HPA overactivity 
probably exacerbates psychotic symptoms, particularly positive symp- 
toms such as hallucinations, delusions and thought disorder. Elevated 
cortisol arising from HPA axis overactivity compromises the efficiency of 
the immune system and increases vulnerability to cardiovascular and 
metabolic disease, common in schizophrenia. Such illnesses in turn are 
additional stresses that may maintain or exacerbate psychosis. 
Multimodal interventions 
Multimodal interventions based on the stress-vulnerability model involv- 
ing antipsychotic medication and psychological therapies aim to equip 

7 
* SCHIZOPHRENIA 
229 
people with schizophrenia and their families with the resources to con- 
trol psychotic symptoms, reduce environmental stress, enhance social 
support and work towards recovery. In a large meta-analysis of 106 
Studies of interventions for schizophrenia, Mojtabai et al. (1998) found 
that after an average of 17 months, the relapse rate for patients with 
schizophrenia who received psychological therapy plus medication was 
20% lower than that of those who received medication only. The relapse 
rate in patients treated with medication only was 52% and that for 
patients treated with medication combined with psychological therapy 
was 32%. 
Family therapy, cognitive-behaviour therapy, cognitive remediation 
therapy, social skills training and vocational rehabilitation are among 
the range of evidence-based psychological interventions that have 
been developed to help people with schizophrenia and their families 
achieve these aims (Kern et al., 2009; Tandon et al., 2010). Brief 
descriptions of these are presented below. 
Family therapy 
About half of medicated clients with schizophrenia relapse, and relapse 
rates are higher in unsupportive or stressful family environments, char- 
acterized by high levels of expressed emotion which involves criticism, 
hostility or emotional over-involvement (Barrowclough & Lobban, 2008). 
High levels of expressed emotion arise from family members’ apprais- 
als of the controllability of psychotic symptoms. Family members who 
express high levels of criticism or hostility tend to view patients as hav- 
ing a high degree of control over their psychotic symptoms and there- 
fore hold patients responsible for their difficulties. In contrast, those who 
express high levels of emotional over-involvement tend to attribute 
patients’ symptoms to uncontrollable factors and so view patients as 
helpless victims of a psychiatric illness. Low expressed emotion occurs 
where family members have an accurate understanding of psychosis 
and skills for managing the condition within a family context. 
The aim of psychoeducational family therapy is to reduce family 
stress and enhance family support so as to delay or prevent relapse 
and rehospitalization, and also to promote recovery. This is achieved by 
helping family members understand schizophrenia within a stress- 
vulnerability framework and develop knowledge and skills to manage 
the condition. Psychoeducational family therapy may take a number of 
formats including therapy sessions with single families; therapy sessions 
with multiple families; group therapy sessions for relatives; or parallel 
group therapy sessions for relative and patient groups. 
Family therapy may be conducted in clinical settings or in patients’ 
homes. It involves psychoeducation based on the stress-vulnerability 
models of schizophrenia with a view to helping families understand_and 
manage the symptoms of schizophrenia, antipsychotic medication, 
related stresses and early warning signs of relapse. Psychoeducational 
family therapy also helps families develop communication and problem- 
solving skills, reduce destructive expressions of anger and guilt, and 

230 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
promote self-care among non-symptomatic family members (Falloon et 
al., 1993; Kuipers et al., 2002; McFarlane, 2004). 
Meta-analyses have shown that compared with medication alone, 
multimodal programmes including psychoeducational family therapy 
and medication lead to lower relapse and rehospitalization rates, and 
improved medication adherence (Pfammatter et al., 2006). Effective 
family therapy spans about 9 months, and longer, more intense 
programmes are more effective. 
Cognitive-behaviour therapy (CBT) 
Beck has proposed an integrative model to explain the development of 
symptoms in schizophrenia and then developed a cognitive-behavioural 
approach to address these symptoms based on this model (Beck et al., 
2011). This is diagrammed in Figure 7.2. According to the model, when 
people with a neurobiological vulnerability to schizophrenia are exposed 
to stress, this increases their physiological arousal (HPA axis hyperac- 
tivity). There is a consequent reduction in their available cognitive 
resources, which increases their experience of psychotic symptoms. 
In early life, exposure to stressful events and trauma contributes to 
the development of schemas containing dysfunctional attitudes and 
beliefs, as well as cognitive biases to make inaccurate inferences. 
Reduction of cognitive resources & 
Integrative capacity 
Limitation of 
integration of 
thought 
processes 
Hypersalient 
beliefs and 
Sparing of 
cognitive 
resources 
reduction of 
reality testing 
Delusions & 
hallucinations 
Figure 7.2 Beck's integrated model of schizophrenia for use in CBT (adapted from Beck, A., Rector, N., Stolar, N. & 
Grant, P. (2011). Schizophrenia: Cognitive theory, research and therapy. New York: Guilford) 

7 
* SCHIZOPHRENIA 
231 
These are activated by exposure to stress in later life and inform the 
content of hallucinations and delusions. Exposure to stress and related 
hyperarousal in adulthood sets the scene for the development of 
positive symptoms, negative symptoms and disorganization. This is 
because at these times negative schemas and related cognitive biases 
are reactivated. Also, limited cognitive resources are available to check 
out the validity of inferences made about the environment and to 
manage day-to-day problem-solving. 
Within CBT, the symptoms of schizophrenia are viewed as being on 
a continuum with normal experience. This view is consistent with the 
finding that normal population surveys show that up to 25% of people 
have auditory hallucinations, many hold strange, unfounded beliefs (for 
example about horoscopes and faith healing), and under sufficient 
stress or exhaustion disorganized thinking and inactivity may occur. 
Patients are helped to view all of their symptoms as on a continuum with 
normal experience, as arising within the context of a stress-vulnerability 
model, and as being controllable through the use of cognitive- 
behavioural strategies and medication. A fundamental premise of CBT 
is that activating events give rise to negative automatic thoughts 
(informed by beliefs in negative schemas), which in turn affect mood, 
behaviour and the strength of beliefs within negative schemas. 
From a CBT perspective, hallucinations are similar to negative auto- 
matic thoughts in depression or intrusive thoughts typical of obsessive 
compulsive disorder. However, they are experienced as loud, external, 
‘real’ and true because people with schizophrenia have a propensity for 
auditory imagery, a tendency to attribute unusual experiences to exter- 
nal factors (an external bias), and a tendency towards premature clo- 
sure and deficient reality testing. That is, they hear their negative 
automatic thoughts as loud, attribute them to an external source, and do 
not check out the validity of their beliefs against alternatives, for exam- 
ple that these are their own loud thoughts, the content of which may not 
be valid. 
Auditory hallucinations are often incorporated into delusional systems 
that may maintain them. For example, a patient who hears a critical, 
omniscient controlling voice may develop paranoid delusions about 
being persecuted by the owner of the voice, which in turn may raise 
their arousal level and so make further hallucinations more likely. 
Patients may try to control voices by engaging in safety behaviours 
such as isolating themselves. These safety behaviours may reduce 
hallucinations in the short term, but in the long term may lead to stressful 
loneliness and this may cause further hallucinations. In CBT patients 
learn to identify and control stresses that trigger auditory hallucinations, 
to give up safety behaviours that maintain hallucinations and to 
reappraise the source of their ‘voices’ and the content of what they say. 
From a CBT perspective, delusions are beliefs or inferences about 
events or experiences (including hallucinations) that in turn affect mood 
and behaviour, in the same way that negative automatic thoughts and 
dysfunctional beliefs affect mood and behaviour in depression and 
anxiety disorders. However, in schizophrenia, delusions develop within 

232 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
the context of markedly reduced cognitive resources which limit patients’ 
capacity to modify them. The content of delusions is influenced by 
dysfunctional attitudes and assumptions contained in negative schemas, 
by hallucinations and by cognitive biases. These include a strong 
egocentric or self-referential bias, a bias towards external causation of 
subjective experiences, and a bias towards indiscriminate attribution of 
extreme positive or negative intentions to others. Thus, a patient who 
experiences an unusual sensation on the skin may interpret this as 
due to aliens activating subcutaneous microchips to try to control 
their behaviour. Delusions are maintained by the belief that they 
accurately represent reality rather than being testable inferences; by a 
bias towards focusing on information that confirms the reality of 
delusions and ignoring disconfirmatory evidence; by engaging in safety- 
seeking behaviours that prevent the truth of delusions from being tested; 
and by cognitive resource-sparing strategies such as jumping to 
conclusions. 
In CBT patients are helped to collect evidence to test out the validity 
of their delusions, starting with the least strongly held ones, and then to 
test out the validity of the non-delusional schemas that underpin these. 
In order to test out delusional beliefs, patients are also helped to give up 
safety behaviours, such as locking the door and disconnecting the 
phone when strangers are outside their houses, in the case of people 
with persecutory delusions. 
Within CBT, formal thought disorder (characterized by derailment, 
thought blocking, etc.) is conceptualized as a problematic thinking and 
speaking pattern that occurs due to limited cognitive capacity arising 
from stress within the context of a genetic vulnerability to schizophrenia. 
It is analogous to stuttering. The primary CBT intervention is to help 
patients recognize thought disorder when it occurs, the stressful situ- 
ations in which it occurs, and the negative automatic thoughts that give 
rise to it. They are then helped to challenge these negative automatic 
thoughts and so reduce the stress associated with thought disorder. 
Within CBT, negative symptoms (blunting of affect, alogia and 
avolition) are conceptualized as ways of coping with the experience of 
having limited cognitive resources and so limited expectations for 
success or pleasure, and problematic delusional beliefs or hallucinations. 
If a patient finds it difficult to think clearly, expects little success or 
pleasure, believes that his actions are being controlled by others and 
hears voices telling him that he is useless, then it is understandable that 
he will be relatively inactive. In CBT behavioural experiments are set up 
in which patients set goals, engage in activities and monitor their 
experience of pleasure, success and self-control as they achieve goals. 
Controlled trials and meta-analyses show that CBT has a moderate 
effect, particularly on delusions and hallucinations, 
in medicated 
patients whose positive symptoms are not fully controlled by anti- 
psychotic medication (Pfammatter et al., 2006; Tai & Turkington, 2009; 
Tandon et al., 2010). Effective CBT spans about 9 months, and longer, 
more intense programmes are more effective. 

7 * SCHIZOPHRENIA 
233 
Cognitive remediation 
Neuropsychological 
investigations 
have shown 
that about 
 three- 
quarters of people with schizophtenia show significant cognitive deficits 
(Palmer et al., 2009; Savia et al., 2008). On average the overall IQ of 
people with schizophrenia is about one standard deviation below the 
normative mean, although there is considerable heterogeneity between 
persons and within cases over time. 
In schizophrenia most cognitive functions are affected, including 
attention, memory, processing speed, cognitive flexibility, social cogni- 
tion and executive function. Episodic memory and processing speed 
are the areas where greatest deficits occur. While about a quarter of 
people with schizophrenia show no cognitive deficits, a distinct subgroup 
show very severe general cognitive deficits (similar to Crow's (1985) 
type II schizophrenia or Kraepelin’s (1899) dementia praecox), and the 
remainder show variable patterns of specific cognitive deficits (more in 
keeping with Bleuler’s (1911) views on ‘loosening of associations’ and 
other specific deficits in schizophrenia). 
Many people with schizophrenia show mild Breer cognitive defi- 
cits, followed by a steep decline in cognitive functioning during psychotic 
episodes, with some amelioration of cognitive deficits during remission 
and relative stability over the long term. In many cases cognitive deficits 
have a significant impact on social and occupational adjustment and ill- 
ness management, and response to psychosocial interventions such as 
social skills training and supported employment (Kurtz, 2011). 
In schizophrenia, cognitive deficits are subserved by the many 
structural and functional neurobiological abnormalities mentioned in 
earlier sections. Cognitive rehabilitation therapy is a set of cognitive 
drills that aim to help patients in remission enhance their attention, 
memory and executive functions or develop strategies for compensating 
for their cognitive deficits so that they can better achieve their recovery 
goals (Tomas et al., 2010). In this type of treatment patients engage in 
regular computer-based or paper-and-pencil-based training tasks and 
puzzles a number of times each week over a period of months. Specific 
tasks are designed to improve specific targeted deficits such as memory. 
Task difficulty is pitched so that high success rates are achieved or 
errorless learning occurs. Over time patients build up their cognitive 
skills or develop strategies for compensating for them. 
With compensatory approaches, patients learn strategies or use 
memory prompts and other devices to make up for their cognitive defi- 
cits. Meta-analytic studies of the effectiveness of cognitive remediation 
report moderate effect sizes on cognitive test performance and indices 
of daily functioning (Medalia & Choi, 2009; Pfammatter et al., 2006; 
Tandon et al., 2010). 
Social skills training 
People with schizophrenia typically show deficits in accurately perceiving 
social situations, understanding and planning what to do in them, and 

234 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
then responding in a socially appropriate way. This renders them 
vulnerable to engaging in stressful social interactions, to rejection, to 
avoidance of further social interaction, and to social isolation (Fett et al., 
2011; Walker et al., 2004). The aim of social skills training is to enhance 
social competence and so prevent social isolation. 
Social skills training is usually offered within a group therapy context, 
and involves the development of communication, conversation, assert- 
iveness, medication management and social problem-solving skills. 
Modelling, rehearsal, shaping and reinforcement are used during the 
training process. The main emphasis is on practising skills rather than 
talking about them (Bellack et al., 2004; Tenhula & Bellack, 2008). 
Meta-analyses show that compared with medication alone, multimodal 
programmes that include social skills training and medication lead to 
significant improvements in social skills in service users with schizo- 
phrenia (Kurtz & Mueser, 2008; Pfammatter et al., 2006). 
Vocational rehabilitation 
Unemployment is a highly prevalent problem in schizophrenia which 
vocational rehabilitation aims to address (Becker, 2008). Effective 
vocational rehabilitation involves assessment, job searching, matching 
available jobs to client preferences, rapid placement in competitive 
employment (rather than sheltered workshops), and the provision of 
individualized vocational support and training while service users are in 
employment (rather than beforehand). Systematic reviews and meta- 
analyses consistently show that compared with traditional approaches, 
such as sheltered workshop placement, supported employment doubles 
the chances of engaging in long-term, paid, competitive employment 
(Becker, 2008; Cook & Razzano, 2005). Employed service users 
typically show improved self-esteem and better symptom control. 
The recovery model 
The recovery movement is being adopted as an overarching framework 
for mental health services internationally (Roe & Davidson, 2008; Slade, 
2009). Kraepelin’s (1899) conceptualization of schizophrenia as a neu- 
rological disorder with a chronic declining course led to the develop- 
ment of long-term institutional care and a reliance on physical treatments, 
including medication, as the main interventions for schizophrenia during 
much of the 20th century. This in turn led to the institutionalization of 
‘psychiatric patients’ and the gradual erosion of their civil rights within 
institutions. It also led to their stigmatization and marginalization within 
society. A further consequence of Kraepelin’s position was a reduced 
emphasis on the role of trauma and stress in the aetiology of schizo- 
phrenia and the value of psychosocial interventions in its treatment. It 
was in response to this position that the recovery model emerged at the 
end of the 20th century and the dawn of the new millennium. 
The recovery movement initially arose from service user-groups and 
mental health professionals involved in rehabilitation, but more recently 
S

7 * SCHIZOPHRENIA 
235 
has become adopted internationally as a best practice framework for 
service delivery. The model conceptualizes the recovery process as a 
personal journey, and privileges the concepts of optimism, well-being, 
personal strengths, supportive relationships, collaboration, personal 
choice, adaptive coping, developing a meaningful 
life, civil rights, 
empowerment and inclusion. 
The recovery model has been inspired by longitudinal research 
which showed that chronic decline in schizophrenia was not inevitable 
(Hafner & an der Heiden, 2008), that trauma and stress play a role in 
the aetiology of schizophrenia (Bebbington & Kuipers, 2008), and that 
psychosocial 
interventions 
have an important place in facilitating 
recovery from psychosis (Mojtabai et al., 1998). The recovery movement 
embraced these research findings, placing a strong emphasis on 
professionals working collaboratively with service users to help them 
achieve their preferred goals. There was a shift in emphasis from 
institutional to community care, and from remediating patient deficits to 
fostering service-user strengths. There was also an emphasis on the 
civil rights of patients to make choices about their preferred treatments 
and to have an inclusive place in society. The recovery movement has 
created a context for the development of innovative community-based 
approaches to mental health service delivery, such as the strengths- 
based case management model and assertive community treatment. 
Strengths-based case management 
The strengths-based case management model was developed by 
Charles Rapp in the Kansas School of Social Welfare (Rapp & Goscha, 
2006, 2008). With this model professionals work in partnership with 
clients to help them recover. Thus, the strengths model falls within the 
overall framework of the recovery model. 
The model is guided by six principles. First, people with schizophrenia 
can recover and transform their lives. Second, the primary focus of 
clinical work is on strengths rather than deficits. Third, the community is 
a source of resources that may facilitate recovery. 
Fourth, case 
managers are guided by service users’ preferences, and implement 
plans only with their approval. Fifth, the community is the primary setting 
for case management. Sixth, a strong therapeutic relationship between 
the case manager and service user is essential for recovery. 
There are four stages in the model: the engagement phase, strengths 
assessment, creating personal plans and resource acquisition, and 
disengagement. In the engagement phase the therapist forms a strong 
and respectful, 
collaborative therapeutic alliance 
with the client. 
Assessment focuses predominantly on evaluating clients’ personal 
strengths, and strengths they can access 
in their environments. 
Strengths are identified in domains of the daily living situation, finances, 
education or work, social support, health, leisure, recreational activities 
and spiritual or cultural activities. Strengths assessment forms the basis 
for the client and case manager to set goals and plan an agenda of 
things clients wish to achieve. To address this agenda, clients are 
helped to acquire the necessary community resources and supports for 

236 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
implementing their recovery plans which will increase their reintegration 
into community life. As clients’ autonomy increases and is sustained, 
and as clients come to live more independently in the community, the 
process of gradual disengagement is negotiated. 
A series of empirical evaluations has shown that this strengths 
model, when implemented with adequate fidelity, is more effective than 
routine psychiatric services in promoting recovery from schizophrenia 
(Rapp & Goscha, 2008). 
Assertive community treatment 
Assertive community treatment was developed by Leonard Stein and 
Mary Ann Test at the Mendota Mental Health Institute in Madison, 
Wisconsin to address the challenges of deinstitutionalization. It is an 
integrated community mental health service delivery model in which 
hard-to-reach people with schizophrenia receive intensive, continuous 
individualized treatment, 
rehabilitation, and support services from 
community-based multidisciplinary teams in which team members carry 
small case loads (DeLuca et al., 2008). Assertive community treatment 
aims to promote rehabilitation and recovery, and to prevent homeless- 
- 
ness and unnecessary hospitalization. There is a major focus on helping 
service users develop the skills to manage everyday problems of living. 
All therapies and services are provided by team members and are not 
‘farmed out’ to other professionals. 
Multimodal treatment in which evidence-based pharmacological and 
psychosocial therapies are provided in an integrated way is central to 
this service-delivery model. Thus, evidence-based medication algo- 
rithms, adherence programmes, psychoeducational family therapy, 
cognitive behaviour therapy, supported employment and so forth can 
be offered within the context of assertive community treatment pro- 
grammes. Teams help service users to avoid crisis situations, and 
where necessary provide rapid response crisis intervention on a 24/7 
basis to prevent unnecessary hospitalizations. Services are provided to 
clients in their homes or elsewhere in the community, on a time- 
unlimited basis. Team composition, training, adherence to assertive 
community treatment programme fidelity guidelines and ongoing super- 
vision are essential for the effectiveness of this approach to service 
delivery. 
In a meta-analysis of six randomized controlled trials, Coldwell and 
Bender (2007) found that assertive community treatment led to a 37% 
reduction in homelessness and a 26% improvement in psychiatric 
symptom severity compared with standard case management. In a 
systematic review of 25 randomized controlled trials, Bond et al. (2001) 
concluded that assertive community treatment substantially reduces 
psychiatric hospital use, increases housing stability, and moderately 
improves symptoms and subjective quality of life. It is highly successful 
in engaging service users in treatment. 
Bond et al. (2001) found that the more closely case management 
programs followed assertive community treatment principles, the better 
were the outcomes. While assertive community treatment services are 

7 * SCHIZOPHRENIA 
237 
costly, these costs are offset by a reduction in hospital use by service 
users with a history of extensive hospital use. In meta-analysis of 44 
Studies involving over 6,000 service users, Ziguras and Stuart (2000) 
found that assertive community treatment was more effective than 
treatment as usual in reducing care costs and family burden, and in 
improving family satisfaction with services. 
Assessment 
The assessment and treatment of schizophrenia is ideally conducted by 
multidisciplinary teams. The early detection and treatment of psychosis 
is critical because better outcomes occur in cases where duration of 
untreated psychosis is brief (Tandon et al., 2008a). For hard-to-reach 
cases, the adoption of an assertive outreach approach is optimal 
(DeLuca et al., 2008). 
Typically, the preliminary assessment and management of acute 
psychotic episodes is managed by psychiatrists and psychiatric nurses. 
Once positive symptoms have been managed with antipsychotic 
medication, a broader-based assessment is conducted to guide long- 
term case management. Through careful clinical interviewing of patients 
and members of their families, the symptoms of schizophrenia and 
relevant history are obtained. A diagnosis is given in accordance with 
the criteria outlined in ICD-10 and DSM-IV-TR, given in Table 7.1, and 
a formulation explaining the symptoms entailed by the diagnosis is 
developed in which the relevant predisposing, precipitating, maintaining 
and protective factors are outlined. A general clinical formulation model 
is given in Figure 7.3. 
From Table 7.1 it may be seen that there are differences between 
DSM and ICD criteria. For a DSM diagnosis, impairment in functioning 
must have been present for 6 months, whereas for an ICD diagnosis 
symptoms must have been present for at least a month. The psychotic 
- 
disorders module of the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis | 
Disorders is a widely used and well-validated structured interview for 
diagnosing schizophrenia (SCID, First et al., 1996). Psychotic symptom 
severity may be initially rated and regularly monitored with the Brief 
Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS, Lukoff et al., 1986) or the Positive and 
Negative Symptom Scale (PANSS, Kay et al., 1987). With the BPRS 
and PANSS, 
the severity of symptoms such as delusions 
and 
hallucinations are rated on Likert scales on the basis of observations of 
patients’ behaviour and their responses to questions. 
Overall functioning may be monitored periodically with the clinician- 
rated Global Assessment of Functioning scale (GAF, Luborsky, 1962). 
On the GAF the patients’ overall functioning is rated on a single 100- 
point rating scale. The social needs of service users indicating the 
resources required to help them adjust within the community may be 
assessed with the short version of the Camberwell Assessment of Need 
(CAN, Slade et al., 1999; Trauer et al., 2008). This covers issues such 
as 
mental 
and 
physical 
health, 
drug use, 
social 
relationships, 
accommodation, transport, budgeting, and activities of daily living. The 

238 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
PREDISPOSING FACTORS 
Genetic vulnerability to psychosis 
Schizotypy, trait anxiety, external locus of control 
Obstetric complications 
Early trauma and abuse 
Drug misuse — cannabis and hallucinogens 
MAINTAINING FACTORS 
PROTECTIVE FACTORS 
PRECIPITATING 
Exposure to high 
FACTORS 
Good premorbid 
expressed emotion 
. 
adjustment, personal 
Life stresses 
strengths & 
Inadvertent 
and transitions 
aehiavanienis 
reinforcement of 
psychotic symptoms 
Family support 
School or workplace 
support 
Peer-group support 
Drug misuse 
Social isolation 
Schizophrenia 
Treatment refusal, 
medication non- 
adherence 
Engagement in 
treatment 
Figure 7.3 General formulation model for schizophrenia 
scale also offers a framework for identifying needs that have and have 
not been met. 
The use of the CAN as a central part of assessment is consistent 
with Rapp’s strengths-based model of case management mentioned 
earlier (Rapp & Goscha, 2006). In research studies, expressed emotion 
of family members towards patients, which has an impact on their 
relapse rates, is assessed by the Camberwell Family Interview (CFI, 
Leff & Vaughn, 1985). Because this instrument is too cumbersome for 
use in routine clinical practice, Hooley and Parker (2006) recommend 
asking patients to rate how critical family members are of them on a 
10-point scale, an assessment procedure that correlates highly with 
expressed emotion assessed by the CFI. 
Service users’ assessments of their recovery journey may be regu- 
larly monitored with the Recovery Assessment Scale (RAS, Corrigan et 
al., 2004). This self-report instrument assesses hope, meaning of life, 
quality of life, symptoms and empowerment. During the process of 
assessment and treatment, patients and family members may be invited 
to keep daily records of medication adherence, fluctuations in symp- 
toms, distress, beliefs, and the circumstances preceding and following 
these fluctuations. These idiographic ratings are useful for fine-tuning 
ongoing family therapy, CBT and other psychosocial interventions. 

7 * SCHIZOPHRENIA 
239 
Treatment 
The optimal treatment for schizophrenia is multimodal and includes 
both antipsychotic medication and psychological therapies (Tandon et 
al., 2010). Currently second-generation antipsychotic medications are 
the pharmacological treatments of choice, for reasons stated earlier in 
this chapter. Evidence-based psychological therapies include family 
therapy, cognitive-behaviour therapy, cognitive remediation therapy, 
social skills training and vocational rehabilitation, all of which have been 
described above. 
Treatment programmes should be offered in a carefully planned and 
co-ordinated way by multidisciplinary teams with adequate training in 
these evidence-based pharmacological and psychological interventions. 
Treatment packages should be individually tailored to take account of 
service users’ clinical needs as identified in the case formulation and 
personal preferences as expressed during assessment, in line with the 
recovery model orientation. In all cases psychoeducational family ther- 
apy to help service users and their families understand schizophrenia 
and to promote medication adherence is essential, but more intensive 
family therapy is warranted where family members show high levels of 
criticism, hostility or emotional overinvolvement. CBT is particularly use- 
ful for the management of residual positive symptoms that are not con- 
trolled by medication, or to facilitate a reduction in the medication dosage 
required to control positive symptoms. To be optimally effective, both 
family therapy and CBT should be offered for about 9 months. 
Cognitive remediation therapy and social skills training are appropri- 
ate where it is clear that significant cognitive and social skills deficits are 
present. Vocational rehabilitation is appropriate where service users 
require employment. Where there is comorbid alcohol or drug misuse or 
obesity (a side-effect of some antipsychotic medications), evidence- 
based treatment for these problems should be integrated into the over- 
all treatment package (Kavanagh, 2008). 
The development of a strong therapeutic alliance and the adoption of 
an approach that modifies intrapsychic and interpersonal maintaining 
factors underpins effective psychosocial interventions for schizophre- 
nia. This overall approach to the management of schizophrenia is 
broadly consistent with international best practice guidelines (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2004b; Buchanan et al., 2010; Dixon et al., 
2010; NICE, 2009b). 
Controversies 
There are many controversies surrounding schizophrenia. These cen- 
tre on issues such as the validity of the schizophrenia construct, the 
validity of the schizotypy dimensional conceptualization of psychosis, 
the idea that schizophrenia reflects a split personality, the view that 
diagnosing schizophrenia 
is an act of oppression, the role of the family 
in the aetiology of schizophrenia, and the psychoanalytic treatment of 
psychosis. These issues will be briefly considered below. 

240 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Validity of the schizophrenia construct 
There is ongoing controversy about the validity of the construct of 
schizophrenia. At one extreme schizophrenia is conceptualized as a 
discrete biomedical disease-like entity — a ‘mental illness’ — with clearly 
defined symptoms, arising primarily from genetic and neurobiological 
factors, and requiring treatment mainly with antipsychotic medication. 
This is the prevailing position within mainstream psychiatry following 
the tradition founded by Emil Kraepelin (1899) and currently expressed 
most authoritatively in works such as the DSM-IV-TR and mainstream 
psychiatry textbooks. 
In the UK, critics of this position include Mary Boyle (2002) and 
Richard Bentall (2003). They point out that there is scant evidence to 
support the view that schizophrenia is a biomedical ‘mental illness’, and 
marshal many different arguments to support this position. The 
symptoms that define the illness are not distributed within the population 
in the way that symptoms of diseases such as cancer or heart disease 
are. They are SSMS COS OS Whe ae Many so-called 
normal 
people have delusions and 
hallicinations. The supposed 
biological causes of schizophrenia (genetic vulnerability, structural and 
functional brain abnormalities, etc.) are not present in all cases or 
absent in all non-cases. Not all cases of schizophrenia follow a distinct 
uniform course. Not all cases of schizophrenia respond to biomedical 
treatment. Some people with psychotic symptoms recover without 
biomedical intervention either spontaneously or through engaging in 
psychological therapy. Bentall (2003) and Boyle (2002) support all of 
these arguments with research evidence (some of which has been 
covered in this 
chapter) and conclude that the construct of schizophrenia 
as a} mental illness’ \has no validity. 
Schizotypy 
There is ongoing controversy about the validity of categorical and 
dimensional models of psychotic processes (Linscott & van Os, 2010). 
The schizotypy construct has been proposed by researchers such as 
Gordon Claridge in the UK and Mark Lenzenweger in the US as a 
dimensional alternative to the prevailing categorical conceptualization 
of schizophrenia (Lenzenweger, 2010). 
According to the categorical view, which derives from Kraepelin’s 
(1899) work and is enshrined in the ICD and DSM classification systems, 
schizophrenia is a discrete diagnostic category. Within a population, a 
proportion of people have schizophrenia and the rest do not. In contrast 
to this prevailing categorical view is the schizotypy hypothesis. This 
proposes that anomalous sensory experiences, peculiar beliefs and 
disorganized thinking are present in an extreme form in schizophrenia 
as hallucinations, delusions and thought disorder, but these processes 
are on a continuum with normal experience — a position originally 
advocated by Bleuler (1911). 
A variety of measures of schizotypy have been developed which 
assess this continuum, and research programmes involving these 

7 * SCHIZOPHRENIA 
241 
measures have provided support for the construct (Lenzenweger, 
2010). For example, research on schizotypy shows that the continuum 
may be composed of subdimensions; the continuum extends from 
normal to psychotic experiences; schizotypy is heritable; and people 
with high schizotypy scores but who are not psychotic show attentional, 
eye-movement and other neuropsychological abnormalities associated 
with schizophrenia. 
Schizophrenia and split personality 
In popular culture schizophrenia is often used to refer 
to split personality. 
For example, in a UK survey of a national random sample Luty et al. 
(2006) found that 40% of respondents equated 
split or multiple 
personality with schizophrenia. However, in psychology, it is clear from 
this chapter that schizophrenia does not refer to such a condition. The 
closest scientific equivalent to split personality is a condition referred to 
as multiple personality disorder (MPD) in ICD-10 and dissociative 
identity disorder (DID) in DSM-IV-TR. The central feature of MPD or 
DID is the apparent existence of two or more distinct personalities within 
the individual, with only one being evident at a time. Each personality 
(or alter) is distinct, with its own memories, behaviour patterns and 
interpersonal style. Commonly, the host personality is unaware of the 
existence of the alters and these vary in their knowledge of each other. 
A developmental, diathesis—stress model of dissociative identity 
disorder is now widely accepted (International Society for the Study of 
Trauma and Dissociation, 2011). Available evidence suggests that the 
capacity to dissociate is normally distriputed within the population. 
People who have a high degree of this trait, wnen exposed to extreme 
trauma (such:as repeated severe child abuse) during early childhood 
may cope by dissociating their consciousness from the experience of 
trauma. They achieve dissociation by entering a trance-like state. 
Where repeated trauma occurs in early childhood, and dissociation 
is repeatedly used as an effective distress-reducing coping strategy, the 
process of dissociation is negatively reinforced. That is, the habit of 
dissociation is strengthened because it brings relief from distress during 
trauma exposure. Furthermore, the process of dissociation allows the 
child to preserve relationships with abusive or inadequate caregivers 
during the periods when traumatic abuse is not occurring. Eventually, 
sufficient experiences become dissociated to constitute a separate 
personality. These may be activated in later life at times of stress or 
trauma or through suggestion in hypnotic psychotherapeutic situations. 
Psychological treatment commonly involves helping clients integrate 
the multiple personalities into a single personality and develop non- 
dissociative strategies for dealing with stress. Unlike schizophrenia, 
psychotropic medication is of little value in treating the core symptoms 
of multiple personality disorder. 
In the ICD and DSM, MPD and DID are classified with other disso- 
ciative conditions including dissociative amnesia (inability to recall 
events following a trauma); dissociative fugue (sudden unexpected 

242 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
travel away from the customary place of activities coupled with confu- 
sion or amnesia for aspects of one’s identity following a trauma); and 
depersonalization disorder (a sense of being out of one’s body following 
trauma). People who have a strong capacity to dissociate may develop 
one of the dissociative disorders rather than PTSD following trauma. 
Dissociative phenomena fall on a continuum, with tip-of-the-tongue 
experiences being a mild dissociative phenomenon, hypnotic trance 
states being a more pronounced dissociative condition; depersonaliza- 
tion disorder and dissociative amnesia and fugue being more extreme 
forms of dissociation; and MPD or DID being the most extreme form of 
dissociation. More extreme dissociative conditions develop when the 
person has a strong capacity to dissociate and is exposed repeatedly to 
severe trauma. 
Diagnosis as oppression 
The prevailing professional view within the field of mental health is that 
a diagnosis of schizophrenia reflects the assignment of a person with 
an objectively verifiable condition to a valid diagnostic category based 
on careful and unbiased observation, and that this process is conducted 
in the patient’s best interests. However, an alternative viewpoint most 
strongly presented by Thomas Szasz (2010) since the early 1960s is 
that diagnosis is an act of oppression, because it paves the way for 
involuntary hospitalization and involuntary treatment. 
Szasz, a US psychiatrist, argues that the process of diagnosing a 
person with schizophrenia is a covert, politically oppressive transaction 
in which a deviant or disadvantaged person is subjected to a process of 
social control. This is offered as one explanation for the greater rates of 
schizophrenia among ethnic minorities (particularly African Americans) 
and people from low socio-economic groups. Furthermore, exponents 
of this position argue that schizophrenia is not a valid diagnostic 
category, but an invalid fabrication constructed to exert social control 
over deviant people who do not conform to societal norms. 
Schizophrenia as a sane reaction to an insane situation 
R. D. Laing (2009), a Scottish psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, in the 
1960s and 1970s strongly opposed the view that schizophrenia was a 
genetically based medical condition requiring treatment with anti- 
psychotic medication. He also opposed the prevailing orthodoxy that 
the contents of delusions and hallucinations were incoherent. Laing 
proposed that the contents of psychotic symptoms were understand- 
able as psychological responses to complex, confusing, conflicting and 
powerful parental injunctions that left no scope for more rational and 
adaptive attempts at communication. That is, he viewed schizophre- 
nia as ‘a sane reaction to an insane situation’. 
For Laing, effective treatment involved creating a context within 
which insight into the complex family process and the psychotic 
response to this could be facilitated. The role of the therapist was to 

7 + SCHIZOPHRENIA 
243 
understand the content of patients’ delusions and hallucinations, and 
interpret these for the patient as responses to conflicting parental 
injunctions. The experience of psychosis and recovery was a difficult 
journey from which the person could emerge with new and valuable 
insights. Laing advocated drug-free psychotherapeutic treatment for 
psychosis within the context of a therapeutic community. He founded 
the Philadelphia Association 
in the UK, which continues 
to run 
therapeutic communities influenced by Laing’s ideas. 
Laing’s view on the exclusive role of the family in the aetiology of 
schizophrenia and the exclusive use of psychotherapy in its treatment 
has not been supported by subsequent research. Genetic factors play a 
major role in the aetiology of schizophrenia, and antipsychotic medi- 
cation reduces positive symptoms in two-thirds of cases (Ritsner & 
Gottesman, 2011; Tandon et al., 2010). However, research findings 
have supported the hypothesis that the family does affect the psychotic 
process and psychotherapy has a place in the management of 
psychosis. Personal trauma, including child abuse increases the risk of 
psychosis, stressful life events including those within the family can 
precipitate an episode of psychosis, and high levels of family criticism, 
hostility and emotional overinvolvement increase the risk of relapse 
(Bebbington & Kuipers, 2008; Hooley, 2007; Shelvin et al., 2008). 
Family therapy delays relapse in families characterized by high levels of 
expressed emotion and cognitive behaviour therapy which stresses the 
idea that psychotic symptoms are understandable and on a continuum 
with normal experience can help patients control these symptoms 
(Tandon et al., 2010). 
Psychoanalysis and psychosis 
There is controversy over the value of psychoanalysis in understanding 
and treating psychosis. The developers of the influential PORT (Patient 
Outcomes Research Team) guidelines, on the basis of a literature 
review, concluded that psychoanalytically based psychotherapy has no 
place in the treatment of schizophrenia (Lehman & Steinwachs, 1998). 
In contrast, Gottdiener (2006), in a review of results of controlled trials 
and meta-analytic results, concluded that psychodynamic psychotherapy 
was as effective as CBT in the treatment of medicated patients with 
schizophrenia. 
Freud and later psychoanalysts attributed the development of 
schizophrenia to adverse early family experiences, and many analysts, 
like Freud, acknowledged that treatment of psychosis with psychoanalytic 
methods was problematic because psychotic patients did not develop 
transference to the analyst in the same way that neurotic patients did 
(Lucas, 2009). Freud never treated a psychotic patient and was 
pessimistic about the relevance of psychoanalysis to psychosis; this 
attitude deterred many analysts from attempting to treat schizophrenia. 
However, there were exceptions. Frieda Fromm-Reichman in the US 
and Wilfred Bion in the UK developed supportive psychodynamic psy- 
chotherapy-approaches to treating psychosis (Lucas, 2009). Currently, 

244 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
despite Gottdiener’s (2006) supportive review of psychodynamic treat- 
ment outcome studies, psychoanalytically informed interventions are 
rarely used to treat schizophrenia. 
Summary 
Schizophrenia refers to a complex group of psychotic disorders 
that affects about 1% of the population. The condition is marked 
by positive symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations, 
negative symptoms such as flattened affect, alogia and avoli- 
tion, and disorganized speech and behaviour. In the past, a 
broad definition of schizophrenia was used in North America 
and a narrow definition used in Europe, but there is now consid- 
erable international agreement on a narrow-band definition of 
schizophrenia. In the DSM and ICD classification systems dis- 
tinctions are made between four main subtypes of schizophre- 
nia: paranoid, catatonic, hebephrenic or disorganized, and 
undifferentiated. 
Schizophrenia, 
schizophreniform 
disorder, 
schizoaffective disorder and schizotypal, schizoid and paranoid 
personality disorders constitute the schizophrenia spectrum 
disorders which share a similar genetic aetiology and treatment 
response. 
Schizophrenia typically has its onset in late adolescence or 
early adulthood 
and follows 
a chronic relapsing course, 
although up to 20% of patients show complete remission. A 
favourable outcome is associated with good premorbid adjust- 
ment, and a brief duration of untreated psychosis character- 
ized by an acute onset in response to precipitating stressful life 
events, a family history of affective disorder and a favourable 
life situation to return to following discharge from hospital. 
The greatest risk factor for schizophrenia is a family history of 
psychosis. 
Currently there is wide acceptance of a stress-vulnerability 
model of schizophrenia whereby the condition is proposed to 
arise when a genetically vulnerable individual is exposed to 
significant 
life stress. 
Life stresses 
include 
predisposing 
trauma, precipitating acute stressful life events and maintaining 
chronic stressful family interactions. 
Neurobiological research has identified a number of candi- 
date genes and structural and functional brain abnormalities 
associated with schizophrenia. The two-syndrome hypothesis 
offers a simplified way to integrate relevant findings on research 
into the biological origins of schizophrenia. This hypothesis 
entails the view that a distinction may be made between type 
schizophrenia, which is a genetically inherited disease marked 
by a dysregulation of the dopaminergic system and character- 
ized by positive symptoms, and ype. schizophrenia, which is 

7 
* SCHIZOPHRENIA 
245 
a neurodevelopmental disorder arising from prenatal or perina- 
tal insults resulting in neuroanatomical abnormalities marked 
by chronic negative symptoms. 
Comprehensive multidisciplinary assessment and treatment 
with multimodal evidence-based interventions is internationally 
accepted as best practice in cases of schizophrenia. Individually 
tailored 
multimodal treatment programmes 
based 
on the 
stress-vulnerability model should include both antipsychotic 
‘ medication and evidence-based psychological therapies such 
as family therapy, CBT, cognitive rehabilitation, social skills 
training, and vocational rehabilitation. 
Controversies about schizophrenia concern issues such as 
the validity of the schizophrenia and schizotypy constructs, 
confusion of schizophrenia with MPD/DID, diagnosis as an 
oppressive process, family process in the aetiology of schizo- 
phrenia, and the psychoanalytic treatment of psychosis. 
Questions 
e 
What are the main clinical features of schizophrenia and how is it 
different from the popular conception of a ‘split personality’? 
e 
What are the differences between paranoid, hebephrenic, catatonic 
and undifferentiated schizophrenia? 
e 
Howprevalent is schizophrenia? 
e 
What are the risk factors for schizophrenia? 
e 
What are biological and diathesis—stress theories of schizophrenia, 
and the main research findings relevant to these theories? 
e 
What are the main evidence-based approaches to assessment and 
treatment of schizophrenia? 
“a 
e 
Which controversial issues concerning schizophrenia interest you 
most, and why? 
ELS io Lael 
ts pA 
A 
a cal 
ee ae nara 
FURTHER READING 
Professional 
» 
Mueser, K. & Jeste, D. (2008). Clinical handbook of schizophrenia. New 
York: Guilford. 
e 
Rubin, A., Springer, D. & Trawver, K. (2010). Clinician’s guide to evidence- 
based practice: Psychosocial treatment of schizophrenia. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley. 
Self-help | 
° 
Healy, C. (2007). Understanding your =e sep illness: A work- 
book. Chichester, UK: Wiley 

246 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Kuipers, E. & Bebbington, P. E. (2005). Living with mental iliness (third 
edition). London: Souvenir Press. 
Mueser, K. & Gingerich, S. (2006). The aves. family guide to schizo- 
phrenia. New York: Guilford. 
WEBSITES 
American Psychiatric Association’s practice guidelines for treating schiz- 
ophrenia: 
http://psychiatryonline.org/guidelines.aspx 
National 
Institute 
for 
Clinical 
Excellence 
guidelines 
for treating 
schizophrenia: 
http://guidance.nice. org. uk/topic/mentalhealthbehavioural 
Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT) updated 
treatment recommendations 2009: 
http://schizophreniabulletin.oxfordjournals.org/content/36/1/94 
full. 
pdf+html 
Schizophrenia Research Forum: 
www.schizophreniaforum.org 

Personality disorders 
; 
Fc 
ts 
After studying this chapter you will be able to: 
Learning objective 
e define the concept of personality disorder 
e 
list the main personality disorders in the DSM and 
ICD classification systems 
e distinguish between Cluster A, B and C personality 
disorders in terms of their main clinical features 
e summarize the epidemiology of personality disorders 
e outline the diathesis—stress, psychodynamic and 
cognitive-behavioural theories of personality 
disorders 
e name the main evidence-based approaches to 
assessment and treatment of personality disorders 
e describe some of the controversial issues concerning 
personality disorders. 
Introduction 
Often episodes of psychological problems such as anxiety and depres- 
sion occur against a backdrop of more pervasive and long-standing 
personality-based difficulties. To address this, distinctions are made in 
ICD-10 (World Health Organization, 1992) and DSM-IV-TR (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2000) between episodic psychological disorders 

248 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
on one hand and persistent personality disorders on the other. In 
DSM-IV-TR a multiaxial system is used for summarizing diagnostic 
assessments. The main diagnosis is given on Axis |, and personality dis- 
orders are recorded on Axis II. (Comorbid medical conditions are coded 
on Axis III, psychosocial stressors on Axis IV and current level of function- 
ing on Axis V, although these other axes do not concern us at this point.) 
Axis | disorders are characterized by atypical episodes of psycho- 
logical functioning that deviate from an individual's normal pattern of 
experience and behaviour. In contrast, Axis Il personality disorders are 
pervasive, enduring, inflexible patterns of behaviour, cognition and 
affect that differ markedly from prevailing cultural expectations and that 
lead to distress or impairment. 
In clinical practice about 40% of patients present with both classes of 
disorder (Zimmerman et al., 2008). Personality disorders run a chronic 
course and are associated with a poor outcome. In the Collaborative 
Longitudinal Personality Disorders Study, Skodol et al. (2005) found 
that personality disorders were characterized by functional impairment 
in personal, social, educational and occupational domains; a poor 
response to treatment for comorbid depression; a high risk of suicide; 
and extensive health service usage. Individuals with comorbid Axis | 
and II disorders have greater service needs than those with Axis | dis- 
orders only (H6rz et al., 2010). The economic cost of meeting the treat- 
ment needs of patients with personality disorders is therefore significant. 
In a Dutch study of 1740 people with comorbid Axis | and II diagnoses 
treated at six specialist mental health services, Soeteman et al. (2008) 
found that the average cost in the 12 months prior to attending specialist 
mental health services was €11,126 per patient. Two-thirds of this was 
direct medical costs and the remainder was due to productivity losses. 
The assessment and treatment of personality disorders are an important 
concern for clinical psychology on both humanitarian and economic 
grounds. 
Inthis chapter, after considering the clinical features and epidemiology 
of personality disorders, a number of specific theoretical explanations 
for personality disorders will be considered, and an outline of their 
assessment and treatment will be given. 
Clinical features and case examples 
The defining features of personality disorders described in DSM-IV-TR 
and ICD-10 include the following: 
e 
anenduring dysfunctional pattern of behaviour and experience 
e 
the pattern begins in adolescence and is consistent across situations 
e 
there are difficulties with cognition, affect, impulse control, behaviour 
and interpersonal functioning 
e 
recurrent relationship and occupational problems are present 
e 
difficulties in learning from experience or benefiting from psycho- 
therapy occur 
e 
there is usually a history of other psychological disorders and/or 
criminality. 

8 
+ PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
249 
Personality disorders are characterized by an enduring pattern of 
behaviour and experience that deviates markedly from cultural expecta- 
tions. This pattern leads to significant personal distress or significant 
impairment in social functioning. With personality disorders there are 
marked difficulties in two or more of the following domains: cognition, 
affect, impulse control, behaviour, and interpersonal functioning. 
With cognition, there may be peculiarities or difficulties in the way 
self, others and events are interpreted. At an affective level the range, 
intensity, lability and appropriateness of emotional responses may be 
out of keeping with cultural expectations. There may be serious 
difficulties with impulse control leading to highly erratic or impulsive 
behaviour, markedly inhibited behaviour, or peculiar behaviour. With 
respect to interpersonal behaviour there are typically serious difficulties 
in making and maintaining stable and fulfilling interpersonal relation- 
ships. Most people find the rigid behavioural patterns of people with 
personality disorders aversive and so avoid them. In the long term, the 
social isolation or negative responses of others to people with personality 
disorders causes them personal distress. 
A hallmark of personality disorders is the fact that the cognitive, 
affective, behavioural and interpersonal difficulties constitute a long- 
standing and rigid pattern of psychological functioning. Usually person- 
ality disorders can be traced back to adolescence or early adulthood. 
Furthermore, individuals with personality disorders have great difficulty 
learning from life experiences or therapeutic interventions how to alter 
their rigid behaviour patterns. They repeatedly make the same mistakes 
and find it very challenging to learn from their errors. Often they are 
unaware of the impact of their behaviour on others, and wish to conceal 
their history of social and psychological difficulties. It is therefore clini- 
cally useful to include collateral information from family members when 
assessing personality disorders. 
For some personality disorders, such as antisocial personality disor- 
der, diagnosis is made by reputation rather than presentation. Person- 
ality disorders commonly occur in conjunction with other psychological 
difficulties 
or criminality. 
In clinical settings personality disordered 
patients usually create significant problems for staff and other patients. 
Staff often describe them as manipulative and as playing one staff mem- 
ber off against another, or as refusing to co-operate with treatment. 
In DSM-IV-TR the 10 main personality disorders are subdivided into 
three clusters on the basis of their cardinal clinical features. The first 
cluster includes the paranoid, schizoid and schizotypal personality 
disorders. These are grouped together because they are characterized 
by odd or eccentric behaviour. It was noted in Chapter 7 that these 
conditions are schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Their clinical features 
resemble subclinical psychotic symptoms and they share the same 
genetic aetiology as schizophrenia. 
The second cluster includes the antisocial, borderline, histrionic and 
narcissistic 
personality 
disorders. 
These 
are 
characterized 
by dramatic, emotional 
or erratic impulsive behaviour. The third 
cluster includes the avoidant, dependent and obsessive-compulsive 

250 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
personality disorders, all of which are characterized by anxiety and fear- 
fulness. A very similar classification system is used in ICD-10. There 
are, however, some minor differences. The schizotypal syndrome is 
listed as a psychotic condition along with schizophrenia in ICD-10, and 
narcissistic personality disorder is omitted. Also, obsessive compulsive 
personality disorder is referred to as anakastic personality disorder; 
antisocial personality disorder is referred to as dissocial personality dis- 
order; and avoidant personality disorder is referred to as anxious avoid- 
ant personality disorder. 
The clinical features of the 10 personality disorders are set out in 
Table 8.1. The current classification of personality disorders has its 
roots in the work of the German psychiatrist Kurt Schneider (1923). 
Multiple personality disorder (MPD), which was discussed in the 
closing section of Chapter 7, is not classified with other personality 
disorders in ICD-10. Nor is dissociative identity disorder (the DSM- 
IV-TR term for MPD) classified with personality disorders in DSM-IV-TR. 
Rather, in both classification systems this condition is classified with 
other disorders where dissociation is the core feature. 
Cluster A: The odd, eccentric group 
The odd, eccentric group of personality disorders includes: 
e 
paranoid personality disorder 
e 
schizoid personality disorder 
e 
schizotypal personality disorder. 
Paranoid personality disorder 
Clinical features 
People with paranoid personality disorder have a pervasive distrust of 
others. At a cognitive level, they interpret the motives of others in nega- 
tive, malevolent, conspiratorial or exploitative terms. They assume, on 
the basis of minimal or ambiguous evidence, that others intend to harm 
them, be disloyal to them, exploit them, or use personal information to 
discredit them. At an affective level they are angry, combative and 
unforgiving of those whom they view as having harmed them. At a 
behavioural and interpersonal level, they constantly question the loyalty 
of close friends, partners or spouses. They may refuse to confide in 
others in case their confidences are used against them. They may con- 
stantly check on their spouses’ or sexual partners’ whereabouts and 
question their fidelity. They may hold grudges indefinitely if they believe 
that their friends or partners have harmed, insulted, injured or betrayed 
them. Kraepelin (1921) and Freud (1911) both gave early accounts of 
paranoia as a distinct condition. 
Case example 
Margaret, age 35, had a paranoid personality disorder. She and Brian 
came for therapy because of extreme marital distress. Brian complained 

PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
2851 
‘OL-GDI Ul Pe}Sij Jou S| Jepsosip Ayjeuossed INSISSIOJEN,. ‘OL-D| ul eluasydoziyos UM UONIPUOS DOYDASG e Se Pe}si] S! awoipus jedAjoziyos, -2j0N 
eee 
yOlyuoo asned jo.U0o 
JO} peau pue sseupjoo 
J19U} YOIYM Ul 
sdiysuogejes ajdginyy 
sseuued J1384} UO 
juapuedep Ajaj}ajdwio 
aie Asay} UoIyM Ul 
sdiysuogejal ajdyinyy 
S19U07 
suoneyoedxe ybiy 
JU} JOO O} [Ej JEU} 
sdiysuoyjejes ajdyjnyy 
sdiysuonejel 
mojjeys ejdqinyy 
juowuUOpUege Plone O} 
s}dwaye jnysseoonsun 
ONUCL UyIM 
sdiysuonjejel ejdninyw 
sdiysuornejes 
aAeyojdxe ajdyjinw 
J@u07] 
JQUO7 
INSNySI 
sdiysuojejay 
sjeob 
||2J8A0 JO Soul|pesp 
JO} pueBos jNOUIM 
Burmoj|o} ajnd payejeq 
ssoulbul9 
BHurjew uoisioep 
Jo} Ayyiqisuodsel 
aye} 0} JeSsNjoy 
JEMEIPUIIM |EID0S 
Huryjees UONneJIWpPY 
Burjees uonusye 
SAKONPSS “|EOUjESy | 
SUUEY-J9S 
sJayjO YM syyBi4 
AyeulwuD 
sJaU}O Jo s}YyBi Se}elol/A, 
QUuJUsd0F] 
914jUe00F 
@AO109S 
snojeyog 
uonoepeduwi Jee 
Awouojne jo Je34 
uonoefai jo 1e984 
poeyesjsny si peau 
Siu} Ji pesseidep JO 
AuBue sewiooeg pue 
UOHeILUPe SEACID 
mojjeys 
pesseideq 
anissolbby 
aais|nduu| 
anissolbby 
snoixue Ajjeio0s 
yoye payoujsuog 
poye Pejol}SUOD 
anissoibby 
POLY 
SS9UILSPsO 
ybnosu} peuleysns 3q ued 
Aqunoes pue Ajayes Jey} Jollog 
Ajsnowouo}ne 
uonjouny youued Aay} yeu} ja19q 
sseyjo Aq 
payeles aq jm Aoy) yeu} J9119g 
SJ8UjJO UeU} J8}9q 
aie Aauy esneoeq JuewyeeL} 
dIA 0} JUsWA}jUS Ul! J91/9q 
SJ@UJO O} JSOD BU} JAWeW OU 
uonuaye 0} JUBWA/IHUS Ul Jo1!E9g 
si9ujO 
pue Jas JO MAIA penjevuepuNn 
pue panjeAJaAO UBEMJEq SYIUS 
juawuopuRge jo uonepedxy 
spsepuejls 
JeJOW JO JOS POZI|EUJS}U! ON 
yoseds a6ueS 
snogysiedns 
QOUSJIJOJ JO SEEP| 
sjuBnou} a.uezig 
seep! PppO 
seep! plouesed 
uoipuboa 
siapsosip Ayyjeuosiad sOfew jo saunqesy jerulp> ule 
b°8 71aVL 
WISIUONISNSq 
Awouojne 
jo ype] 
ssauAys 
Aysoipues6 pue 
BOUBLOUUII-}J9S 
Hunjees uoquepny 
@Aagonpas 
Ayarsinduy| 
Ayunyewu! jes 
Ayjouyuso03 
yUSWYSejS8q 
JSNUSIN 
anjeay 
jeajuljo ule 
8aisindwoo 
-SAISSasgO 
juspusdeq 
JUBPIOAY 
xxDISISSIOJEN 
OIUOUIS!H 
aulLepiog 
jeposhuy 
ledAjoz1yoS 
ploziyos 
plouesed 
4aps0sip 
Ayypeuossad 
dnoub jnyess 
~ 
‘gsnoruy 
9 49}SN|9 
dnou6 ones 
‘yeuojows 
‘oneWweIG 
g J8ISNID 
dnoub 
OUujUua0098 
‘PPO 
Vv 
Ja}SNID 
Jaqsnjo 

252 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
that he felt like a prisoner in the marriage. Before leaving each morning, 
Margaret interrogated him about his daily schedule. She phoned him 
frequently at work and would sometimes visit his office unexpectedly to 
check up on him. One night he found her checking through his wallet 
and the memory of his mobile phone to find clues about him having 
contact with another woman. Margaret complained that Brian had been 
unfaithful to her recently. He denied this but said that her suspiciousness 
was making infidelity an attractive option. 
Margaret's suspiciousness was a longstanding characteristic. She 
had a very small circle of friends, whom she had known since childhood, 
She would not make new friends because she found it hard to trust and 
confide in others. She also thought that new friends would ridicule her. 
She had lost one of her closest female friends, Estelle, over an argu- 
ment about loyalty. Estelle was ill on an occasion when Margaret had 
made arrangements for the two of them to go to a James Taylor con- 
cert. Margaret believed that she had gone to a party elsewhere on that 
evening. There was no evidence for this, but Margaret believed that she 
had been betrayed. She would not forgive Estelle despite the latter’s 
attempts to put the incident to one side and continue the friendship. 
There were many incidents like this in Margaret's life, dating back to her 
childhood. 
Margaret had grown up in a family where her parents had separated 
when she was 8 years old. In the time before the parents’ separation 
she often heard them argue about her father’s whereabouts. These 
arguments would often end with her father storming out of the house 
and her mother shouting and crying. On some of these occasions she 
would say to Margaret ‘You can’t trust anyone in this world’. 
Margaret was attracted to Brian because of his openness and hon- 
esty and his willingness to spend a great deal of time with her. Brian 
found that after they were married the demands of work prevented him- 
self and Margaret from spending as much time together. As a result of 
this, Margaret began to accuse him of infidelity. He believed that if she 
continued to accuse him, despite his innocence, he would seriously con- 
sider separation. Margaret interpreted this as evidence of his infidelity. 
Schizoid personality disorder 
Clinical features 
People with schizoid personality disorder show a pervasive pattern of 
detachment from social relationships. They are loners. At a cognitive 
level they have a preference for solitary activities and introspection. 
They have no desire for intimacy and do not wish to have close, 
confiding relationships with their families, friends or sexual partners. 
They are indifferent to praise or criticism. At an affective level they have 
a restricted range of emotions. They are neither depressed, nor do they 
find that relationships or activities bring them great pleasure, nor are 
they roused to anger even in extreme circumstances. 
At an interpersonal level they have few relationships and others find 
them cold and indifferent. They have little regard for social conventions, 

8» PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
253 
and so are not concerned about being seen to ‘do the right thing’. An early 
account of the schizoid personality was given by Eugen Bleuler (1924). 
Case example 
Norman, aged 20, had a schizoid personality disorder. He was a math- 
ematics student who came for counselling because he was concerned 
that his addiction to an international multi-site computer game was 
interfering with his work. He stayed in a college hall of residence but 
lived an isolated life. This was the way he had always lived. As a child 
he was ridiculed for being ‘too brainy’ and so became immersed in rec- 
reational mathematics. At the counselling service he refused to join a 
social skills group because he said he did not want to form relationships 
with other students. 
Schizotypal personality disorder 
Clinical features 
People with schizotypal personality disorder have unusual perceptual 
experiences, eccentric thoughts and speech, inappropriate or con- 
stricted affect, peculiar or eccentric behaviour, and a lack of close rela- 
tionships. At a perceptual level, they may have unusual experiences. 
For example, they may report sensing the presence of ghosts or spirits, 
mystical forces or vibrations. They may experience depersonalization 
and report that sometimes they become an outside observer of them- 
selves in a dream-like state. They may also experience derealization 
and report that sometimes they perceive the world as dream-like. 
At a cognitive level they may have ideas of reference, and believe 
that routine events have a unique personal significance; for example, 
that the shape of a cloud means that they must carry out a particular 
activity. They may also hold paranormal convictions about magic forces, 
telepathy, aliens and so forth, which are outside the norms of their 
subculture. They may also hold paranoid ideas and be suspicious of 
others. Their speech may be unusual, vague, eccentric or peculiar. 
At an affective level, people with schizotypal personality disorder 
show a constricted range of emotions and social anxiety, usually based 
on paranoid fears. At a behavioural level, people with schizotypal per- 
sonality disorder are odd, eccentric and peculiar. For example, they 
may dress in an unfashionable and unkempt way and have unusual 
mannerisms. At an interpersonal level, people with schizotypal person- 
ality disorder are typically socially isolated and find making and main- 
taining friendships anxiety-provoking, so they avoid others. 
Ernst Kretchmer (1936), a German psychiatrist, was among the first 
to use the term schizotype to describe a character type associated with 
a constitutional vulnerability to schizophrenia. 
Case example 
Silver, a man in his late forties, had a schizotypal personality disorder. 
He was a periodic outpatient at a psychiatric hospital. His appearance 

254 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
was distinctive. His long silver-grey hair and beard accounted for his 
unusual name. He wore a black overcoat, the hem of which trailed on 
the ground. He rarely washed and lived alone in a house that had 
belonged to his parents before they died. 
Silver had been referred to the psychiatric hospital by his family 
doctor years before | met him, for participation in a group programme for 
people with schizophrenia. He refused to participate in the programme 
because he was suspicious of other people, but requested periodic indi- 
vidual appointments with the psychologist who directed the group pro- 
gramme. In these outpatient individual sessions he insisted on discussing 
hypnosis and telepathy. He believed that he could hypnotize others from 
a distance, that he could see into the future and that he could read 
minds. He had held these beliefs since adolescence, when he had 
numerous out-of-body experiences (depersonalization). Otherwise he 
was in contact with reality and was on no medication. 
Cluster B: The dramatic, emotional, erratic group 
The dramatic, emotional, erratic group of personality disorders includes: 
e 
antisocial personality disorder 
e 
borderline personality disorder 
e 
histrionic personality disorder 
e 
narcissistic personality disorder. 
Antisocial personality disorder 
Clinical features 
People with antisocial personality disorder show a pervasive disregard 
for the rights of others and consistently violate these rights. Extreme 
versions of this pattern are referred to as psychopathy, sociopathy, and 
dissocial personality disorder. 
At a behavioural level, people with antisocial personality disorder 
are consistently aggressive, destructive and deceitful, and engage in 
theft and lying. Commonly in clinical practice, antisocial personality 
disorder is associated with a history of multiple arrests, multiple con- 
victions and imprisonment. At a cognitive level, people with this 
personality disorder have not internalized rules for moral and ethical 
behaviour and are motivated by personal profit and pleasure seeking. 
They believe that aggressiveness, destructiveness, theft, deceit, and 
lying to achieve personal goals are justified. They develop elaborate 
rationalizations and cognitive distortions to justify their violations of 
others’ rights. 
At an affective level, they are impulsive and reckless, displaying little 
planning and showing no anxiety even in the most dangerous situations. 
Their impulsivity and recklessness may find expression in an erratic 
occupational history, poor financial planning, speeding while driving, 
substance abuse and other forms of risk-taking which may lead to injury 
or death in some cases. 

8 * PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
255 
People with antisocial personality disorder are aggressive and 
irritable and frequently become involved in fights. At an interpersonal 
level they have difficulty maintaining intimate relationships with friends 
or sexual partners. Commonly they charm people into believing that 
they wish to pursue a close relationship and then violate the trust the 
other person has placed in them through irresponsibility, disloyalty, 
aggression, destruction, theft or deceit. They show little remorse for 
violating trust in close relationships, and consequently have few if any 
close friends and typically a history of multiple sexual partners. The 
diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder is not given until after a 
person is 18, and commonly it is preceded by conduct disorder. 
Antisocial personality was first described in detail by Hervey Cleckley 
(1941) in his book The Mask of Sanity and referred to as psychopathy, 
although Cleckley’s 
criteria for the condition defined 
a narrower 
construct than that in the current DSM classification system. Cleckley 
emphasized the importance of callousness; lack of empathy, shame, 
guilt or remorse; and the use of superficial charm, manipulation and 
violence in violating others’ rights to satisfy their needs. 
Case example 
Tony, who had an antisocial personality disorder, was referred to a psy- 
chiatric hospital from a prison for psychological assessment. He 
was referred because he complained of depression to the visiting psy- 
chiatrist at the prison. He had a history of theft and occasional drug 
abuse. 
A thorough clinical interview and a full psychometric evaluation 
revealed no evidence of a mood disorder or, indeed, any other Axis | 
psychopathology. During the feedback session when the results of the 
assessment were presented to him, Tony said he had feigned depression 
because he wanted to be referred to the psychiatric hospital from the 
prison for a change of scene. He joked about the fact that he preferred 
the conditions in the hospital to the prison. 
During the psychological assessment he gave a history that drew a 
picture of himself as a stable, caring man who had fallen on hard times 
and so had stolen from time to time and unluckily been apprehended for 
occasional drug abuse. | interviewed his sister and wife to corroborate 
this essentially normal profile. They offered accounts that were at 
variance with Tony’s. They drew a picture of a man who had grown up 
in a disorganized family, which his father left when Tony was a baby. 
His mother had a series of unreliable partners after that. 
Tony began rule-breaking and stealing as a child and had continued 
to do so right up to the present. He also truanted from school and began 
drinking and drug taking in his teens. He had been married on four 
occasions and in each marriage had been violent towards his wife for 
trivial reasons. He had been involved in episodes of serious drug misuse 
and alcohol binges. Tony had been imprisoned on numerous occasions 
and participated in a wide range of treatment programmes to help him 
alter his antisocial and drug-using behaviour patterns. All had been 
ineffective. He had no close friends, just transient acquaintances. His 

256 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
sister rarely saw him and his present wife (of a year’s standing) was 
considering divorce. 
Borderline personality disorder 
Clinical features 
People with borderline personality disorder are highly impulsive and 
show a pattern of pervasive instability in interpersonal relationships, 
self-image and mood. At a cognitive level they have a core belief that 
within the context of friendships and relationships they will be aban- 
doned. At an affective level, they experience an intense fear of aban- 
donment. They also have a propensity to experience intense uncontrolled 
aggression towards those whom they perceive as abandoning them. 
Their fear of abandonment leads to frantic yet ineffective attempts to 
make and maintain relationships, particularly with sexual partners. 
Once in a relationship, their fear of abandonment may lead them to 
demand continued contact with their partner and continued caregiving 
and attention. When their partners cannot allay their fear of abandon- 
ment or fail to meet their needs for continued caregiving and attention, 
the person with borderline personality disorder may attempt to reduce 
the interpersonal distance by either becoming aggressive to their part- 
ner or engaging in self-harm. They may rage at their partner for frustrat- 
ing their need for care and attention. They may then feel shame and 
guilt and engage in self-harm or self-mutilation to elicit continued care- 
giving from their partner, or to distract themselves from their internal 
psychological distress. Their self-harm may involve overdosing, cutting 
or burning. Sometimes self-mutilation is carried out while in a dissoci- 
ated state. There may be a link between dissociative disorders such as 
multiple personality disorder, discussed at the close of Chapter 7, and 
borderline personality disorder. 
Within close personal relationships and therapeutic relationships, 
beliefs that people with borderline personality disorder hold about them- 
selves and others alternate between extremes of idealization and 
devaluation. Thus, they may on occasion view themselves or their part- 
ners as perfect, kind, caring and highly valued, but on other occasions 
when their needs to receive care and attention from their partners are 
frustrated, they may view themselves or their partner as cruel, uncaring 
and despicable. This alternation between overvalued and undervalued 
views of the self and others and related changes in affect and behav- 
iour may occur suddenly and unpredictably. 
Underlying the belief in the inevitability of abandonment and the 
related fear and anger is a pervasive sense of emptiness. People with 
borderline personality disorder may cope with this through impulsive 
spending, sexual activity, bingeing, drug use, reckless driving or other 
risk-taking activities. Commonly borderline personality disorder occurs 
following a history of physical or sexual child abuse, neglect or early 
parental loss or death. A history of multiple partners and educational 
and occupational instability is common in cases of borderline personality 
disorder. The term ‘borderline’ was first used by the psychoanalyst 
—_

8 
* PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
257 
Adolf Stern (1938) to describe this personality disorder, which he 
believed was on the borderline between the neuroses (such as 
depression and anxiety) and psychoses (such as schizophrenia). 
Case example 
Mary, aged 24, had a borderline personality disorder. She was referred 
for a parenting assessment to a child and family psychology service 
after her child was taken into foster care following a non-accidental 
injury. Mary had become frustrated with her 10-month-old daughter's 
continuous crying and bruised her badly by squeezing and shaking her. 
The parenting assessment showed that Mary had a good knowledge of 
how to care for her child but little sensitivity to the infant’s signals; little 
understanding that the baby could not intentionally try to annoy her; and 
little tolerance for managing the routine daily demands of parenting. 
She also had a very limited social support network and difficulties 
making and maintaining friendships. 
Mary had been involved in several heterosexual relationships. All 
had ended in violent rows. When these relationships ended she felt 
deep regret and a sense of being abandoned. Her attempts to rekindle 
some of these relationships had been unsuccessful and led to further 
violent or abusive rows. She had a history of episodes of major 
depression and had frequently engaged in non-suicidal self-harm. She 
had overdosed on a few occasions and cut her arms. A general feeling 
of emptiness was occasionally broken by feelings of extreme joy (for 
example, at the start of a new relationship) and anger. She lacked any 
coherent life plan. 
Mary herself had been in care as a child on two occasions when her 
parents were unable to cope. She had also been regularly slapped and 
punched as a child by her father when he came home drunk. In school, 
she had never fitted in. She had left school at 14 and worked in a variety 
of casual jobs. She had hoped when she met the baby’s father, Kevin, 
that things would work out. But Kevin left her once she mentioned that 
she was pregnant. She hoped that her child and her role as a parent 
would give her happiness and a sense of direction. She was distraught 
when she found that they had brought her further misery. 
Histrionic personality disorder 
Clinical features 
People with histrionic personality disorder are characterized by a perva- 
sive pattern of dramatic and excessively emotional attention seeking. At 
a cognitive level there is the underlying belief that they are entitled to be 
the centre of attention and to have their needs for attention and admira- 
tion met, regardless of the cost to others. At an affective level they may 
feel a hunger for attention that they fear will not be fulfilled. At a behav- 
ioural level they routinely create situations in which they are the centre 
of attention. To do this they may express their views in dramatic and 
theatrical ways using excessive displays of emotion. However, when 
questioned in detail about why they hold particular views, typically they 

lta 
rate 
| 
Meat 
LU 
U 
peyton 
& 
258 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Od 
viba€ 
F ve 
LM... 
~ 
~ 
— 
es 
have little in the way of well-reasoned arguments or in-depth knowledge 
to back their assertions. They are highly suggestible and may change 
their views in response to changes in fads and fashions. 
This shallowness that characterizes their views and opinions also 
characterizes their relationships. They commonly consider their rela- 
tionships with others (including health professionals) to be far more inti- 
mate and deeper than they are. So they may call doctors that they have 
seen infrequently by their first names and refer to acquaintances as 
their old friends. 
People 
with 
this personality 
disorder may dress 
and groom 
themselves so that they become the centre of attention. Often their self- 
presentation is deliberately seductive. 
Women with histrionic 
personality 
disorder may dress, make themselves up and behave in a way that is 
pa ‘ 
“erotic, seductive and provocative. Men may dress and behave in a 
\ 
macho manner, drawing attention to their physical appearance, strength, 
athleticism and sexuality. One of the earliest descriptions of histrionic 
personality disorder was given by Emil Kfaepelin }1913). 
Case example 
Sarah, aged 18, had a histrionic personality disorder. She was originally 
referred to a child and family clinic in her final year at secondary school. 
She was to be excluded from school for instigating fights and disruption. 
She typically dressed like a film star, spoke like a soap opera character, 
and demanded everyone’s attention. If she didn’t get the attention she 
craved, she threw a tantrum. 
She divided her favours between a number of boys at her school and 
incited them to compete with each other for her affections, promising 
each an exclusive relationship with her if they defeated the other boys. 
She was an only child and grew up in a family where her parents, who 
were involved in the arts, had little time for her. She spent much of her 
childhood alone and coped with the isolation by watching endless soap 
operas. She was intelligent but could not apply herself at school or later 
at college. She changed courses frequently and was led more by her 
attraction to partners and excitement than by vocational interests. 
Narcissistic personality disorder 
Clinical features 
People with narcissistic personality disorder have a pervasive pattern of 
grandiosity, a need for admiration, and a lack of empathy for others. At 
a cognitive level they believe that they are special or better than others 
and so are entitled to be treated differently. They have an over-inflated 
view of their own accomplishments and believe that they are entitled to 
the best of everything and to associate only with people whom they 
perceive to be special or outstanding like themselves. They are pre- 
occupied with fantasies of success, 
power and romantic love. 
At an aftecth GTSTAT, TREY Geavasac mir 
artow Metlehelaaincaalearsinet 
treatment from others. To confirm this view of themselves, at a behaviour 
level, they use their charm in social situations or their power in work 

8 - PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
259 
situations to extract compliments and special treatment from others. 
Thus they may ‘fish for compliments’ in social situations and overload 
their employees in work situations to achieve their own personal goals. 
At an interpersonal level they have difficulty sustaining long-term 
relationships because they have a limited capacity for empathy and so 
do not appreciate the negative effect that their grandiosity and need for 
admiration have on others. They also leave many relationships because 
they fail to meet their high expectations of ‘perfect love’. They have 
difficulties maintaining peer friendships because they are arrogant, 
patronizing and envious of others’ accomplishments and possessions, 
and expect others to be envious of them. 
Occupationally, they may excel at their work or may avoid trying to 
excel for fear of failure. Furthermore, they are extremely sensitive to 
criticism and when their partners or others frustrate their need for 
admiration or are the least bit critical, their self-esteem drops. They feel 
degraded, humiliated, hollow and empty. This may find expression as 
range and anger or depression. Detailed psychoanalytic accounts of 
narcissistic personality disorder and its treatment were first given by 
Otto Kernberg (1975) and Heinz Kohut (1968). 
Case example 
Frank, aged 34, had a narcissistic personality disorder. He came for 
therapy at the insistence of his partner, Maria. She complained that he 
had become impossible to live with. Since they had met Frank had 
always depended on her for emotional support and admiration. While 
she felt that this was appropriate when they were young lovers, she now 
felt that his demands were immature and excessive. 
For example, when he arrived home from work he expected all 
household routines to cease and Maria and the three children to devote 
their attention to his accounts of his day's achievements. If they did not 
meet his expectations he would fly into a rage and verbally abuse them. 
Later he would be remorseful and if he was not forgiven by Maria he 
would sink into a cold, detached, depressed state. 
The problem had become particularly bad recently when his business 
partner, Martin, had questioned his judgement in a major deal that went 
badly wrong and the company made a significant loss. Frank had relied 
on continued support and admiration from Martin (whom he considered 
to be a lesser person than himself) and was devastated at his criticism. 
He had oscillated between threatening to take legal action against 
Martin for defamation of character and withdrawing completely from 
frontline business transactions with the company’s clients because of 
his incompetence. 
Cluster C: The anxious, fearful group 
The anxious, fearful group of personality disorders includes: 
e 
avoidant personality disorder 
e 
dependent personality disorder 
e 
obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. 

260 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Avoidant personality disorder 
Clinical features 
People with avoidant personality disorder show a pervasive pattern of 
social 
inhibition and shyness beginning 
in adolescence 
or early 
adulthood. At a cognitive level people with avoidant personality disorder 
believe that they are inferior to others, unlikable and socially unskilled. 
They also believe that when they meet new people, there is a high risk 
that they will be criticized, rejected, ridiculed, shamed or humiliated. 
At an affective level they experience intense anxiety in social situ- 
ations. At a behavioural level they avoid situations, occupations, job 
promotions and pastimes that involve significant interpersonal contact 
with unfamiliar people. At an interpersonal level they live a constricted 
social lifestyle and avoid, or show extreme restraint in, intimate relation- 
ships, to avoid humiliation and embarrassment. 
Cases with the symptoms of avoidant personality disorder were 
described by Bleuler (1911) as a variant of schizoid conditions in his 
work on the schizophrenias. 
Case example 
Seamus, aged 45, was a bank official with avoidant personality dis- 
order. He was referred to a communications consultancy centre for 
job interview preparation training. The process involved role-playing, 
videoing and reviewing the type of job interview in which he was 
due to participate to achieve promotion. While he was thoughtful and 
quite coherent during a conversation that preceded the role-play, during 
it he was virtually incoherent. 
In the small rural branch of the bank where he worked-he was just 
about able to tolerate the social anxiety he experienced when dealing 
with regular customers. He was shy and avoided all social contact 
outside work. He didn’t want to attend our communications consultancy 
for interview skills training, but the regional personnel manager of his 
bank said he needed to develop his job interview skills so he could be 
promoted to Assistant Manager level. He had attended our consultancy 
so as not to disappoint the personnel manager. However, he would 
happily have avoided promotion because it would involve increased 
contact with unfamiliar people. 
Dependent personality disorder 
Clinical features 
People with dependent personality disorder show a pervasive pattern 
of submissiveness and clinginess. At a cognitive level, they have a 
belief that they must be taken care of by others (such as parents 
and partners) and that if separated from others their safety will be 
jeopardized. 
At an affective level, they experience extreme anxiety when separated 
from parents or partners, whom they view as essential for their safety 
and security. At a behavioural level, they have difficulty making decisions 

8» PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
261 
without asking for and receiving advice and reassurance from others. 
They have difficulty disagreeing with others, particularly parents or 
partners, lest this lead to loss of support. They arrange for others to take 
responsibility for major areas of their lives and rarely initiate projects on 
their own. They go to great lengths to receive reassurance from others, 
even when this involves doing very unpleasant tasks. At an interpersonal 
level, when one intimate relationship ends they quickly seek another, 
lest they be left to cope and make decisions alone. 
One of the first detailed descriptions of dependent personality disor- 
der was given by the psychoanalyst Karl Abraham (1924) and referred 
to this condition as the oral character type, due to his hypothesis 
that the seeds of this personality disorder were sown during the oral 
stage of psychosexual development. This is the earliest stage of devel- 
opment, during which pleasure comes mainly from the process of feed- 
ing, hence the term ‘oral’ and the primary characteristic of dependency. 
Case example 
Tracy, aged 32, had a dependent personality disorder. She was the wife 
of a man who phoned a child and family psychology service requesting 
help with a sexual problem. He initially said that he was attracted to his 
15-year-old daughter. It was suspected that sexual abuse had occurred 
in this case and so a full family assessment was offered. The family 
assessment revealed that he had had sexual intercourse with the 
daughter repeatedly for over a year. 
We advised that the father leave the home and live separately while 
a programme of rehabilitation occurred. The programme would involve 
the mother and daughter strengthening their relationship; the daughter 
learning self-protection skills; and the father attending group therapy for 
sex-offenders. Tracy refused to co-operate because she felt unable to 
make decisions and function without her husband. Thus Tracy was pre- 
pared to jeopardize her daughter's safety for her own dependency 
needs. 
WME, 
... 
" =f 
le 
nd 
my 
Obsessive compulsive personality disorder 
Clinical features 
People with obsessive compulsive personality disorder show a perva- 
sive pattern of preoccupation with orderliness, perfectionism, ethics, 
interpersonal control and fiscal economy. At a cognitive level, there isa 
central belief that for safety and security to be maintained in all areas of 
life a carefully constructed set of organizational rules must be followed 
to perfectionistic standards. This belief covers the execution of routine 
activities of daily living, all areas of occupational responsibility, fairness 
in dealings with others, co-operating with others in jointly ees 
tasks, and managing money. 
At an emotional level, people with this personality disorder experience 
anxiety when their set of perfectionistic rules covering all areas of 
activity is not followed. At a behavioural level, a wide range of problems 
occur. There is extreme difficulty in finishing tasks on time and meeting 

262 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
deadlines, and in some instances tasks are never finished because 
perfectionistic standards are never reached. Flexible problem-solving 
also suffers, because a person with this personality disorder will become 
so fixed on following the original plan that even when unforeseen 
obstacles are encountered, the original plan is still followed. 
Leisure pursuits and family relationships receive 
little attention 
because of devotion to work-related tasks, and this is not accounted for 
by economic necessity. If a person with obsessive compulsive person- 
ality disorder does involve themselves or their children in sports, their 
dedication to perfectionism makes sporting events unhappy affairs 
marked by conflict. Practical solutions to problems at work or at home 
are difficult to find because of ethical scruples, beyond those accounted 
for by religious or culturat standards. 
In work, leisure and family situations, tasks are not delegated 
because of concerns that others will not do them to a perfectionistic 
standard. Conflict and eventually social isolation may arise as a result 
of this. In economic matters, people with obsessive compulsive person- 
ality disorder are miserly and hoard money (however abundant) and 
possessions (however worthless) against possible future times of eco- 
nomic hardship. 
At an interpersonal level people with obsessive compulsive person- 
ality disorder may become isolated because they place such harsh 
demands on others to reach high standards and because they have dif- 
ficulty expressing tender feelings. This is because they can rarely find 
the perfect way to express their positive feelings for others, and they 
find it imperative to express their feelings of disappointment when 
others fail to meet their standards. 
Freud (1908) offered a detailed description of the obsessive compul- 
sive personality disorder and referred to it as the ‘anal character’. He 
used this term because his hypothesis was that its seeds were sown 
during the anal stage of psychosexual development. During this stage 
there is a psychological focus on the anus as a source of pleasure, and 
on the capacity to control the sphincter in the process of toilet training. 
The term ‘anal’ is now commonly used to describe fussy, perfectionistic, 
control-oriented people. 
Case example 
Hank, aged 50, had an obsessive compulsive personality disorder. He 
was a divorced professor of experimental psychology. He came for 
therapy because of depression. This was related to the fact that his 
children and students had refused to have contact with him. 
In his home life he had always been meticulous and set the highest 
standards for family relationships and household routines. It was his 
anger when these standards were not reached that led to his divorce. 
However, he continued to have contact with his children. His insistence 
on punctuality and the critical attitude he took to his children’s behaviour 
had led them to reduce the frequency of their visits with him, and 
eventually to his wife suggesting that he have very infrequent access to 
the children. 

8» PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
263 
He was meticulous in his work. He wrote all his own computer 
programs for conducting his experiments and analysing his data. He 
insisted that his research students receive daily supervision and follow 
his guidance to the letter. If they did not meet his standards, he vilified 
them. His work was internationally known and all of his students had 
their work published or presented at major conferences. However, 
students who worked with him found his criticism of tiny errors in their 
work, his insistence that they follow his guidelines to the letter and his 
excessive devotion to work to the exclusion of leisure difficult to take. 
They had complained to the dean about his criticism of them. He took 
the dean’s suggestion that he take a more flexible approach and be less 
Critical with his students very hard. He felt misunderstood and saw it as 
a personal attack. 
Epidemiology and course 
Prevalence rates for personality disorders are given in Table 8.2. In the 
general population the prevalence of personality disorders is about 
10%, whereas in samples of mental health service users, the rate is four 
times that at about 40% (Torgersen, 2009; Zimmerman et al.’s, 2008). 
The results of the US National Comorbidity Survey Replication showed 
TABLE 8.2 
Epidemiology of major personality disorders 
disorder 
the community 
clinical samples 
in community studies 
Any personality 
10.3 
40.5 
No differences 
disorder 
Cluster A 
oF 
- 
Higher in males 
Cluster B 
Ae 
- 
Cluster C 
6.0 
= 
Cluster A 
Paranoid 
tad, 
4.1 
Odd, eccentric group 
Schizoid 
0.9 
14 
Schizotypal 
0.9 
4.6 
Cluster B- 
Antisocial 
A 
4.3 
Higher in males 
Dramatic, emotional, 
Borderline 
1.6 
15.8 
erratic group 
Histrionic 
1.5 
9.5 
Narcissistic 
0.5 
4.5 
Cluster C 
Avoidant 
Tait? 
11.4 
Anxious, fearful 
Dependent 
0.7 
8.0 
Higher in females 
roup 
a 
Obsessive- 
il 
aia 
compulsive 
? 
ee 
Note: Community 
prevalence rates for any personality disorder and individual personality disorders are median rates from 
42 community Wee summarized in Torgersen (2009). Community prevalence rates for Clusters A, B and Cc are from 
Lenzenweger et al.'s (2007) US National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Clinical prevalence rates are median rates from 
Zimmerman et al.'s (2008) review of 16 clinical studies. Gender differences are from Torgersen (2009). 

264 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
that in rank order, Cluster C personality disorders were the most 
prevalent (6.0%); Cluster A were the next most prevalent (5.7%); and 
Cluster B, the least prevalent (1.5%) types of personality disorders in 
the general population (Lenzenweger et al., 2007). 
For individual types of personality disorder, prevalence rates vary 
from 0.5% to 2.1% in the general population, with obsessive compulsive 
personality disorder being the most prevalent. In samples of service 
users, prevalence rates vary from 1.1% to 15.8%, with borderline per- 
sonality disorder being far more prevalent than other types. Within the 
general population the overall rates of personality disorders are similar 
for males and females. However, Cluster A disorders and antisocial per- 
sonality disorder have consistently been found to be more prevalent 
among males, whereas dependent personality disorder has consistently 
been found to be more prevalent among females (Torgersen, 2009). 
The high prevalence of borderline personality disorders in females 
found in clinical practice is not found in general population surveys. 
There is considerable comorbidity among personality disorders. 
Many people who have one personality disorder meet the criteria for a 
number of others (Lenzenweger et al., 2007). There is also considerable 
comorbidity of Axis | disorders with Axis II disorders. For example, in a 
review of 20 large studies, Guzzetta and di Girolamo (2009) found that 
57% of people with substance abuse disorders, 49% of people with 
mood disorders and 40% of people with anxiety disorders also had 
comorbid personality disorders. 
The results of longitudinal studies where the same group of patients 
is followed 
up over time and cross-sectional 
studies where the 
prevalence of personality disorders in different age groups is examined 
are fairly consistent. Personality disorders are fairly stable over time, 
although some improvement does occur, especially among those with 
Cluster B personality disorders (Grilo & McGlashan, 2009). In midlife 
people with antisocial and borderline personality disorder begin to 
mature out of their dysfunctional behaviour patterns. Borderline patients 
become less impulsive and self-harming and antisocial patients reduce 
their involvement in criminality. However, for both conditions only a 
minority establish successful relationships. 
People with personality disorders show significant impairment in 
functioning. They tend to remain single, to have educational, occupa- 
tional and financial problems that lead them to be of lower SES, and 
have a lower quality of life (Torgersen, 2009). Between a half and three- 
quarters of people with personality disorders attempt suicide; attempted 
and completed suicide rates are highest for borderline and antisocial 
personality disorder; and about 10% of borderline patients actually 
commit suicide (Links & Kolla, 2009). 
Personality disorders affect the extent to which Axis | disorders 
respond to treatment. People with mood, anxiety and substance use 
disorders who also have comorbid personality disorders show less 
improvement in response to psychotherapy compared with people who 
have no comorbid personality disorders (Haaga et al., 2006; Newton- 
Howes et al., 2006; Newman et al., 2006a). 

8 
- PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
265 
Theories 
Diathesis—stress, psychodynamic and cognitive-behavioural theories of 
personality disorders have been developed and summaries of these are 
outlined below. 
Diathesis-stress theories 
Diathesis—stress theories of personality disorders propose that both 
biological factors and stressful environmental factors, particularly those 
within the individual’s family of origin, contribute to the development of 
personality disorders. These theories entail the view that people with 
certain genetically determined temperamental characteristics develop 
particular personality traits, and that personality disorders emerge when 
such people are exposed to certain types of psychosocial risk factors 
within their families or wider social systems (Clark & Watson, 2008; 
Lenzenweger & Clarkin, 2005; Paris, 1996). 
Genetics, temperament and personality traits 
The weight of evidence shows that 50% of the variance in major per- 
sonality traits such as neuroticism, extraversion, openness to experi- 
ence and conscientiousness may be accounted for by genetic factors 
(Krueger & Johnson, 2008; Paris, 1996). The mechanisms by which 
genetic factors influence personality traits are complex. Probably multi- 
ple genes determine temperamental characteristics, and these interact 
with environmental influences in the development of personality traits. 
There is considerable evidence from longitudinal studies for the link 
between temperament and personality traits (Clark & Watson, 2008; 
Rothbart & Bates, 2006). 
Children with temperaments characterized by irritability and fearful- 
ness develop high levels of neuroticism in later life. Children with tem- 
peraments characterized by high activity levels and positive affect 
become extraverted as they mature. Children who temperamentally 
show attentional persistence later develop high levels of conscientious- 
ness. Children with extreme maladaptive temperamental characteristics 
may be more vulnerable to environmental stressors or they may elicit 
reactions from parents and others that exacerbate their extreme 
temperamental characteristics. This in turn may lead them to develop 
maladaptive personality traits, placing them at risk of developing per- 
sonality disorders (DePauw & Mervielde, 2010). 
Genetics and personality disorders 
Genetic studies indicate that personality disorders are moderately herit- 
able, with heritability estimates ranging from about 20% to 70%, and 
that the extensive comorbidity between personality disorders can be 
explained by four main genetic factors and three environmental factors 
(Reichborn-Kjennerud, 2010). The genetic factors include neuroticism 
(common to most personality disorders), introversion (which mainly 

266 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
affects schizoid and avoidant personality disorder), disagreeableness 
and impulsivity (which mainly affects antisocial and borderline personal- 
ity disorder) and conscientiousness or compulsivity, which uniquely 
affects obsessive compulsive personality disorder. On the other hand, 
comorbidity within Clusters A, B and C is best explained by three dis- 
tinct environmental factors. For each of the clusters of personality disor- 
ders, research has thrown light on the role neurobiological factors in the 
aetiology of some specific personality disorders. This will be briefly 
summarized below. 
Neurobiology of schizotypal personality disorder 
There is some evidence that neurobiological factors may play a role in 
the development of schizotypal personality disorder. This disorder 
forms part of a spectrum of psychotic or psychotic-like disorders that 
includes schizophrenia. People with schizotypal personality disorder 
have symptoms similar to those of schizophrenia; they share many of 
the attentional and information-processing deficits found in people 
with schizophrenia; and many have been found to have a positive 
family history for schizophrenia (Mamah & Barch, 2011; Siever & Davis, 
1991). 
Neurobiological studies have shown that schizotypal personality dis- 
order shares candidate genes, and certain structural and functional 
brain abnormalities, with schizophrenia (Coccaro & Siever, 2009; 
Reichborn-Kjennerud, 2010). Candidate genes implicated in the aetiol- 
ogy of schizotypal personality disorder include catechol-O-methyltrans- 
ferase (COMT), which regulates dopamine signalling in the frontal 
cortex, and D-amino acid oxidase activator (DAOA) and dysbindin 
(DTNBP'1), which affect glutamate signalling. 
Schizotypal personality disorder is associated with less dysregula- 
tion of the dopamine neurotransmitter system than that found in schizo- 
phrenia, and reduced temporal lobe volumes similar to that present 
in schizophrenia; but unlike schizophrenia, intact frontal lobes charac- 
terize people with schizotypal personality disorder. 
It is probable 
that the dopamine system and temporal lobe abnormalities subserve 
the eccentricities that characterize people with schizotypal personality 
disorder, but that the less extreme dysregulation of the dopamine 
system and the normal frontal lobes prevent the emergence of frank 
psychosis. 
Neurobiology of borderline personality disorder 
Neurobiological studies have identified candidate genes and structural 
and functional brain abnormalities associated with borderline personal- 
ity disorder (Coccaro & Siever, 2009; Reichborn-Kjennerud, 2010). The 
main candidate gene associated with borderline personality disorder is 
SLC6A4 or 5-HTT, which affects the efficiency of the serotonin neuro- 
transmitter system. The short allele variant of the 5-HTTLPR polymor- 
phism, which regulates expression of the serotonin transporter gene 

8» PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
267 
(SLC6A4 or 5-HTT), is a risk factor for borderline personality disorder 
(and is also associated with vulnerability to depression and PTSD, as 
mentioned in Chapters 5 and 6). . 
While there is evidence for dysregulation of a range of neurotrans- 
mitters in borderline personality disorder, the most robust support is for 
hypoactivity of the serotonin neurotransmitter system (Coccaro & 
Siever, 2009). This system affects mood and impulsivity. Neuroimaging 
studies show that a dysfunction of the frontal and limbic circuitry under- 
pins borderline personality disorder (Schmahl & Bremner, 2006). This 
network includes the orbitofrontal and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the 
anterior cingulate cortex, the hippocampus and the amygdala. A meta- 
analysis has shown that people with borderline personality disorder 
have bilateral decreases in hippocampal and amygdala volumes (Hall 
et al., 2010). Structural changes and overactivity of the amygdala may 
underpin enhanced threat perception and the tendency to repeat emo- 
tionally charged relationship patterns in borderline personality disorder, 
while frontal lobe deficits may subserve difficulties in evaluating height- 
ened threat reactions and regulating emotional responses to perceived 
threats. Reduced hippocampal volume may compromise the capacity 
for developing coherent adaptive autobiographical narratives as an 
alternative to repeating destructive, emotionally charged relationship 
patterns. 
It has consistently been found that people with borderline person- 
ality disorder have a history of severe trauma including child abuse, 
particularly child sexual abuse (Johnson et al., 2009). In the emer- 
gence of borderline personality disorder, this life stress may both 
interact with neurobiological vulnerabilities and contribute to their 
development. 
Neurobiology of antisocial personality disorder 
Candidate genes for antisocial personality disorder and psychopathy 
for which there is some support include monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) 
and the serotonin transporter gene (5-HTT) (Ferguson, 2010; Gunter 
et al., 2010). Both of these affect the efficiency of the serotonin neuro- 
transmitter system, which in turn affects mood, impulsivity and aggres- 
sion. Retz et al. (2004) found that a deletion/insertion polymorphism on 
the 5-HTT gene was a risk factor for violence in male criminals. The 
MAOA gene has earned the nickname ‘warrior gene’ because people 
with low MAOA activity show greater aggression in challenging situ- 
ations (McDermott et al., 2009). Caspi et al. (2002) found that males 
with both a low MAOA activity genotype and a history of child abuse 
were more likely have antisocial behaviour in adulthood than were high 
MAOA activity genotype males who had been similarly abused. 
Neurobiological studies of antisocial personality disorder have led to 
a distinction between reactive-impulsive aggression (typical of most 
criminals who engage in opportunistic violence) and proactive—instru- 
mental aggression (which is characteristic of psychopaths who engage 
in predatory, planned aggression to achieve goals such as money, 

268 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
status and power) (Roth & Buchheim, 2010). With reactive—impulsive 
aggression, there is hyperarousal to threatening stimuli (subserving 
increased anger and fear) associated with increased activity in the 
amygdala and decreased volume and activity in the frontal cortex, 
notably the orbitofrontal and ventro-medial 
prefrontal cortex. The 
increased amygdala activity subserves increased threat perception, 
while the reduced frontal activity subserves a lack of impulse control. In 
contrast, with proactive-instrumental aggression, there is hypoarousal 
to threatening stimuli shown by low heart rate and electrodermal activity 
(Edens et al., 2007). In some, but not all studies this is associated with 
decreased activity in the amygdala. 
These neurobiological processes subserve low levels of anger or 
fear. Thus, people with antisocial personality disorders have very low 
levels of physiological arousal, fail to develop conditioned responses to 
fear-related stimuli, and are unable to learn from negative experiences. 
This lack of conditionability reflects a neuropsychological vulnerability 
to developing antisocial behaviour. However, this vulnerability only 
leads to antisocial personality disorder when combined with psychosocial! 
risk factors, particularly family disorganization, paternal criminality, 
maternal psychological difficulties, parental alcoholism, and inconsistent 
discipline (Kazdin, 1995). 
Cluster C personality disorders 
Relatively little research has been conducted on the neurobiology of 
Cluster C personality disorders. An anxious temperament and the per- 
sonality trait neuroticism (both of which are approximately 50% herit- 
able) probably predispose individuals to developing avoidant and 
dependent personality disorders (Meyer et al., 2005). However, people 
with these attributes require exposure to a highly enmeshed family cul- 
ture in which there is a high degree of parental control and little encour- 
agement for the development of autonomy for the development of 
avoidant and dependent personality disorders (Paris, 1996). Obsessive 
compulsive personality disorder has a unique genetic diathesis, which 
is not shared with other personality disorders (Kendler et al., 2008). 
There is no evidence to support the link between toilet training (as sug- 
gested by Freud’s (1908) ‘anal character hypothesis’) and obsessive 
compulsive personality disorder (Emmelkamp, 1982). 
Stress and personality disorders 
In prospective and retrospective studies a wide variety of family-based 
risk factors have been found to contribute to the development of 
personality disorders (Bakermans-Kranenburg & van lJzendoorn, 2009: 
Johnson et al., 2009; Paris, 1996). These include trauma, physical and 
sexual abuse, neglect, separation from or loss of a parent, parental 
psychopathology and related impaired parenting, insecure attachment, 
problematic parent-child relationships, extremely low or high levels of 
family cohesion, and the absence of social support. 

8 
> PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
269 
The effectiveness of psychotherapy 
and medication 
Duggan et al. (2007, 2008) reviewed 35 randomized controlled trials 
(RCTs) of pharmacological studies and 27 RCTs of psychological treat- 
ments for personality disorders. They concluded that there was evi- 
dence for the effectiveness of specific psychological treatments for 
certain personality disorders, and for the effectiveness of some phar- 
macological interventions in managing specific symptoms associated 
with some Axis II disorders. There was evidence for the effectiveness of 
cognitive-behaviour therapy and psychodynamic psychotherapy, either 
alone or in combination with pharmacotherapy. Most studies focused 
on borderline personality disorder, or heterogeneous groups of patients 
with various personality disorders. With regard to pharmacological 
treatments there was evidence for the effectiveness of antipsychotics in 
reducing cognitive, perceptual and psychotic-like symptoms; mood 
stabilizers in reducing aggression; and antidepressants in regulating 
mood. 
Psychodynamic approaches 
Meta-analyses show that psychodynamic psychotherapy leads to an 
improvement in the adjustment of people with personality disorders, 
notably those that fall within Clusters B and C (Leichsenring, 2010). 
Evidence-based psychodynamic approaches to psychotherapy include 
transference-focused 
psychotherapy and mentalization-based 
treat- 
ment for borderline personality disorder (Bateman & Fonagy, 2010a, 
2010b; Yeomans and Diamond, 2010) and short-term dynamic psycho- 
therapy for Cluster C personality disorders (Svartberg & McCullough, 
2010). 
Transference-focused psychotherapy for borderline 
personality disorder 
In modern psychoanalytic practice, Kernberg’s approach to understand- 
ing borderline personality disorder and an evidence-based practice 
model derived from it — transference-focused psychotherapy — have 
been particularly influential (Caligor, 2010; Kernberg & Caligor, 2005; 
Yeomans & Diamond, 2010). Kernberg’s psychoanalytic object rela- 
tions theory assumes that during the course of early development, indi- 
viduals evolve through a series of stages. As they mature through these, 
their internal representations of self and others become increasingly 
sophisticated. In object relations theory, it is assumed that the children 
learn about others through their relationships with their mothers or 
caregivers. ‘Object’ is the technical term used in object relations theory 
to refer to others (as distinct from the self) and particularly to the mother 
during early development. 
At a very early stage of development, the infant does not distinguish 
between representations of the self and the mother. The main distinction 
that is made is between experiences that make the child feel good or 

270 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
bad. So at the earliest stage the child develops symbiotic fused self-— 
object representations that are ‘all good’ or ‘all bad’. At a second stage 
of development, the child learns that the self and the mother (or object) 
are separate. At this stage the child develops representations for an ‘all- 
good self’ and an ‘all-bad self; an ‘all-good object’ and an ‘all-bad 
object’. As the child matures into the third stage of development the ‘all- 
good’ and ‘all-bad’ self-representations 
are integrated. The child 
develops a more complete view of the self as having both positive and 
negative impulses and wishes. Concurrently the ‘all-good’ and ‘all-bad’ 
representations of others (parents, siblings, friends) are integrated. The 
child develops representations of others as having both positive and 
negative attributes. Wnen this happens the child becomes capable of 
having realistic relationships in which ambivalent feelings towards 
others can be tolerated. So children may feel that they love their parents 
who are good a lot of the time and a bit annoying some of the time. 
In adulthood the way people behave within intimate relationships is 
predominantly informed and organized by their internal object relations 
that they learned in childhood; that is, by mental images of how the self 
and others will function in relationships, and the strong emotions 
associated with these types of relationship. An image of a bad child-like 
self, interacting with a threatening, powerful authority figure associated 
with a strong feeling of fear; or the image of a good child-like self 
interacting with a good protective authority figure associated with a 
strong feeling of security, are examples of internal object relations. 
Where parents are over-indulgent or overly neglectful, violent or 
controlling, the child fails to develop mature self—other internal object 
relations. In their relationships with others, splitting occurs. They view 
others as ‘all-good’ idealized rescuers who will meet all their needs or 
‘all-bad’ persecutors who are out to harm them. They also oscillate 
between viewing the self as ‘all-good’ or ‘all-bad’. These difficulties are 
the hallmark of all personality disorders. Different types of personality 
disorder develop depending on the person’s temperament, whether the 
child was over-indulged, neglected or traumatized, the degree to which 
this occurred, and the specific defence mechanisms that they used to 
cope with forbidden sexual and aggressive impulses. Cluster A and B 
personality disorders arise from neglect, rejection or abuse, whereas 
excessive parental control or over-protection lead to the development of 
Cluster C personality disorders. 
Defences are psychological strategies used to cope with conflict 
between unacceptable impulses (often unconscious sexual or aggres- 
sive urges from the id) and the prohibitions of the conscience (or super- 
ego). Thus, if a person experiences an unacceptable impulse, anxiety 
about the consequences of acting on this impulse will be experienced. 
Defences are used to reduce anxiety. Defences are essential, but some 
are more adaptive than others. From Table 8.3 it may be seen that the 
defences of splitting and projection, which typify many personality dis- 
orders, particularly borderline personality disorder, are at the most prim- 
itive level. Splitting involves reverting to viewing the self and others in 
‘all-good’ or all-bad’ terms. Projection involves attributing negative 

Level 
High-adaptive 
level 
Mental 
inhibitions 
compromise 
formation 
level 
Features of 
defences 
Promote an 
optimal balance 
among 
unacceptable 
impulses and 
prosocial wishes 
to maximize 
gratification and 
permit conscious 
awareness of 
conflicting 
impulses and 
wishes 
Keep 
unacceptable 
impulses out of 
awareness _ 
* PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
271 
TABLE 8.3 
Defence mechanisms at different levels of maturity 
Defence 
Anticipation 
Affiliation 
Altruism 
Humour 
Self-assertion 
Self-observation 
Sublimation 
Suppression 
Displacement 
Dissociation 
Intellectualization 
lsolation of affect 
Reaction 
formation 
Repression 
Undoing 
The individual regulates emotional discomfort 
associated with conflicting wishes and impulses 
or external stress by ... 
considering emotional reactions and 
consequences of these before the conflict or 
stress occurs and exploring the pros and cons of 
various solutions to these problematic emotional 
states 
seeking social support from others, sharing 
problems with them without making them 
responsible for them or for relieving the distress 
they entail 
dedication to meeting the needs of others and 
receiving gratification from this (without excessive 
self-sacrificing) 
reframing the situation that gives rise to conflict or 
stress in an ironic or amusing way 
expressing conflict-related thoughts or feelings in 
a direct yet non-coercive way 
monitoring how situations lead to conflict or stress 
and using this new understanding to modify 
negative affect 
channelling negative emotions arising from conflict 
or stress into socially acceptable activities such as 
work or sports 
intentionally avoiding thinking about conflict or 
stress 
transferring negative feelings about one person 
onto another less threatening person 
experiencing a breakdown in the integrated 
functions of consciousness, memory, perception, 
or motor behaviour 
the excessive use of abstract thinking or 
generalizations to minimize disturbing feelings 
arising from conflict 
losing touch with the feelings associated with 
descriptive details of the conflict, trauma or stress 
substituting acceptable behaviours, thoughts or 
feelings that are the opposite of unacceptable or 
unwanted behaviours, thoughts or feelings that 
arise from a conflict 
expelling unwanted thoughts, emotions or wishes 
from awareness 
using ritualistic or magical words or behaviour to 
symbolically negate or make amends for 
unacceptable impulses 
(Continued) 

272 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN 
Level 
Minor image 
distorting level 
Disavowal 
level 
Major image 
distorting level 
Action level 
Level of 
defensive 
dysregulation 
Features of 
defences 
Distort image of 
self and others to 
regulate self- 
esteem 
Keep 
unacceptable 
impulses and 
ideas out of 
consciousness 
with or without 
misattribution of 
these to external 
causes 
Gross distortion 
or misattribution 
of aspects of the 
self or others 
Action or 
withdrawal from 
action 
Failure of 
defences to 
regulate conflict- 
related feelings 
leading to a 
breakdown in 
reality testing 
INTRODUCTION 
TABLE 8.3 
(Continued) 
Defence 
The individual regulates emotional discomfort 
associated with conflicting wishes and impulses 
or external stress by ... 
Devaluation 
attributing exaggerated negative characteristic to 
the self or others 
Idealization 
attributing exaggerated positive characteristics to 
Omnipotence 
Denial 
Projection 
Rationalization 
Autistic fantasy 
Projective 
identification 
Splitting of self- 
image or image 
of others 
Acting out 
Apathetic 
withdrawal 
Help-rejecting 
complaining 
Passive 
aggression 
Delusional 
projection 
Psychotic denial 
Psychotic 
distortion 
others 
attributing exaggerated positive characteristics or 
special abilities and powers to the self which make 
oneself superior to others 
refusing to acknowledge the painful features of 
the situation or experiences which are apparent to 
others 
attributing to others one’s own unacceptable 
thoughts, feelings and wishes 
providing an elaborate self-serving or self- 
justifying explanation to conceal unacceptable 
thoughts, actions or impulses 
engaging in excessive daydreaming or wishful 
thinking as a substitute for using problem-solving 
or social support to deal with emotional distress 
attributing to others one’s own unacceptable 
aggressive impulses. Then inducing others to feel 
these by reacting aggressively to them. Then 
using the other person’s aggressive reactions as 
justification for acting out unacceptable aggressive 
impulses 
failing to integrate the positive and negative 
qualities of self and others and viewing self and 
others as either all good or all bad 
acting unacceptably to give expression to the 
experience of emotional distress associated with 
conflict or stress 
not engaging with others 
making repeated requests for help and then 
rejecting help when offered as a way of 
expressing unacceptable aggressive impulses 
unassertively expressing unacceptable aggression 
towards others in authority by overtly complying 
with their wishes while covertly resisting these 
attributing to others one’s own unacceptable 
thoughts, feelings and wishes to an extreme 
degree 
refusing to acknowledge the painful features of 
the situation or experiences which are apparent to 
others to an extreme degree 
viewing reality in an extremely distorted way 
———__-————————————————————————————— 
Note; Based on American Psychiatric Association ( 
2000) Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (fourth edition, 
text revision, DSM-IV-TR). Defensive Functioning Scale (pp. 807-809). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. 

8 
» PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
273 
aspects of the self to others: for example, attributing extreme anger or 
spite to another person, and then feeling justified in being hurt and dis- 
appointed, because feelings of anger and spite are unacceptable to the 
self. 
Transference-focused psychodynamic psychotherapy for borderline 
personality disorder is based on Kernberg’s model of the development 
of object relations (Kernberg & Caligor, 2005; Yeomans & Diamond, 
2010). With this form of therapy, the therapist initially forms a contact 
with the patient for twice weekly sessions over a year-long period. In 
these sessions the therapist creates a safe and secure context within 
which patients can describe challenging episodes in their lives and 
express strong emotions, without physically acting these out through 
violence, self-harm or leaving therapy. For borderline patients these 
strong emotions typically involve primitive internal object relations dyads 
where patients experience the self and significant others in their lives 
(including the therapist) as ‘all good’ or ‘all bad’. The therapist carefully 
observes the patients’ expression of strong affects, the primitive object 
relations and defences of splitting and projection associated with them, 
and talks with the patient about these observations in a non-judgemental 
way. 
The main therapeutic interventions are clarification, confrontation 
and interpretation. With clarification, the therapist invites patients to 
elaborate on the thoughts, actions and emotions of the self and others 
(including the therapist) in problematic situations. With confrontation, 
the therapist points out inconsistencies and contradictions between 
patients’ differing accounts of the self and others at different times, or 
between patients’ accounts, affects and behaviours in a single episode. 
For example, the therapist may point out that in one instance the 
therapist—client transference relationship resembles that of a persecuting 
parent to a frightened and needy child with the client in the role of the 
child; that at another time the relationship is the same but the roles are 
reversed, with the client. adopting the role of the persecuting parent; 
while on other occasions the relationship resembles that of a satisfied 
child and an all-giving mother. With interpretation, the therapist may 
offer explanations for such inconsistencies by suggesting links between 
the use of splitting, primitive idealization and projection as defences to 
reduce anxiety associated with attempting to integrate the all-good and 
all-bad primitive object relations. For example, the therapist may point 
out that one reason for viewing people as all-good or all-bad is that it 
preserves the possibility of having one’s needs met by an all-gratifying 
mother. However, the down-side of using splitting and projection is that 
it prevents the development of sustainable intimate relationships 
because it requires denying the existence of frustrating characteristics 
in people defined as all-good, and positive characteristics of people 
defined as all-bad. This in turn may involve patients accepting that they 
have strong unacceptable sexual and aggressive feelings. 
As patients repeatedly engage in therapeutic conversations involving 
clarification, confrontation and interpretation, their capacity for reflec- 
tion on their own and others’ roles in emotionally intense interaction 

274 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
increases. That is, they show increased reflective functioning, which is 
the capacity to understand the psychological states, motives and inten- 
tions of the self and others. They become better able to tolerate painful 
emotions without resorting to seeing the self and others as ‘all-good’ or 
‘all-bad’ and acting out their intense emotions in destructive ways. 
A series of trials support the effectiveness of transference-focused 
psychotherapy in improving the functioning of patients with borderline 
personality disorder on a number of parameters including reflective 
functioning, mood, self-harm and hospitalization (Yeomans & Diamond, 
2010). 
Mentalization-based treatment for borderline 
personality disorder 
Mentalization-based treatment is an evidence-based psychodynamic 
therapy developed by Anthony Bateman and Peter Fonagy in the UK 
(Bateman & Fonagy, 2010a, 2010b). It aims to improve adjustment in 
borderline 
personality disorder by enhancing 
mentalization 
skills. 
Mentalization or mentalizing is the capacity to understand mental states 
of the self and others, and to conceptualize these states as being 
separate from behaviour. Mentalizing involves being able to think about 
thoughts, emotions, wishes, desires, and needs in the self and others; 
to understand that these internal events may have an impact on actions; 
but to recognize that they are distinct from those actions. The impulsivity, 
emotional regulation problems and consequent relationship difficulties 
that occur in borderline personality disorder arise from a limited capacity 
to mentalize. 
Mentalization develops in early life in the context of caregiver—child 
attachment relationships within which the child’s mental states are 
understood 
and 
‘mirrored’ 
by their caregivers 
and appropriately 
responded to. The development of mentalization is compromised where 
such understanding, mirroring and responsive parenting are absent. 
Thus, neglectful or abusive parenting and the insecure, and often disor- 
ganized, attachment that develops as a consequence inhibits the devel- 
opment of a robust capacity to mentalize within attachment relationships. 
These processes in combination with the predisposing factors of child- 
hood trauma or abuse and constitutional vulnerability (for example, dif- 
ficult temperament) lead to the development of borderline personality 
disorder. In borderline personality disorder a hypersensitive attachment 
system develops in which there is extreme sensitivity to loss. In situ- 
ations where loss occurs or is anticipated, the person experiences 
hyper-arousal. Hyper-arousal radically reduces the capacity to men- 
talize in such situations. This may occur because hyper-arousal directly 
reduces the capacity to mentalize, or in cases of child abuse children 
may defensively inhibit the mentalization process to avoid having to 
recognize that their attachment figures have intentionally hurt them. 
Mentalization-based treatment focuses on facilitating an optimal 
level of arousal in the context of a secure attachment relationship 
between patient and therapist which is not too intense or too detached. 
—

8 * PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
275 
Initially the therapist facilitates this optimal level of arousal with 
techniques such as empathy, support and clarification. These techniques 
soothe the patient, reduce arousal and create a context that supports 
mentalization. When patients engage in transference reactions, rather 
than interpreting these to provide insight, the therapist collaborates with 
the patient and helps them to mentalize the transference. This involves 
encouraging 
patients 
to think about 
the current 
client—therapist 
relationship with the aim of focusing their attention on another mind — 
the mind of a therapist — and assisting them to contrast their own 
perception of themselves with how they are perceived by the therapist. 
In this form of treatment, therapists adopt a mentalizing therapeutic 
stance. This is characterized by humility, curiosity, patience and respect. 
The therapist humbly adopts a ‘not-knowing’ position; curiously asks 
patients in detail about their experiences; 
patiently takes time to 
understand these; and legitimizes in a respectful way the differing 
perspectives of the patient and the therapist. If similarities in patterns of 
relationships in the therapy and in childhood or currently outside of the 
therapy are pointed out (following the triangle of person in Figure 5.5), 
the aim of this is not to provide patients with insight so that they can 
control this behaviour pattern in future, but to draw attention to other 
situations that require mentalization. Therapists actively avoid offering 
transference interpretations in a way that involves them ‘thinking for’ 
patients. Rather they stimulate patients to ‘mentalize’ about transference 
reactions and reach their own conclusions. 
Evidence from trials in which mentalization-based treatment was 
offered to partially hospitalized patients and to outpatients over periods of 
42-18 months shows that it is effective in the short and long terms 
(Bateman & Fonagy, 2010a, 2010b). In anumber of trials it led to improved 
adjustment of patients with borderline personality disorder, as shown by 
reduced self-harm and rehospitalization and increased employment. 
Short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy for 
Cluster C personality disorders 
Short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy is an evidence-based treat- 
ment developed by Leigh McCullough in the US and has been shown in 
a controlled trail to be effective for Cluster C personality disorders 
(Svartberg & McCullough, 2010). Within this model (which is dia- 
grammed in Figure 5.5), Cluster C personality disorders are assumed to 
arise from a dynamic conflict between prohibited adaptive feelings (F) 
such as anger, grief, attachment or sexual excitement one hand, and 
inhibiting feelings (A) such as anxiety, guilt and shame on the other. 
Defences (D) such as social withdrawal, dependency or an excessive 
concern with order emerge as compromise responses to these con- 
flicts, and as the symptoms of Cluster C personality disorders. For 
example, a person who is angry (F) may become anxious about repris- 
als (A) and so may become withdrawn and deferential (D); a person 
who feels grief due to loss (F) may fear further pain due to loss (A) and 
so may avoid intimacy by becoming dutiful and orderly (D). 

276 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
McCullough refers to this process as ‘affect phobia’ which is a social 
learning theory way of describing psychodynamic conflict. F—A-—D pat- 
terns, referred to as the triangle of conflict, are learned in childhood with 
parents and caregivers (P), and are repeated in adult patients’ current 
lives with partners, friends and colleagues (C) and also in transference 
relationships with therapists (T). These three contexts, T-C-P, within 
which the triangle of conflict is replicated are referred to as the triangle 
of person. In short-term dynamic psychotherapy, through interpretation 
therapists help patients understand how they repeatedly enact the 
triangle of conflict in multiple contexts represented by the triangle of 
person. They then help patients desensitize themselves to their unac- 
ceptable feelings (F) by encouraging them to repeatedly experience 
these hidden feelings in an intense way within therapy sessions, with- 
out resorting to the use of defences. This treatment typically involves 
a year of weekly sessions. 
Cognitive-behavioural approaches 
Results from a meta-analysis show that cognitive-behavioural ap- 
proaches and psychodynamic approaches to the treatment of person- 
ality disorders are equally effective (Leichsenring & Leibing, 2003). 
Within the cognitive-behavioural tradition Marsha Linehan’s dialectical 
behaviour therapy for borderline personality disorder is the best vali- 
dated approach (Stanley & Brodsky, 2009). Aaron T. Beck's cognitive- 
behavioural conceptualization of personality disorders has also been 
influential (Beck et al., 2003). 
Dialectical behaviour therapy 
Dialectical behaviour therapy was developed by Marsha Linehan in the 
US. Marsha is both an eminent clinical psychologist and a survivor of 
borderline personality disorder. Dialectical behaviour therapy is based 
on a biosocial diathesis—stress conceptualization of the aetiology of 
borderline personality disorder (Stanley & Brodsky, 2009). The theory 
proposes that the condition arises when individuals with a constitutional 
vulnerability that compromises their capacity for emotion regulation are 
chronically exposed to invalidating environments. 
In such environ- 
ments, individuals’ communications about their inner challenging expe- 
riences are repeatedly invalidated, so that eventually they become 
self-invalidating, which is a central feature of borderline personality dis- 
order. Their moderate displays of emotion are regularly punished, but 
extreme emotional displays are inadvertently reinforced by family mem- 
bers’ expressions of concern or medicai care. This results in ongoing 
emotional inhibition with periodic intense emotional displays character- 
istic of borderline personality disorder. 
Dialectic behaviour therapy aims to decrease suicidal behaviour, 
posttraumatic symptomatology, behaviours that interfere with engaging 
in therapy, and behaviours that interfere with quality of life. It also aims 
to increase behavioural skills for emotion regulation and enhance self- 

8 » PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
277 
respect. Dialectic behaviour therapy begins with the formation of a 
therapeutic contract which is typically between 6 months and a year. 
The cornerstone is a dialectical worldview where polar opposites, or 
thesis and antithesis, are integrated through synthesis. Clients are 
helped to acknowledge polarizations in their experiences and work 
towards a synthesis of these extremes. 
For therapists and clients, the overriding dialectic within therapy in 
between acceptance and change. Dialectical behaviour therapy inte- 
grates cognitive-behavioural, change-based interventions with accept- 
ance-based approaches, notably mindfulness meditation derived from 
Zen practice. It is a multimodal programme that incorporates individual 
psychotherapy, telephone consultation, group-based 
skills training, 
therapists’ consultation meetings and ancillary treatments such as med- 
ication and acute-inpatient psychiatric services. 
In group sessions 
mindfulness meditation, skills for tolerating distress and regulating emo- 
tions, and interpersonal effectiveness skills such as assertiveness are 
acquired. In individual therapy, clients are helped to become motivated 
to use these skills, and to increase adaptive and decrease maladaptive 
behaviours by altering the factors that reinforce these behaviours in 
their day-to-day lives. There is a strong emphasis on validation of cli- 
ents’ experiences and using behavioural analysis to understand factors 
that promote and inhibit therapeutic progress. In telephone consulta- 
tions between sessions clients are helped to generalize the skills they 
have learned to multiple real-life settings and to manage crises. In con- 
sultation meetings, liaison with family members and other involved pro- 
fessionals and agencies occurs. 
A meta-analysis has shown that dialectical behaviour therapy 
reduces suicidal and self-injurious behaviour in patients with borderline 
personality disorder and improves their overall adjustment (Kliem et al., 
2010). 
Cognitive-behavioural theories 
In Aaron T. Beck’s cognitive behavioural conceptualization of personal- 
ity disorders he proposes that people with personality disorders have 
developed pervasive, self-perpetuating cognitive—interpersonal cycles 
that are severely dysfunctional (Beck et al., 2003). Early life experi- 
ences, including family routines and relationships as well as traumatic 
events, lead to the formation of assumptions about the world and in 
particular about interpersonal relationships: for example, ‘people are 
not trustworthy’. In day-to-day interactions, these underlying assump- 
tions lead to automatic thoughts such as ‘He’s trying to con me’. These 
in turn lead to emotional reactions such as anger and behavioural reac- 
tions such as oppositional and confrontative conversation. This in turn 
elicits behaviour from others such as secretiveness and avoidance, 
which reinforces the basic assumption that ‘people are not trustworthy’. 
For each personality disorder there are predominant mood states 
and predominant behavioural strategies used to deal with interpersonal 
situations. Collections of basic assumptions, learned in early life, may 

278 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
be formed into schemas that inform those aspects of the world to which 
the person attends and how they are apt to interpret most situations. 
For example, an abuse—mistrust schema may contain a collection of 
beliefs about the untrustworthiness of others and their potential for 
abusing or harming the person. In addition to schemas, cognitive 
distortions such as mind-reading (I just know he’s trying to get at me 
with that remark) or emotional reasoning (I feel angry, so he must be 
persecuting me) contribute to the way a person reacts to interpersonal 
situations. Also, predominant mood states may predispose people to 
attend to particular types of information or to evaluate situations in 
particular ways. For example, anger may predispose a person to attend 
to potential threats and to evaluate situations as opportunities for 
confrontation. 
B 
Cognitive therapy aims to break the dysfunctional cognitive—interper- 
sonal cycles that constitute the person’s personality disorder using a 
variety of cognitive and behavioural strategies. These include helping 
people learn to identify and challenge their automatic thoughts and core 
assumptions; helping people develop different interpersonal strategies 
and skills that are less likely to elicit from others behaviour that rein- 
forces dysfunctional beliefs; and helping people engage in activities that 
will directly alter their mood states. There is some evidence from meta- 
analyses for the effectiveness of CBT with a range of personality disor- 
ders (Leichsenring & Leibing, 2003). 
Marital and family therapy 
Marital and family therapy interventions for personality disorders focus 
on helping couples and families recognize and alter current family- 
based patterns of interaction that maintain the personality disorder. 
They also help family members identify and challenge the belief systems 
and narratives that underpin these rigid interaction patters. Finally, in 
marital and family therapy, family members may be invited to understand 
how particular personal characteristics or traits and particular family of 
origin experiences have predisposed them to developing family belief 
systems and behaviour patterns that maintain personality disorders. 
Controlled trials of marital and family therapy for personality disorder 
have not been reported in the literature, but guidelines on current best 
practice have been published (e.g., Lebow & Uliaszek, 2010). 
Risk of violence 
The assessment and management of risk of violence is essential in 
cases of antisocial personality disorder, because of the association 
between this condition and aggression. In clinical interviews, patients 
with antisocial personality disorder may not give true accounts of their 
aggressive impulses. Because of this, the use of validated structured 
clinical instruments and information from collateral sources such as 
relatives or other agencies that have had contact with the patient to 

8 = PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
279 
assess risk violence is important (Scott & Resnick, 2006). Thus, risk 
management typically involves interviews with the patient and members 
of their families as well as multidisciplinary and multiagency meetings. 
Multiagency meetings may involve staff from probation services, since 
many patients with antisocial personality disorder are on probation. 
The Psychopathy Checklist (PCL-R, Hare, 2003) and Historical, 
Clinical, Risk Management—20 (HCR-20, Douglas et al., 2001) are 
examples of well-validated and widely used instruments for assessing 
risk of violence. The HCR-20 consists of 20 items on historical, clinical 
and risk management issues. The historical items cover previous 
violence, substance misuse problems, major mental illness, psychopathy 
and personality disorder. The clinical items are concerned with lack of 
insight, negative attitudes, active symptoms of mental illness, impulsivity 
and unresponsiveness 
to treatment. The risk management items 
include feasibility of plans, exposure to destabilizing influences, lack of 
personal support, non-compliance with treatment and stress. 
In light of the assessment a formulation of the risk of violence is 
developed, identifying factors likely to increase or decrease the risk and 
a plan for managing these. Risk management plans should be directed 
at crisis resolution, decreasing risk factors and increasing protective 
factors. Members of the patient’s family and other involved profes- 
sionals such as probation officers and social workers may play a role 
in risk management plans. Unfortunately, there are no well-validated 
treatments for antisocial personality disorder, so risk management 
strategies must focus on using available evidence-based practices to 
address specific problems such as motivational interviewing for comor- 
bid substance use or training in anger management skills. 
Assessment 
The assessment of personality disorder occurs within the context of the 
assessment of the whole person. When assessing patients with person- 
ality disorder, typically Axis | disorders such as mood, anxiety, sub- 
stance use or eating disorders are present, and these are assessed in 
ways described in Chapters 3-6. In a significant proportion of cases, 
risky behaviours such as self-harm or violence may also be present. 
The assessment and management of risk of harm to the patient or 
others is always prioritized. (Suicide risk assessment has been discussed 
in Chapter 6.) 
Ideally the assessment and treatment of personality disorders is 
conducted by multidisciplinary teams. Initial screening for personality 
disorders may be conducted with self-report inventories such as the 
Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory—IIl (MCMI-III, Millon, 2009), the 
Schedule for Nonadaptive and Adaptive Personality—Il (SNAP-2, Clark 
et al., 2008) or the personality disorder scales of the Minnesota 
Multiphasic Personality Inventory—2 (MMPI-2, Colligan et al., 1994). 
Where self-report instruments suggest the presence of a personality 
disorder, a diagnosis may be confirmed through clinical interviewing. A 

280 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
number of structured interviews for the diagnosis of personality disorders 
are available, such as the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV 
Personality Disorders (SCID-II, First et al., 1997) and the International 
Personality Disorder Examination (IPDE, Loranger, 1999). The Revised 
NEO Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R, Costa & McCrae, 1992) is the 
best available instrument for assessing the Big 5 personality factors and 
their 30 facets, and this may provide a useful profile of personality traits 
and facets to take into account in formulating the case. (The trait 
approach to personality disorders is discussed below in the section on 
controversies. ) 
The personality disorder diagnosis, along with information from an 
assessment of personality traits and facets and the clinical history, is 
used to construct a formulation. The formulation explains the main 
clinical problems entailed by the personality disorder with reference to 
predisposing, maintaining and protective factors. Precipitating factors 
may be included in formulations of personality disorders, to identify 
events that precipitated referral for treatment or a recent crisis. However, 
since personality disorders are by definition longstanding patterns of 
adjustment, 
factors 
that precipitated 
their onset 
usually are 
not 
meaningfully 
identifiable. 
During the process of assessment and 
treatment patients with personality disorders and family members may 
be invited to keep daily records of fluctuations in symptoms, distress, 
and beliefs and the circumstances preceding and following these 
fluctuations. These idiographic ratings are useful for fine-tuning ongoing 
therapy. Comprehensive reviews of personality disorder assessment 
instruments are given in Strack (2010) and Widiger (2008). 
Treatment 
In extensive narrative reviews of the design and delivery of psychotherapy 
programmes for service users with personality disorders, Bateman and 
Fonagy (2000) and Linehan et al. (2006) concluded that effective 
programmes — whether cognitive behavioural or psychodynamic — 
share a number of common features. They are theoretically coherent 
(not eclectic), offering an explanation for problematic behaviours and 
interpersonal styles, and for the role of psychotherapy in offering a 
solution to these problems. They are well structured and of long duration, 
usually extending beyond a year. They include procedures for helping 
clients engage in treatment, maintain therapeutic contact and adhere to 
therapeutic regimes. 
Effective psychotherapy programmes may include sequential or con- 
current individual, group and family sessions, following a pre-established 
coherent pattern. Effective outpatient psychotherapy programmes are 
offered within the context of broader multimodal, multidisciplinary ser- 
vices in which there are clear policies and practices for inpatient care, 
use of medication, and crisis management where high-risk behaviour in- 
cluding self-harming, aggression or other crises occurs. Effective pro- 
grammes have a clear focus on key problem areas such as self-harm, 
aggression and difficult interpersonal relationships. Effective therapeutic 

8 * PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
281 
techniques strike a balance between a focus on acceptance of clients’ 
constraints and limitations on one hand, and a focus on behavioural 
change and developing less problematic ways of living on the other. 
Psychotherapists offering effective treatment programmes for per- 
sonality disorders receive sustained intensive supervision, in which 
intense countertransference reactions elicited by psychotherapy with 
these clients are addressed. Positive outcomes are more probable 
where therapists are patient, flexible and creative in their approach to 
therapy; are comfortable with long-term, intense therapeutic relation- 
ships; are tolerant of their own negative feelings about patients and the 
therapy process; and have specific training in treating personality disor- 
ders (Fernandez-Alderez et al., 2006). 
For borderline personality disorder, dialectical behaviour therapy, 
mentalization-based treatment and transference-focused psychother- 
apy are well-developed evidence-based treatments. For other person- 
ality disorders, either psychodynamic or cognitive behaviour therapy of 
at least a year’s duration may be effective in a proportion of cases. 
Adjunctive psychopharmacological interventions for symptom manage- 
ment may be integrated into psychological treatment programmes for 
personality disorders. The central role of psychotherapy in the treat- 
ment of personality disorders is consistent with international guidelines 
for best practice (Alwin et al., 2006; American Psychiatric Association, 
2001b; National Institute of Mental Health in England, 2003; NICE, 
2009c, 2009d). 
Controversies 
In the field of personality disorders the main controversies centre on the 
categorical or dimensional conceptualization of abnormal personality 
functioning, the validity of the distinction between Axis | and Axis II 
disorders, and therapeutic communities as an alternative to hospital or 
outpatient treatment. 
Trait theory as an alternative to categorical diagnoses 
Within DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10, personality disorders are conceptual- 
ized in categorical terms. That is, it is assumed that within a population 
some people have personality disorders and some do not, and that 
there are qualitative differences between those that do and do not meet 
the diagnostic criteria for personality disorders. Trait theories, in con- 
trast, propose that a limited number of dimensions may be used to char- 
acterize important aspects of behaviour and experience. Traits are 
normally distributed within the population. So for any given trait (for 
example, introversion—extraversion), most people show a moderate 
level of the trait, but a few people show extremely low or extremely high 
levels. Within a population, people who fall at the extreme ends of these 
dimensions 
may have the sorts of difficulties attributed in DSM-IV-TR 
and ICD-10 to people with personality disorders. However, these people 
differ from others only in the degree to which they show particular traits. 

282 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Traits are identified by factor-analysing responses of large samples of 
people to extensive personality questionnaires and rating scales. Factor 
analysis is a procedure for mathematically clustering questionnaire or 
rating scale items that correlate with each other into a small set of 
dimensions. 
In recent years trait theory has come to be dominated by the five-factor 
model of personality (McCrae & Costa, 2008). This model includes the 
following dimensions: neuroticism, extraversion, openness to experience, 
agreeableness, and conscientiousness. Neuroticism reflects differences 
in emotional lability and varies from emotionally stable to unstable. 
Extraversion reflects differences in sociability and varies from introverted 
to extraverted. Openness to experience reflects willingness to accept new 
ideas, feelings and actions and extends from imaginative creativeness to 
constriction. Agreeableness refers to interpersonal warmth or coldness. 
Conscientiousness varies from highly dutiful and self-disciplined to irre- 
sponsible and undisciplined. Each of the factors within the five-factor 
model contains six facets, which are listed in Table 8.4. There is evidence 
TABLE 8.4 
Factors and facets of the five-factor model of personality 
Factor 
Facet 
Neuroticism 
Anxiety 
Angry hostility 
Depression 
Self-consciousness 
impulsiveness 
Vulnerability 
Extraversion 
Warmth 
Gregariousness 
Assertiveness 
Activity 
Excitement seeking 
Positive emotions 
Openness to experience 
Fantasy 
Aesthetics 
Feelings 
Actions 
Ideas 
Values 
Agreeableness 
Trust 
Straightforwardness 
Altruism 
Compliance 
Modesty 
Tender-mindedness 
Conscientiousness 
Competence 
Order 
Dutifulness 
Achievement striving 
Self-discipline 
Deliberation 

8 » PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
283 
for the heritability of all of factors within the Five Factor Model except 
agreeableness 
which seems 
to be predominantly 
environmentally 
determined (Costa & Widiger, 1994). 
Thomas Widiger has proposed that the five-factor model may be used 
as an alternative system for describing personality disorders (Widiger & 
Mullins-Sweatt, 2010). The profiles of major personality disorders on the 
dimensions of the five-factor model of personality are presented in Table 
8.5. These profiles are based on Samuel and Widiger’s (2008) meta- 
analysis of data from 16 studies of 30 facets of the five-factor model of 
personality in groups of patients with personality disorders. 
Widiger argues that trait theory offers a more scientifically useful 
approach to assessment. Personality questionnaires that have been 
developed to measure the Big Five personality traits have good psycho- 
metric properties (De Raad & Perugini, 2002). They are reliable and 
valid, and have population norms. The five-factor personality trait theory 
and related measures assume a demonstrated continuity between nor- 
mal and abnormal personality. Research on the Big Five personality 
traits has led to a significant body of knowledge on the genetic and 
childhood antecedents of normal adult personality, neurobiological cor- 
relates of personality traits, and the stability and change in personality 
traits over the life course. This body of research may inform our under- 
standing of personality disorders, if we base our assessment on the 
five-factor model. Compared with categorical classification systems, 
trait models offer a more parsimonious way of describing people with 
rigid dysfunctional behaviour patterns. This in turn offers a more parsi- 
monious way to conceptualize the development of effective treatments. 
Continuity between Axis | and Axis II disorders 
A second controversy concerns the validity of the distinction between 
Axis | and Axis II disorders. There are significant similarities between 
each of the personality disorders and certain Axis | disorders. However, 
there are also distinct differences. These are listed in Table 8.6. 
Paranoid, schizoid and schizotypal personality disorders each bear a 
marked resemblance to aspects of schizophrenia. However, people 
with these three personality disorders do not show frank delusions, 
hallucinations, thought disorder or negative symptoms. There are clear 
parallels between antisocial personality disorder and conduct disorder, 
since both involve moral immaturity and violation of others’ rights. About 
a third of youngsters with conduct disorder, when they reach adulthood, 
meet the diagnostic criteria for antisocial personality disorder (Kazdin, 
1995). Borderline personality disorder resembles depression, insofar as 
loss and abandonment are central themes and negative affect is a core 
feature of both conditions. 
Hysterical personality disorder and conversion hysteria are similar 
insofar as in both conditions a caricature of a role is adopted and this is 
associated with attention seeking and secondary gain. However, with 
hysterical personality disorder, the role is that of a stereotypically 
seductive woman or macho male, whereas in conversion hysteria a 

INTRODUCTION 
284 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN 
InyAor 
BAY 
UWE 
NA 
Bunjaes 
Buryjees 
JUSW9}IOXy 
jUsWO}IOXy 
aAlessy 
aAIessy 
snouebaig 
snouebeais 
OIUOLYSIH 
aaisjndul| 
SNOlNSUudd-}jaS 
INJNP JON 
SNOKUY 
snoixuy 
ssejaseg 
pepuens 
ajqeseujn/A, 
Aibuy 
Joljeg-yies syoe] 
jenjo1yuod 
Plo 
Aibuy 
passeidegq 
pouldiosipuy) 
INsNyjsiyy 
ssajAor 
pesseideg 
aulapsog 
Jaljeq-ses SxOe] 
INYSNjsSi|\| 
jenyojuoD 
peuljdiosipun 
YSIJOS 
dnos6 ones 
pepieny 
INANP JON 
jenjoijuog 
anisindul| 
‘eUuONOUWIS ‘OHeWeIG 
ssajalreg 
ssajaieg 
pepieny 
juswayioxe syoes 
Aibuy 
jesosnuy 
g Jajsnji9 
snokuy 
INASNIYSI|\] 
Aibuy 
SNOINSUOD-}|8S 
joofy 
snoisuod-jjas 
paesseidaq 
INYSNySI,\ 
plop 
pesseidagq 
jedAjoziuoS 
JUSWS}IOXE SPIOAY 
@AISSILUGNS 
SAIOLU| 
ssejAor 
_ joorv 
pio 
ssajAof +  snolmsuod-jjas 
Joojy 
INSNYSI 
PIOD 
pesseideq 
PIOZIUDS 
YSHISS 
snoKxuy 
pesseideq 
pepiens 
joojy 
 snoimsuoo-jjes 
Aubuy 
jenyoijuoy 
ssajAor 
pesseideg 
dnos6 oujus998 ‘ppoO 
INASNISHAI 
INYSNIySI,\ 
PjoD 
Aubuy 
ploueled 
V 493SNID 
Japsosip 
s]e0ej 89/4} doy 
sseusnonusi9suoD 
—- sseuajqeaalby 
UOISJBABXZ 
WSIDOINON 
AyBUOSI8g 
Jaysnfg 
$8 a1aVL 
Ayyeuosied jo japow 4OPEJ-OAlj BY} JO 5}92L} OE JO sisAjeue-e} 
aw © WO) ssapsosip Ayjeuosied AL-INSG JO SajljOig 

“SUONE|AI09 JAY} JO OZIS OU} JO JAPIO UI! Paysi| ae (OE JO yno) sje0ej ¢ do} ayy sapsosip Ayjeuosiad Yoee JO} 
‘yWNIOd |2UY BU} Uj “PaISi| Ge 70 =4 Ue Ja}eaL6 (GO" > d) suonejasoo yueoyuBis pey yey} s}e0e} AjUC “SIBPJOSIP Ajyjeuosuad YM SUOHEIALOD 49U} JO OZIS SY} JO JOP UI Ps}Si] Be 1O}e} 
yoea ulUyM s}80k} ‘Japsosip Ayyeuosiad yoee 104 -Ayyeuosiad JO [OPO JO}DEJ-OAY BU} JO S}BOB} OE JO SAIPNIS Q} WO} Bye JO siskjeue-e}aW! (g00Z) SJe5ipy pue jenuies UO paseg -ejON 
PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
285 
paurjdiosip-seS 
BulAuys 
inyaseg 
JUSWOASIUOY 
HUIALI]S JUSLUBASIUOY 
nynng 
iInjang 
@AIsindwos 
Ayepso 
AueapsO 
-8AISS8SqO 
Aibuy 
pesseideq 
pesseideq 
SNOIDSUOD-JJ8S 
peuljdiosipun 
Snolosuod-jjaS 
ajqesauln/ 
jayjoq-sjas SyOe] 
SAISSIWUGNS 
aiqesaujnA, 
juepuedeq 
JUSW}IOX9 SPIOAY 
@AOCU| 
Aubuy 
PIOD 
S|QeJounA 
jooly 
ssejAor 
snoxuy 
dnou6 
pesseideqg 
saoueiedxe 
pauljdiosipuy) 
Jsopol 
aAissiwigns 
pesseideq 
ness ‘snoxuy 
SNONSUON-}J98S 
MAU SPIOAY 
Ja1jeqg-sJoS SYOe7] 
|NySNUjsi\y 
Joofy 
Ssnolosuodd-jj8S 
JUEPIOAY 
\ 
gsejsni9 
[NYISNYSIA 
YSYIES 
jenjoiyuo) 
JEnjolyuoD 
pepiens 
papuens 
inyseog 
jnyseog 
Aibuy 
ONSISSINEN 

286 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
TABLE 8.6 
Comparison of personality disorders and Axis | disorders with similar features 
Cluster 
Cluster A 
Odd, 
eccentric 
group 
Cluster B 
Dramatic, 
emotional, 
erratic group 
Cluster C 
Anxious, 
fearful group 
Personality 
Similar Axis 1 
Common clinical 
Differences in clinical features 
disorder 
disorder 
features 
Paranoid 
‘ Schizophrenia _- Mistrust and 
In PPD delusions, hallucinations, 
(PPD) 
suspiciousness 
thought disorder, and negative 
symptoms of schizophrenia are 
absent. 
Schizoid 
Schizophrenia 
Attachment 
In SDPD delusions, 
(SDPD) 
problems and 
hallucinations, thought disorder, 
social isolation 
and negative symptoms of 
schizophrenia are absent. 
Schizotypal 
Schizophrenia 
Eccentric thoughts, 
In SLD delusions, hallucinations, 
(SLPD) 
perceptual 
thought disorder, and negative 
experiences and 
symptoms of schizophrenia are 
speech 
absent. 
Antisocial 
Conduct 
Moral immaturity 
For a diagnosis of ALPD the 
(ALPD) 
disorder 
person must be over 18. Conduct 
disorder applies to children and 
adolescents. 
Borderline 
Depression 
Impulsivity 
In BPD, episodes of low mood 
(BPD) 
are brief and the course of the 
disorder is lifelong beginning in 
childhood. 
Histrionic 
Conversion 
Attention seeking 
In HPD attention is gained 
(HPD) 
hysteria 
through adopting seductive or 
macho role but with hysteria it is 
gained by adopting a sick-role. 
Narcissistic 
2? 
(NPD) 
Avoidant 
Social phobia 
Shyness 
In ATPD people avoid 
(ATPD) 
relationships, but with social 
phobia they avoid situations 
Dependent 
Separation 
Lack of autonomy 
DPD continues into adulthood 
(DPD) 
anxiety 
and affects all areas of 
functioning 
Separation anxiety is a childhood 
disorder 
Obsessive- 
Obsessive- 
Perfectionism 
In OCPD symptoms are accepted 
compulsive 
compulsive 
but in OCD they are resisted 
(OCPD) 
disorder 
sick-role is adopted. The symptoms of conversion hysteria, which are 
not feigned, include deficits in sensory or motor functioning in the 
absence of an organic illness. Avoidant personality disorder and social 
phobia are similar insofar as shyness typifies both conditions. However, 
those with the personality disorder avoid relationships, whereas those 
with the phobia avoid particular social situations. 
Dependent personality disorder and separation anxiety both entail 
problems with autonomy. Separation anxiety is a childhood disorder, 

8 
» PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
287 
but dependent personality disorder is the adult expression of the same 
core issues. Obsessive compulsive personality disorder closely resem- 
bles obsessive compulsive disorder. However, with the personality dis- 
order the obsession with orderliness and rule-following is fully accepted 
and embraced as a valued part of the person’s lifestyle, whereas with 
OCD the obsessions and compulsions are resisted. 
The similarities between Axis | and Axis II disorders described call 
into question the validity of the distinctions made between these classes 
of disorder. For example, it might be more parsimonious to amalgamate 
diagnoses such as conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder, 
and express these difficulties in dimensional terms such as externalizing 
behaviour problems. This approach is supported by results of genetic 
studies which show that certain Axis | and Axis Il disorders share genetic 
risk factors (Reichborn-Kjennerud, 2010). These include schizophrenia 
and Cluster A personality disorders, especially schizotypal personality 
disorder; borderline personality disorder and depression; avoidant 
personality disorder and social phobia; and antisocial personality 
disorder, conduct disorder and substance use disorders. 
Therapeutic communities 
Therapeutic communities developed as an alternative approach to 
treating personality disorders, addictions and other severe mental 
health problems. Traditional inpatient mental health settings were hier- 
archically organized, and run on authoritarian lines. They encouraged 
patients to be passive recipients of treatment. Therapeutic communities 
were run on more democratic lines and encouraged service users to 
take an active role in their own rehabilitation. Responsibility for the daily 
running of the community was shared among service users and staff. 
In the UK, the radical psychiatrists Maxwell Jones (Jones, 1952) and 
R. D. Laing (mentioned in Chapter 7 in the section on controversies) 
were pioneers in the development therapeutic communities. In the US, 
therapeutic communities were developed 
mainly for people with 
addiction problems. Therapeutic communities for people with personality 
disorders have been run in prisons, hospitals and day hospitals. In 
these communities there are usually daily meetings of service users 
and staff, and a predominance of group activities. 
The hallmark 
of therapeutic communities 
is their democratic, 
participative approach to decision-making. This creates a context within 
which service users significantly influence the way their therapeutic 
communities are run. Complex, participative community processes are 
the central therapeutic factors of therapeutic communities (Jones, 1952). 
In a systematic review of 52 outcome studies of the effects of therapeutic 
communities on people with personality disorders and a meta-analysis 
of 29 of these, Lees et al. (1999) found that a significant positive effect 
occurred in 19 of the 29 studies in their meta-analysis. Participants in 
these trials were young offenders or psychiatric service users with a 
range of personality disorders. In their narrative review, Lees et al. 
concluded that for people with personality disorder, long-term treatment 

288 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
in therapeutic communities may lead to improvements in mental health 
and interpersonal functioning, and that the longer a service user stays in 
treatment, 
the better the outcome. They also found that secure 
therapeutic communities were effective in managing difficult prisoners, 
and significantly reducing serious prison discipline incidents including 
fire-setting, violence, self-harm and absconding. 
Summary 
Personality disorders are characterized by enduring dysfunc- 
tional patterns of behaviour and experience that begin in ado- 
lescence and are consistent across situations. There are 
difficulties with cognition, affect, impulse control, behaviour 
and interpersonal functioning. There are also recurrent rela- 
tionship problems or occupational problems with a history of 
other psychological disorders or criminality. People with per- 
sonality disorders have difficulty learning from experience or 
benefiting from psychotherapy for their personality disorders or 
other comorbid Axis | disorders. 
In DSM-IV-TR, 10 main personality disorders are subdi- 
vided into three clusters on the basis of their cardinal clinical 
features. The odd, eccentric cluster includes the paranoid, 
schizoid and schizotypal personality disorders. The dramatic, 
emotional, erratic cluster includes the antisocial, borderline, 
histrionic and narcissistic personality disorders. The third 
cluster includes the avoidant, dependent and obsessive- 
compulsive personality disorders, all of which are character- 
ized by anxiety and fearfulness. A very similar classification 
system is used in ICD-10. 
The prevalence of personality disorders is approximately 
10% in the general population, whereas in samples of mental 
health service users the rate is about 40%. Many people who 
have one personality disorder meet the criteria for a number of 
others. 
Personality disorders 
are fairly stable over time, 
although some improvement does occur, especially among 
those with Cluster B personality disorders. 
Diathesis—stress theories argue that personality disorders 
emerge when genetically or constitutionally vulnerable individ- 
uals are exposed to particular types of environmental stress. 
Heritability estimates for personality disorders range from 20% 
to 70% and recent research has begun to discover the neuro- 
biological basis for some personality disorders, especially 
schizotypal, borderline and antisocial personality disorder. 
There is evidence for early adversity, problematic parenting, 
trauma and child abuse in the aetiology of many personality 

8» PERSONALITY DISORDERS 
289 
disorders. Psychodynamic and cognitive behavioural theories 
of personality disorders explain the emergence of person- 
ality disorders in diathesis—stress terms, but propose detailed 
psychological processes to account for symptom aetiology 
and maintenance. Controlled trials of treatment programmes 
based on these conceptualizations have been shown them 
to be effective for some personality disorders, with the stron- 
gest evidence base being for dialectical behaviour therapy, 
‘ transference-focused therapy and mentalization therapy for 
borderline personality disorder. 
With regard to pharmacological 
treatments 
there was 
evidence for the effectiveness of antipsychotics in reducing 
psychotic-like symptoms, mood stabilizers in reducing aggres- 
sion, and antidepressants in regulating mood. Patients with 
personality disorders usually have other Axis | disorders and 
frequently are at risk of self-harm or violence. The assessment 
and management of such patients is ideally conducted by 
multidisciplinary teams and often involves multiagency liaison. 
The main controversies in the field centre on the categorical or 
dimensional conceptualization of abnormal personality func- 
tioning, the validity of the distinction between Axis | and Axis II 
disorders and the value of democratic therapeutic communities 
as an alternative to traditional authoritarian inpatient treatment 
settings. 
Questions 
e 
What is a personality disorder and how does it differ from an Axis | 
disorder? 
e 
What are the main personality disorders included in the DSM and 
ICD classification systems? 
e 
Whatis the main clinical feature of each of the personality disorders? 
e 
Howprevalent are personality disorders? 
e 
What are the diathesis—stress, psychodynamic, and cognitive- 
behavioural theories of personality disorders and the key research 
findings relevant to these theories? 
e 
What evidence-based approaches have been developed for the 
assessment and treatment of personality disorders? 
e 
What are the pros and cons of adopting a ‘Big 5 dimensional 
approach to personality disorders as an alternative to the DSM and 
ICD categorical systems? 

290 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
FURTHER READING 
Professional 
Clarkin, J. & Lenzenweger, M. (2005). Major theories of personality dis- 
order (second edition). New York: Guilford. 
Magnavita, J. J. (2010). Evidence-based treatment of personality dys- 
function: Principles, methods, and processes, Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association. 
Oldham, J., Skodol, A. & Bender, D. (2009). Essentials of personality 
disorders. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Self-help 
Fusco, G. & Freeman, A. (2004). Borderline personality disorder: A pa- 
tient’s guide to taking control. New York: Norton. 
Mason, P. T. & Kreger, R. (1998). Stop walking on eggshells: Taking 
your life back when someone you care about has borderline personality 
disorder. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger. 
WEBSITES 
American Psychiatric Association's practice guidelines for treating border- 
line personality disorder: 
http://psychiatryonline.org/guidelines.aspx 
National Educational Alliance for Borderline Personality Disorder in the 
US: 
www.borderlinepersonalitydisorder.com 
National Institute for Clinical Excellence guidelines for treating antisocial 
and borderline personality disorders: 
http://guidance.nice.org.uk/topic/mentalhealthbehavioural 
PsychNet — Personality Disorders page: 
www.psychnet-uk.com/x_new_site/personality_psychology/a_index_ 
personality_psychology.html 
UK Department of Health Personality Disorder policy documents: 
www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/publications/publications 
policyandguidance/dh_4009546 
UK Personality Disorder site: 
www.personalitydisorder.org.uk 
e

Models that influence 
the practice of clinical 
psychology 
Learning objectives 
After studying this chapter you will be able to: 
e 
list the key assumptions of biological, 
psychodynamic, cognitive-behavioural and family 
systems models that influence the practice of clinical 
psychology 
outline the main achievements of the biological, 
psychodynamic, cognitive-behavioural and family 
systems models 
critically evaluate the limitations of the biological, 
psychodynamic, cognitive-behavioural and family 
systems models 
describe the contributions of the humanistic client- 
centred tradition, personal construct psychology 
and positive psychology to the practice of clinical 
psychology. 
Introduction 
Explanations and interventions for the various clinical problems des- 
cribed in Chapters 2-8 have arisen from four main models: 
the biological model 
the psychodynamic model 
the cognitive-behavioural model 
the family systems model. 

292 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
In this chapter the main assumptions of each of these models will 
be outlined, along with an account of their achievements or strengths 
and shortcomings or limitations. 
A summary of these issues is given in 
Table 9.1. The contribution of a number of other influential approaches 
to practice will be briefly considered in this chapter, including those 
based on client-centred humanistic psychology, personal construct 
psychology and the positive psychology. 
Biological model 
Assumptions 
The biological model of psychological problems is also referred to 
as the neurobiological, organic, medical or disease model. In this 
framework it is assumed that the various psychological difficulties that 
people with a particular syndrome display are symptoms of a specific 
disease with a discrete neurobiological cause, a unique course and 
prognosis, and for which a specific physical treatment will ultimately be 
identified (Nestler & Charney, 2008). This model evolved within the 
medical tradition where there were numerous examples of physical 
conditions involving a syndrome of signs and symptoms that could 
be explained by a discrete cause, such as an infection or metabolic 
dysfunction. 
Syphilis is a good example of a condition where a discrete physical 
cause (syphilitic infection) leads to a psychological syndrome (general 
paresis of the insane) and can be treated by a specific physical inter- 
vention (inoculation). In 1897 Richard von Krafft-Ebing, 
a German neu- 
rologist, following the work of Louis Pasteur, inoculated patients who 
had general paresis with pus from syphilitic sores, and this halted the 
development of the degenerative condition, which typically culminated 
in insanity. The success of this work gave impetus to the biological 
model of mental health problems. The model has been championed by 
psychiatry more than other mental health professions. 
Diathesis—stress or stress-vulnerability models are modern variants 
of the biological model. In these types of model it is assumed that psy- 
chological problems or ‘psychiatric illnesses’ occur when people who 
are neurobiologically vulnerable to such difficulties are exposed to par- 
ticular stresses. For example, a diathesis—stress model of schizophre- 
nia was described in Chapter 7 (Walker et al., 2008; Zubin & Spring, 
1977). 
Achievements 
The biological or medical model has led to a number of important 
achievements. The first of these has been the development of mental 
health legislation (Bartlett & Sandland, 2007; Gunn & Wheat, 2009). 
This legislation makes provision for the involuntary detention and treat- 
ment of people with psychological disorders whose judgement is 
severely impaired, especially if they are a danger to themselves or other 

INFLUENTIAL MODELS 
293 
9 
a 
8 
SJO}JOR} Wa}sAs [eIo0s 
soilpeww-uou sezijeulbieyy e 
pasnge si uoje|si6a) yyeoy jejuayy e 
sJo}oe} 
Bununoosip jo sabueq 
@AIDOYO-]SOD JON 
UOISN}OXE S8JOWOJg e 
oiuoXsdejui Buyunoosip jo sobueq e 
sjoyoe} s1ue610 
Ayyjenxes ajyuejul 
$J0}OB} JeoINOd-o190s sjunoosiq e 
SJOJOL} 
Bujunodsip jo saHueq e 
JO JuNODNe ayeind9eU] e 
SUONEDIPSW JO SJOBJS-apPiS e 
oiueBio Bununossip jo sebueq e 
swej|qoid 
saseyjodAy 
S|@pOwW ;eEUOISUSLUIP S}UNODSIG e 
sseuenBea jo iaBueg e 
Buiziyjeiu} jo soBueq e 
aiqelsejun SuleJuoD © 
 SS8OdUSNYU! |EJUOWUOJIAUS SJUNODSIG e 
SUOHeWWIF 
Seley Wa|qosd-njnw xe;dwo0o 
GHulbeuew JO} YIOMOLULY SAIS) 
s]USsWe 
aL} 
sio}oR} jeI00s pue jeoibojoyoAsd 
snoJobu AjjeoyyUuains e 
Adesau} pue Aj\yeuosied 
jeaisAyd pue jeaibojooeuueyud @ 
‘yeaiBojoig jo uoesHayul Syed © 
swajgoid ayloads JO} 
JO SJapOW JauUjO pauidsu} e 
ABojouyos} jeoipayy e 
aonoeid Ppeseg-sdUsPIAa S}ILUSq 
SUONUSAJE}UI OWIOads Se} ° 
eino Bure} peziwijiie7 e 
POUJELU DYNUSIOS e 
BAIOEYa-JSOO pue Joug e 
eojoeid 
e0UaJaJSUBI} JO AIBAOOSIQ e 
UONEOYISSe|D 
inoineyag jewsouge 
peseqg-souapIAe S}iWad e 
jnjHuluesw sseupew seyey\| e 
uone|sibe] uyesy jeyuay e 
40 }x9]U0N JeI00s peyyHyBiyH 
aAHOEYe pue jag e 
snolosuooun jo AJaAoosiq e 
AUBSU! JO UONEJEgI] e 
 sjUsWaAsINOY 
AsaBinsoyohsd e 
Adesau} 
Adesau} snoiweyoq 
sisAjeueoyoAsd 
log e 
sso9ooid 
Ajiuse} JO JEU WUE}]-WOUS e 
@AMIUBOD WU8}-HOUS e 
@U0-0}-8U0 Wu8}-6u07] 
jea1iBojooeweud e 
Adesoy 
sjeljeq pue susayjed uoOeJE}U! 
syiqey 
S}O1|JUOO 
Aju Buiureyurew-wejqoid Jayy 
eaandepe aJsow wes] e 
SNOIOSUODUN sAJOSEY e 
Ayyewuusouge SND Ayyoeay 
jeo6 Adesau 
inoiweysq 
jeuuouge 
wejshs Ajiwey jeuonourysAq 
sjiqey peusee7y 
ABojoujyedoyoAsd snoisuooun 
Ayyewuouge we}shs snosiau jeyUusD 
jo asne9 
we 
 ————— 
——— 
jepow swajshs Ajwe4 
japow jesnoineyaq aaijjuBboa 
jepow ayAjeueoyoAsg 
jepow jeoibojoig 
————  ——————————eeeeeSFSNeSNeNNSeSeNFSFSFee fF  — — — — 
 —4GA«wOC«é——hOUOOM 
ANoIAeyaq jewUsOUge }o japoyy 
L°6 JISVL 
‘ 

294 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
people. Suicidal behaviour and extremely violent behaviour are recog- 
nized within mental health legislation in most countries as possible 
reflections of impaired judgement and possible grounds for involuntary 
detention or treatment in a psychiatric treatment centre. 
A second important achievement of the biological model has been 
the development of widely used classification systems. This began with 
the painstaking work of Kraepelin (1899), who catalogued symptoms 
characteristic of different groups of patients. Psychological problems 
are currently classified 
in the fifth chapter of the World Health 
Organization’s (1992) International Classification of Diseases (now in 
its 10th edition) and in the American Psychiatric Association’s (2000) 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (now in its text- 
revised fourth edition). These two systems — ICD-10 and DSM-IV-TR — 
are now used widely throughout the world and provide a way for 
clinicians and researchers to communicate with each other in a rela- 
tively unambiguous manner. This was not always the case. In the past 
there has been wide variation in diagnostic criteria used in different 
countries. For example, in the US a very broad definition of schizophre- 
nia was typically used until the development of DSM-III in 1980. The 
extraordinary differences in rates of diagnoses are highlighted by the 
results of the US—UK project presented in Table 9.2. 
The use of scientific methods and quantitative techniques to study 
psychological problems is a third achievement of the biological model. 
Case—control studies, longitudinal studies, and randomized controlled 
trials are three common research designs used in studies conducted 
within the medical tradition. Case—control studies may be used to deter- 
mine the unique characteristics associated with a particular psychologi- 
cal disorder. In such studies a group of diagnostically homogeneous 
cases about which the researcher is trying to find out more information 
is compared to another group of patients with a known condition or with 
a normal control group. This was the method Kolvin et al. (1971) used 
to differentiate between childhood schizophrenia and autism. They 
found that compared with childhood schizophrenia, autism was associ- 
ated with an earlier onset, delayed language development, catastrophic 
reactions to environmental changes, gross stereotypic behaviours, and 
the absence of delusions and hallucinations. 
Longitudinal studies may be used to determine the course of a psy- 
chological disorder. In longitudinal studies the researcher obtains infor- 
mation on a group of diagnostically homogeneous cases on a number 
TABLE 9.2 
Rates of diagnosis of schizophrenia in the US and the UK 
Hospital diagnosis 
Project diagnosis 
US 
61% 
29% 
UK 
34% 
35% 
Note: N = 192 in US; N = 174 in UK. Adapted from Cooper, J., Kendall, R., Gurland, B., 
Sharp, L. Copeland, J., & Simon, R. (1972). Psychiatric diagnosis in New York and London. 
London: Oxford University Press. 

9* INFLUENTIAL MODELS 
295 
of occasions; for example, in childhood and adulthood. This was the 
research design used by Robins (1966) to establish the course of child- 
hood conduct disorder. He found that about a third of cases developed 
antisocial personality disorder and a third adjusted well in adulthood. 
The remaining third had a more variable course. 
Randomized controlled trials are used to evaluate the effectiveness 
of specific treatments. Diagnostically homogeneous cases are randomly 
assigned to treatment or control conditions. All cases are assessed 
immediately before and after treatment and then at follow-up some 
months after treatment has been completed. Standard assessment 
procedures are used for all cases at all three time points. If the group 
that receives treatment shows greater improvement than the control 
group, then the treatment may be said to be effective. This design is 
typical of studies reviewed in books such as What Works with Children, 
Adolescents and Adults? (Carr, 2009a), What Works for Whom? (Roth 
& Fonagy, 2005) and A Guide to Treatments That Work (Nathan & 
Gorman, 2007). 
; 
The development of sophisticated methods for monitoring activity 
within the central nervous system is a fourth achievement of the bio- 
logical model. These include brain imaging systems such as the CAT 
(computerized axial tomography) scan; the PET (positron emission 
tomography) scan; the SPECT (single photon emission tomography) 
scan; MRI (magnetic resonance imaging); and fMRI (functional mag- 
netic resonance imaging) (Bremner, 2005). Imaging techniques have 
thrown light on those areas of the brain associated with particular disor- 
ders. For example, Thompson et al. (2001) using MRI scanning have 
documented extensive grey matter loss in early onset schizophrenia, as 
shown in Figure 9.1. 
A fifth achievement of the biological model is the development of 
physical treatments for psychological problems. These include psy- 
chopharmacological advances such as antipsychotic medication for 
psychoses; antidepressant medication for unipolar mood disorders; and 
lithium carbonate for bipolar disorder (Nathan & Gorman, 2007). There 
is some evidence for the effectiveness of electroconvulsive therapy for 
major depression that does not respond to medication and psychother- 
apy (Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2005), although, as was mentioned 
in Chapter 6, there is considerable controversy about this (Read & 
Bentall, 2010). Psychosurgery has been found to be effective in extreme 
cases of OCD (Matthews & Christmas, 2009; Mindus et al., 2001). The 
development of the physical treatments, particularly psychopharmaco- 
logical treatments, has depended on hypotheses in which dysregulation 
of neurotransmitter systems has played a central part; for example, the 
dopamine theory of schizophrenia (Seeman, 2011). 
Limitations 
Despite these major achievements, the biological model is not without its 
limitations. First, psychological problems are not caused exclusively by 
organic factors. Rather, for conditions such as anxiety, depression and 

296 
hompson, 
schizophrenia, people with a genetic vulnerability to a particular condi- 
tion develop psychological problems if they are exposed to particular 
stresses within their environment (Hankin & Abele, 2005). This observa- 
tion has led people working within the ‘medical model’ tradition to a move 
away from a purely biological model to a diathesis—stress conceptualiza- 
tion of psychological problems. Such models acknowledge the impor- 
tance of psychosocial factors such as family environment, gender, social 
class and culture in the development of psychological problems. For 
example, confusing and unsupportive family environments, the societal 
inequalities that favour men over women, membership of disadvantaged 
ethnic minorities, or membership of low socio-economic groups may all 
contribute to the stress experienced by individuals who are biologically 
vulnerable to psychopathology and who, as a result, develop psycho- 
logical problems. 
Second, many psychological problems are not distributed within the 
population as a set of discrete syndromes with an underlying biological 
cause. Boyle (2002) has shown, for example, that schizophrenia does 
not meet the criteria for a medical syndrome. Furthermore, many psy- 
chological problems are normally distributed within the population. 
Thus, dimensional rather than categorical conceptualizations of specific 
conditions are probably more valid for many psychological problems 

9* INFLUENTIAL MODELS 
297 
(Helzer et al., 2008). For example, conduct disorder may probably be 
most validly conceptualized as cases characterized by extreme levels 
of externalizing behaviour problems, which fall on a continuum, with 
most children showing moderate levels of these types of difficulty 
(Walton et al., 2011). This was discussed in Chapter 2. Also, trait con- 
ceptualizations of personality disorders are probably more valid than 
categorical conceptualization (Widiger & Mullins-Sweatt, 2010). This 
was discussed in Chapter 8. 
Third, many psychopharmacological and physical treatments for psy- 
chological problems have harmful or unknown side-effects (Breggin, 
1991). For example, many widely used antipsychotic medications lead to 
an irreversible neurological movement disorder known as tardive dys- 
kinesia (Tammenmaa et al., 2004). Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 
which is commonly used to treat major depression that is unresponsive 
to antidepressant medication, invariably leads to relatively long-term 
memory loss and confusion, while its therapeutic effects are short-lived 
(Read & Bentall, 2010). Stimulant therapy with drugs such as Ritalin 
(methylphenidate), which is widely used to treat ADHD, may adversely 
affect growth and cardiovascular functioning and its long-term effects in 
adulthood and old age are unknown (Paykina et al., 2007; Rapport & 
Moffitt, 2002). Despite the shortcomings of psychoactive medications, 
the pharmacological treatment of psychological problems has wide- 
spread acceptance. This is partly because the development, marketing 
and sale of psychopharmacological treatments is an influential, lucrative 
global industry, supported by the medical profession and governments 
as the mainstay of treatment for psychological problems. 
Fourth, in some instances psychological problems are reactions to 
stresses inherent in family structures such as oppressive, neglectful or 
abusive patterns of family organization. In others, psychological prob- 
lems are a reaction to stresses inherent in the structure of society at 
large such as poverty, injustice, prejudice, racism, sexism, ageism and 
intolerance for nonconformity. The biological model, with its exclusive 
emphasis on organic factors in the aetiology of psychological problems 
and its privileging of physical treatment, draws attention away from 
important psychosocial and political changes that may be required to 
alleviate psychological distress and to preserve civil liberties (Laing, 
2009; Szasz, 2010). By insisting from the privileged position of a high- 
status profession that psychological problems are a reflection of mental 
illness requiring physical treatment, proponents of the biological model 
prevent society from addressing injustices, stresses and intolerance for 
nonconformity at a political level. 
Fifth, the development of inpatient treatment facilities such as asy- 
lums and psychiatric hospitals has led to the exclusion of people with 
psychological problems from society. This in turn has promoted stigma- 
tization and marginalization of large groups of people with psychologi- 
cal problems, which may further reinforce the difficulties of people with 
psychological problems and coping difficulties (Rosenhan, 1973). 
Sixth, mental health legislation, which emerged within the biological 
and medical tradition, has been abused so as to limit the freedom of 

298 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
people with psychological problems. Szasz (2010) has argued that 
imprisoned criminals have more liberty and fewer violations of personal 
rights than people with psychological problems who are involuntarily 
detained. 
Seventh, because the biological model of psychological problems 
and practices based on it are championed by biologically oriented 
psychiatry, non-medical professions, including clinical psychology and 
psychotherapy, have often been marginalized in the development of 
mental health services. 
Psychoanalytic model 
Assumptions 
The psychoanalytic or psychodynamic model assumes that psycho- 
logical problems are symptoms of underlying unconscious conflict or 
psychopathology (Skelton, 2006). As a child develops, according to 
classical psychoanalytic theory, primitive sexual and aggressive urges 
of the unconscious ‘id’ become gradually controlled by the rational ‘ego’. 
The ego is guided by an internalization of society’s standards: the 
‘superego’. However, intrapsychic conflict is inevitable. Conflict occurs 
between the sexual and aggressive impulses of the id and societal 
standards as reflected in the superego. 
Such conflict is managed unconsciously by using various defence 
mechanisms, the function of which is to keep forbidden sexual and 
aggressive impulses from consciousness. For example, a man who is 
angry at his boss in work may sing his superior’s praises, thereby using 
the defence of reaction formation. A full list of defences is given in Table 
8.3 in Chapter 8. However, defences are compromises between the 
forces of the id and superego and often carry costly side-effects. For 
example, the man who is angry at his boss may eventually develop 
chest pains and anxiety, as a result of repressing rather than acknow- 
ledging the anger felt. 
Furthermore, the psychoanalytic model proposes that relationship 
styles learned early in life are transferred in later life to other relation- 
ships, notably relationships with authority figures, sexual partners and 
psychotherapists. These relationship styles or ‘transference phenom- 
ena’, as they are called in psychoanalysis, are coloured in part by feel- 
ings aroused and partially resolved during the Oedipus complex phase 
(for boys) or Electra complex phase (for girls). These developmental 
phases refer to the psychoanalytic hypothesis that children in early life 
desire their opposite-sex parent and harbour aggression towards the 
parent of their own gender. However, these sexual and aggressive 
impulses are repressed and the child eventually identifies with the par- 
ent of the same gender for fear of the consequences of acting them 
out. In later life patients, such as the man with chest pains referred to 
earlier, experience feelings towards significant others and deal with 
them in a manner similar to that which occurred during the Oedipal 
phase of development. So the man with chest pains experienced 
aggression towards his boss and later towards his psychotherapist in a 

9 * INFLUENTIAL MODELS 
299 
similar fashion, and dealt with this using reaction formation in a manner 
similar to that with which he handled the Oedipal triangle as a child. 
Psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic psychotherapy provide a context 
within which patients can experience transference towards a psycho- 
therapist and then through interpretation gain insight into the transfer- 
ence and related defences that underlie their psychopathology. The 
analyst or therapist and client meet frequently according to a strict 
schedule. The patient reports in an uncensored way his or her contents 
of consciousness. Eventually the client develops transference and 
the analyst interprets this repeatedly over time 
until the patient 
has gained insight into the transference and related defences and 
worked through related unresolved feelings. Concurrently, the patient’s 
symptoms abate. 
In order to be able to practise psychoanalysis, therapists must 
undergo their own analysis so that they have a first-hand understanding 
of the process and so that they will recognize transference feelings that 
they have towards patients (countertransference). Traditionally strict 
selection criteria are used for psychoanalysis, and typically YAVIS 
(young, adult, verbal, intelligent and single) patients only have been 
deemed suitable. However, this has changed in recent years with devel- 
opments such as object relations approaches to conditions such as 
borderline personality disorder (discussed in Chapter 8). 
Achievements 
First, the most outstanding achievement of the psychoanalytic model is 
the discovery of the unconscious (Ellenberger, 
1970). Freud drew 
together a set of ideas from a wide range of sources and crystallized them 
in the notion of the unconscious, not as a passive repository of irretriev- 
able memories but as an active set of psychological processes. According 
to the psychoanalytic model of the unconscious, people can make them- 
selves forget things or keep them outside awareness. Repressed uncon- 
scious aggressive and sexual impulses may motivate behaviour. 
Second, psychoanalysis gave meaning to apparently meaningless 
behaviour. For example, Freud (1909a) showed how in phobias, fears 
of one stimulus (e.g. one’s father) could be displaced onto other stimuli 
(e.g. horses). He also showed how unconscious processes that 
explained psychological disorders could also explain peculiar everyday 
behaviour. For example, in his book The Psychopathology of Everyday 
Life, Freud showed how forgetting people’s names, slips of the tongue, 
errors in writing and so forth in some cases are due to repression 
(Freud, 1901). Such errors or parapraxes have come to be referred to 
colloquially as ‘Freudian slips’. He also showed that apparently mean- 
ingless dreams may be interpreted and made coherent to aid self- 
understanding, a proposition that has been partially supported by 
subsequent research (Freud, 1900; Siegel, 2010). 
Third, psychoanalysis introduced the ideas of transference and 
countertransference into the practice of psychotherapy. The idea that 
people have a limited number of relationship-maps which they learn 
early in life and transfer onto significant others in adulthood has been 

300 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
supported by recent empirical work on continuity in patterns of attach- 
ment from childhood to adulthood (Cassidy & Shaver, 2008; Rholes & 
Simpson, 2004). 
Fourth, psychoanalysis established the place of the ‘talking cure’ in 
mainstream mental health practice. It also provided a model for the 
development of both short-term and long-term outpatient treatment of 
patients with a range of psychological difficulties. In the UK the compe- 
tencies required for delivering psychodynamic psychotherapy have 
been delineated by the British Psychological Society's Centre for 
Outcomes Research and Effectiveness (Lemma et al., 2008). 
Fifth, empirical studies of long-term psychoanalysis and short-term 
psychodynamic psychotherapy show that it is effective with a range of 
problems including anxiety, mood and personality disorders and com- 
plex comorbid presentations (Shedler, 2010; Leichsenring & Rabung, 
2008, 2011; Leichsenring et al., 2004). 
Finally, Freud provided a model for developing a theory of personality 
and therapy which spawned a wide range of neo-Freudian derivatives 
including those of Jung, Adler, Horney, Stack Sullivan, Reich, Fairburn, 
Klein, Erikson and many others (Schultz & Schultz, 2008). 
Limitations 
Classical psychoanalysis has many limitations. First, many of its hypoth- 
eses were untestable due to the imprecision of the constructs or the 
imprecision of predictions entailed by psychoanalytic theory. Also, for a 
considerable time there was little evidence for the effectiveness of psy- 
choanalytic psychotherapy. Recent meta-analyses of treatment out- 
come studies have addressed this limitation (Shedler, 2010; Leichsenring 
& Rabung, 2008, 2011; Leichsenring et al., 2004). 
Second, Freud’s speculations about infantile sexuality were not 
borne out by subsequent developmental research and in particular by 
research on child sexual abuse. It is quite likely that many of Freud’s 
patients who reported sexual contact with a parent had in fact been 
sexually abused and were not simply fantasizing about seducing their 
parents in Oedipal dramas (Masson, 1984). 
Third, as a model for practice, classical psychoanalysis is too time- 
consuming and expensive. Classical psychoanalysis involves multiple 
sessions each week for a number of years. It is therefore not sufficiently 
cost-effective for routine use in a public mental health service where 
resources are limited. However, in recent times attempts have been 
made to use psychoanalytic ideas and practices as a basis for brief 
psychodynamic therapy (Lemma et al., 2010; Leichsenring et ai., 2004). 
Cognitive-behavioural model 
Assumptions 
The cognitive-behavioural tradition incorporates a range of psychothera- 
peutic theories and practices including behaviour therapy, behaviour 
modification, cognitive therapy and cognitive-behaviour therapy, all 
of which have their roots in learning theories, both behavioural and 

9 * INFLUENTIAL MODELS 
301 
cognitive (Freeman et al., 2005). Within the cognitive-behavioural 
tradition it is assumed that psychological problems are distressing habits 
that are learned through the same processes as normal behaviour. 
These processes include operant and classical conditioning, imitation 
and insight. 
Therapy involves helping clients to replace distressing habits of think- 
ing and behaving with more adaptive ones. This process is based on the 
principles of learning theory. Through careful interviewing and observa- 
tion, the antecedents that trigger problematic behaviours, beliefs and 
mood states, and the consequences that reinforce them, are identified. 
Treatment programmes, based on this type of assessment, include inter- 
ventions that alter antecedents which signal the onset of psychological 
problems; interventions that challenge non-adaptive beliefs and styles of 
information processing that accompany psychological problems; and 
interventions that change the consequences of behaviour so that normal 
alternatives to abnormal behaviour patterns are reinforced. 
In the behavioural treatment of depression, antecedents of low mood 
may be altered through inviting clients to schedule pleasant events reg- 
ularly throughout their day (Lewinsohn & Gotlib, 1995). In the cognitive 
therapy of depression, anxiety and personality disorders, clients are 
coached in how to identify and challenge negative automatic thoughts 
and to identify the use of cognitive distortions (Beck et al., 1979, 2003; 
Clark & Beck, 2010a). With conduct disordered children, reward pro- 
grammes are used so that prosocial behavioural targets are routinely 
reinforced (Forgatch & Patterson, 2010). Modelling, rehearsal, shaping 
and operant reinforcement procedures may be used to help individuals 
with skills deficits learn self-regulation, social, communication and 
problem-solving skills. Skills training is routinely used when working 
with people who have skills deficits, for example people with schizo- 
phrenia who have negative symptoms and limited social skills (Tenhula 
& Bellack, 2008). 
Treatment programmes also include procedures based on classical 
conditioning. For example, with systematic desensitization for people 
who have phobias, increasingly threatening stimuli are paired with the 
experience of relaxation (Head & Gross, 2008). Another example of a 
classical conditioning based intervention is the use of urine alarm 
programmes for nocturnal enuresis in which bedwetting is paired with 
the sound of an alarm (Houts, 2010). Through this procedure, the child 
learns eventually to awaken when the bladder is full. 
Within the cognitive-behavioural tradition, specific treatment pro- 
grammes are developed for specific symptoms and detailed assess- 
ments of the impact of treatment on psychological problems targeted in 
treatment are routinely made. The tradition has been championed by 
clinical psychologists. 
Achievements 
The cognitive-behavioural tradition has made a number of important 
contributions to the understanding and treatment of psychological 
difficulties. 

302 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
First, this tradition has led to the development of brief effective 
approaches to therapy which are applicable to a wide range of patients 
(Freeman et al., 2005). Typically cognitive-behaviour therapy is brief, 
ranging from one to 30 sessions, depending on the nature and severity 
of the problems. 
Second, the cognitive-behavioural tradition has shown empirically 
that its treatment strategies are effective. It has led the evidence-based 
practice movement in the mental health field. More than any other 
approach to treating psychological difficulties, the cognitive-behavioural 
tradition has generated an enormous volume of empirical research to 
test the effectiveness of a wide variety of treatment programmes for a 
broad range of probleins in adults and children (Carr, 2009a; Nathan & 
Gorman, 2007). 
Third, the cognitive-behavioural model has led to the development of 
specific psychological treatment packages for specific types of problem. 
For example, exposure-based treatments have been developed for 
anxiety disorders (described in Chapter 5), cognitive therapy has been 
developed for mood disorders (described in Chapter 6), and cognitive- 
behavioural approaches have been developed to treat the positive 
symptoms of schizophrenia (outlined in Chapter 7). 
Fourth, compared to other treatment approaches, CBT has been 
more widely disseminated in books, training videos and brief training 
programmes that are highly accessible to a range of mental health pro- 
fessionals. In the UK the dissemination of CBT has been mainstreamed 
within the National Health Service through the Improving Access to 
Psychological Therapies programme (www.iapt.nhs.uk). 
Fifth, methodological and scientific rigour has characterized cognitive- 
behavioural research on psychological problems and their treatment. 
Limitations 
The main limitation of the cognitive-behavioural model is the risk it 
entails of trivializing psychological problems. When people are suffering 
profound psychological distress, it may seem to them that to construe 
their difficulties as bad habits does not do justice to the gravity of their 
distressing life situations. 
Two other possible limitations of the cognitive-behavioural model 
deserve mention. First, there is the danger of disregarding the possible 
role of organic factors in the aetiology of psychological difficulties. This 
is problematic because there is extensive evidence for the role of 
genetic and neurobiological factors in the aetiology of many mental 
health problems. Second there is the risk of not taking the role of the 
patient’s wider social context into account. Poverty, unemployment, low 
socio-economic status and stressful family environments may all 
contribute to the development of psychological problems. 
Having noted these two dangers, it should be mentioned that they 
have been addressed by various members of the cognitive-behavioural 
tradition at different times. For example, cognitive-behavioural approaches 
to understanding conditions such as schizophrenia (outlined in Chapter 7) 

9 * INFLUENTIAL MODELS 
303 
and borderline personality disorder (described Chapter 8) are based on 
diathesis—stress conceptualizations of their aetiology, which take account 
of the important role of genetic and neurobiological factors. Also, there is 
increasing recognition within the cognitive-behavioural tradition for the 
important role of life stress and immediate family environment in the main- 
tenance and amelioration of psychological problems (Dattilio, 2009). 
Family systems model 
Assumptions 
The family systems model assumes that psychological problems are 
maintained by patterns of interaction and belief systems within the fam- 
ily and the wider social system of the client. Historical, contextual and 
constitutional factors may predispose family members to engage in 
these interaction patterns and adopt these belief systems. The many 
family therapy schools within this tradition may be classified in terms of 
their central focus of therapeutic concern and in particular with respect 
to their emphasis on (1) problem maintaining behaviour patterns; (2) 
problematic and constraining belief systems; and (3) historical, contex- 
tual and constitutional predisposing factors (Carr, 2006b). 
With respect to the first theme, some family therapy schools highlight 
the role of repetitive patterns of family interaction in the maintenance of 
problem behaviour and advocate practices that aim to disrupt these 
patterns of interaction. Schools that fall into this category include the 
MRI brief therapy approach (Segal, 1991), strategic therapy (Robbins et 
al., 2009), structural therapy (Colapinto, 1991) and functional family 
therapy (Sexton, 2009). 
With respect to the second theme, some schools of family therapy 
point to the centrality of belief systems and narratives which subserve 
repetitive interaction patterns that maintain presenting problems. Prac- 
tices that facilitate the emergence of new belief systems and narratives 
which liberate family members from problem-maintaining interaction 
patterns are espoused by these schools. Schools that fall into this cat- 
egory include social constructionist approaches (Anderson, 2003), the 
Milan school (Campbell et al., 1991), solution-focused family therapy 
(Cheung, 2009) and narrative therapy (Duvall & Béres, 2011). 
With respect to the third theme, a number of family therapy traditions 
highlight the role of historical, contextual and constitutional factors in pre- 
disposing family members to adopt particular belief systems and engage 
in particular problematic interaction patterns. Such schools advocate 
using practices that specifically address these historical, contextual and 
constitutional predisposing factors, including working with members of the 
extended family and wider social network as well as coaching individuals 
to manage historical, contextual and constitutional constraints. This 
category contains transgenerational family therapy (Hargrove, 2009); 
psychoanalytic family therapy traditions (Magnavita, 2009), attachment 
theory-based approaches (Diamond, 2005; Johnson & Bradley, 2009), 
experiential family therapy (Wetchler & Piercey, 1996), multisystemic 

304 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
therapy which includes reference to the wider system (Henggeler et al., 
2009) and psychoeducational approaches (McFarlane, 2005). 
Elsewhere | have argued that an integrative approach to family ther- 
apy may be taken so that for any problem, a formulation may be con- 
structed using ideas from many schools of family therapy in which the 
pattern of family interaction that maintains the problem is specified, the 
constraining beliefs and narratives that underpin each family member's 
role in this pattern are outlined, and the historical and contextual factors 
that underpin these belief systems and narratives are specified (Carr, 
2006b). In parallel with this, a similar formulation may be constructed to 
explain why the problem does not occur in exceptional circumstances, 
which, while similar to problematic situations, differ in important key 
respects. 
In light of these formulations, a range of interventions that address fac- 
tors within each column of the formulations may be considered. Some 
interventions aim primarily to disrupt problem-maintaining behaviour pat- 
terns or amplify exceptional non-problematic patterns. Others aim to help 
family members change the personal narratives that make them repeat 
the same problematic behaviour patterns and develop more liberating 
and flexible belief systems that underpin exceptions to the problem. Still 
others aim to modify the negative impact of historical, contextual and 
constitutional factors or to draw on family strengths in these domains. 
In family systems therapy, assessment and treatment involves the 
client and the family participating in multi-person meetings. Multiple per- 
spectives on the problem and related interaction patterns, belief sys- 
tems and predisposing factors are therefore available to the therapist. 
Furthermore, there is the possibility of multiple people being involved in 
therapeutic change. Because of this, it is a fundamental assumption of 
family systems therapy that a small intervention may lead to a big 
change. It is therefore not surprising that family therapy is usually brief, 
with treatment rarely extending beyond 20 sessions. Furthermore, fam- 
ily therapy is dominated neither by clinical psychology nor by psychia- 
try. Many disciplines are involved, including social work and nursing. 
Achievements 
Family therapy has made an important contribution to the understand- 
ing and treatment of psychological problems. First, in a field dominated 
by essentially individualistic models of practice, it has highlighted the 
role of the social context in the aetiology and treatment of psychological 
difficulties. Second, family therapy is a brief, affordable form of treat- 
ment well suited to public health services. It is highly cost-effective 
(Crane, 2011). Where different family members have problems, they 
may all be treated by the same therapist or team. Third, empirical 
research shows that family therapy is effective with a wide range of 
problems in children and adults (Carr, 2009b, 2009c). Thus, there is a 
sound foundation for evidence-based practice. Fourth, systems theory 
can offer an integrative framework for comprehending not just the role 
of social factors but also those of biological and intrapsychic factors in 
the understanding and treatment of psychological difficulties. Fifth, in 

9 * INFLUENTIAL MODELS 
305 
Clinical practice, an integrative approach to family therapy is particularly 
useful in managing complex cases in which multiple family members 
have multiple problems, since often these are interconnected — a point 
missed by individualistic conceptualizations of psychological problems. 
Limitations 
The main limitations of the family systems model are a danger of vague- 
ness, the risk of losing sight of the needs and rights of the individual, 
and the danger of failing to take account of neurobiological factors. 
Other influential models 
The four models described above are the most influential in the field of 
Clinical psychology. However, there are many other frameworks that 
influence the way clinical psychologists conduct their work. These 
include the client-centred humanistic tradition, personal construct psy- 
chology and positive psychology. 
Client-centred humanistic psychology 
Client-centred humanistic psychotherapy is an overarching term for a 
tradition that includes a variety of specific approaches to therapy and 
counselling; for example, Carl Rogers’ client-centred therapy, Fritz 
Perls’ gestalt therapy and various experiential therapies (Cain & 
Seeman, 2001). Within this tradition, it is assumed that avoidance or 
denial of current feelings, emotions and desires, and deliberate or inad- 
vertent failure to take responsibility for these aspects of experience, 
prevent self-actualization and give rise to psychological symptoms. 
A defining feature of client-centred humanistic psychotherapy is the 
use of the therapeutic relationship between client and therapist as a 
resource in promoting self-actualization and personal growth. A second 
defining feature of this tradition is facilitating personal growth by helping 
clients to become more aware of their disavowed emotions and desires 
and to take responsibility for these. Within this tradition, personal growth 
is the main goal of therapy. Resolving presenting problems is often sec- 
ondary to this superordinate goal. The practice within clinical psychol- 
ogy of establishing a strong therapeutic alliance with the client reflects 
the influence of the client-centred humanistic tradition. 
Constructivist psychotherapy 
Constructivist psychotherapy is based on George Kelly’s personal con- 
struct psychology (Winter & Viney, 2005). Personal construct psychol- 
ogy holds that people’s problems are rooted in the way they construe or 
interpret the world. Consequently a defining feature of personal con- 
struct psychotherapy is the exploration and transformation of clients’ 
unique construct and belief systems. In the UK personal construct psy- 
chology and constructivist psychotherapy have had an impact on the 
practice of clinical psychology through influential clinical psychologists, 
notably Don Bannister and Fay Francella. 

306 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
Positive psychology 
Remediating deficits and managing disabilities has been a central con- 
cern for clinical psychology since its inception. Positive psychology, in 
contrast, complements this aim by focusing instead on the enhance- 
ment of happiness. 
Positive psychology was founded by Martin 
Seligman in the US at the turn of the millennium. 
While modern positive psychology is a new movement, it draws on a 
rich intellectual heritage that includes the humanistic tradition. However, 
the distinguishing features of the modern positive psychology movement 
are its commitment to the scientific study of positive aspects of human 
experience, the academic infrastructure that has been established to 
support this research, and the intellectual leadership provided by the 
founders of the movement. 
Positive 
psychology focuses 
on understanding 
and _ facilitating 
(1) happiness and well-being, (2) positive traits and engagement in 
absorbing activities, and (3) the development of meaningful positive 
relationships, social systems and institutions (Lopez & Snyder, 2009). 
Common themes within positive psychology that influence the practice 
of clinical psychology include resilience, optimism, hope, forgiveness, 
curiosity, creativity, wisdom, emotional intelligence, self-efficacy, self- 
determination, self-regulation, humour, mindfulness, therapeutic writ- 
ing, posttraumatic growth, attachment, empathy and altruism. 
The client-centred 
humanistic, 
personal construct and positive 
psychology models, with their emphasis on the quality of the thera- 
peutic alliance, the uniqueness of each client, client strengths and 
optimism, are common themes in the practice of clinical psychology. 
Summary 
The bioiogical, psychoanalytic, cognitive-behavioural and fam- 
ily systems models are each based on a unique set of assump- 
tions. Despite limitations, each model has given rise to a unique 
set of achievements. With the biological model it is assumed 
that psychological problems may be classified into syndromes. 
Each syndrome is due to an underlying brain disease for which 
a discrete cause and physical cure may be ultimately identified. 
It is also assumed that each condition follows a distinctive 
course and has a particular prognosis. 
The biological model's greatest achievement was the libera- 
tion of people with psychological problems and the creation of 
asylums where those 
in psychological 
distress 
received 
humane treatment. Mental health legislation, widely used clas- 
sification systems such as the DSM and ICD, a commitment to 
scientific study of psychological problems, and the develop- 
ment of psychopharmacological treatments are among the 
major achievements of the biological model. Its limitations 

9* INFLUENTIAL MODELS 
307 
include the facts that many psychological problems are not 
caused by organic factors, many psychopharmacological treat- 
ments have harmful side-effects, asylums have led to social 
exclusion and mental health legislation has been abused. 
The psychoanalytic model assumes 
that psychological 
problems 
are symptoms 
of underlying 
psychopathology. 
Psychotherapy gives insight into the conflicts, defences and 
transference phenomena that constitute this psychopathology. 
‘Achievements of the psychoanalytic model include the discov- 
ery of the unconscious, the demonstration of continuity between 
normality and psychological problems and the establishment of 
talking therapy as a valid method for treating psychological 
problems. Classical psychoanalysis, however, is too expensive 
to be a viable approach for routinely treating people in the pub- 
lic health services. This and the fact that is diagnostically 
vague, many of its propositions are untestable, and it patholo- 
gizes everyone are its major limitations. 
The cognitive-behavioural model assumes that symptoms 
are learned through conditioning, imitation and insight and that 
therapy involves changing patterns of learned behaviour using 
specific treatments that have been developed for specific 
symptoms. The development of brief evidence-based effective 
approaches to therapy applicable to a wide range of patients is 
the main achievement of the cognitive-behavioural model. The 
risk of trivializing psychological problems and of paying insuf- 
ficient attention to organic or social factors are its principal 
limitations. 
The systems model assumes that psychological problems 
are maintained by patterns of interaction and belief systems 
within the family and the wider social system of the patient. 
Historical, contextual and constitutional factors may predispose 
family members to engage in these interaction patterns and 
adopt these belief systems. In family therapy, assessment and 
treatment involves the client and the family. In terms of achieve- 
ments, empirical research shows that family therapy is effective 
with a wide range of problems and that systems theory offers a 
framework for integrating biological, psychological and social 
factors. The main limitations of this approach are a danger of 
vagueness, a risk of losing sight of the individual, and a danger 
of failing to take account of neurobiological factors. 
The biological, psychoanalytic, cognitive-behavioural and 
family systems models have been the most influential in the 
field of clinical psychology. 
Other frameworks that have 
influenced the practice of clinical psychology include the client- 
centred humanistic tradition, personal construct psychology 
and positive psychology. 

308 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Questions 
e 
What are the key assumptions, general achievements and general 
limitations of the biological, psychodynamic, cognitive-behavioural 
and family systems models? 
e 
Having read Chapters 2-8, what do you consider to be the top three 
specific achievements of the biological, psychodynamic, cognitive- 
behavioural and family systems models?. 
e Why are the client-centred humanistic tradition, personal construct 
psychology and positive psychology important for the practice of 
clinical psychology? 
FURTHER READING 
e 
Tyrer, P. & Sternberg, D. (2005). Models of mental disorder: Conceptual 
models in psychiatry (fourth edition). Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
e 
Watchel, P. & Messer, S. (1997). Theories of psychotherapy: Origins 
and evolution. Washington, DC: APA. This text includes up-to-date 
accounts of psychodynamic, cognitive-behavioural and family systems 
approaches to psychotherapy. 
WEBSITES 
Psychiatric associations that privilege the 
neurobiological model 
American Psychiatric Association: 
www.psych.org 
Royal Australian & New Zealand College of Psychiatrists: 
Wwww.ranzcp.org 
Royal College of Psychiatrists: 
www.rcpsych.ac.uk 
Psychoanalytic associations 
American Psychoanalytical Association: 
Wwww.apsa.org 
Australian Psychoanalytical Society: 
www.psychoanalysis.asn.au 
British Psychoanalytical Society: 
www.psychoanalysis.org.uk 
International Psychoanalytical Association: 
www.ipa.org.uk 
Cognitive-behavioural associations 
Association for Behavioural and Cognitive Therapies (US): 
www.abct.org 
Australian Association for Cognitive and Behaviour Therapy: 
www.aacbtqld.org.au 

9 » INFLUENTIAL MODELS 
British Association of Behavioural & Cognitive Psychotherapies: 
www.babcp.com 
Family therapy associations 
American Association for Marital and Family Therapy: 
www.aamft.org 
Association for Family Therapy (Uk): 
www.aft.org.uk 
European Family Therapy Association: 
www.europeanfamilytherapy.eu 
Family Therapy Association of Ireland: 
www.familytherapyireland.com 
309 

1 O 
Effectiveness of 
psychological therapies 
Fra 
non a 
Learning objectives 
After studying this chapter you will be able to: 
e define evidence-based practice in clinical psychology 
e explain the hierarchy of evidence that informs 
evidence-based practice 
e summarize the main findings from the evidence base 
for the effectiveness of psychotherapy 
e outline the medical cost offset associated with 
psychotherapy 
e describe the role of common and specific factors in 
the effectiveness of psychotherapy. 
Introduction 
One of the main ways in which clinical psychologists help clients is 
through psychotherapy. Psychotherapy is a contractual process in 
which trained professionals with expert knowledge of their discipline 
interact with clients to help them resolve psychological problems and 
address mental health difficulties. Psychotherapy may be offered to 
children and adults on an individual, couple, family or group basis. 
Often clinical psychologists offer psychotherapy as one element of a 
multimodal programme provided by a multidisciplinary team. For exam- 
ple, a multidisciplinary adult mental health team may routinely offer a 
multimodal programme of cognitive behaviour therapy combined with 
antidepressants 
for depression, 
as described 
in Chapter 
6. A 

10 
+ EFFECTIVENESS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL THERAPIES 
311 
multidisciplinary child and adolescent mental health team may routinely 
offer a multimodal programme for children with attention deficit hyper- 
activity disorder which includes’ behavioural parent training, school- 
based behavioural consultation, child-focused self-instructional and 
social training and methylphenidate, as outlined in Chapter 2. In this 
chapter the focus will be on the evidence base for the overall effective- 
ness of psychotherapy and common factors that underpin effective 
approaches. 
Evidence-based practice 
In clinical psychology there has been a gradual move from practice 
guided exclusively by descriptions of clinical cases to evidence-based 
practice guided by the results of scientific studies on the effectiveness 
of psychological interventions. This evolution has occurred as part of 
the broader movement of evidence-based medicine (Sackett et al., 
1996, 2000). 
Evidence-based practice in medicine and clinical psychology involves 
the judicious and compassionate use of the best available scientific evi- 
dence to make decisions about patient or client care. In clinical psychol- 
ogy, it involves taking account of available scientific evidence about 
‘what works’ on one hand, and clients’ unique problems, needs, rights 
and preferences on the other, and making balanced, compassionate 
judgements (APA Presidential Task Force on Evidence Based Practice, 
2006; Norcross et al., 2006). 
Hierarchy of evidence 
When considering scientific evidence for the effectiveness of psycho- 
logical interventions, it is useful to organize categories of available sci- 
entific evidence into a hierarchy, from the least to the most persuasive, 
as illustrated in Figure 10.1. In this hierarchy, case studies are the least 
persuasive form of evidence. The most persuasive evidence for the 
effectiveness of psychotherapy and other psychological interventions 
comes from meta-analyses of controlled trials. 
Case studies and case series 
In case studies descriptions and explanations are given of the way ther- 
apy was conducted with individual cases and the impact of therapy on 
clients’ problems or symptoms. Such studies offer important insights into 
the details of how particular types of psychotherapy may be conducted 
with specific cases. Some examples are sketched in Figure 10.2. 
The main limitation of case study evidence is that any observed 
improvements in clients’ problems may be due to the passage of time, 
idiosyncratic responses of individual cases, or biased observation. 
Studies of case series provide more convincing evidence for the effec- 
tiveness of therapy. In such studies, groups of cases with similar sorts 
of problem are assessed before and after treatment with a standard set 

312 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Stronger 
Evidence 
Case series 
Case studies 
Weaker 
Evidence 
Figure 10.1 Hierarchy of evidence 
Sigmund Freud 
In Freud’s (1909b) case study of the Rat Man (a pseudonym for Ernst 
Psychoanalysis — Lanzer) he described how he used interpretation of obsessional 
a 
thoughts and compulsive behaviour to treat obsessive compulsive 
disorder. He interpreted the symptoms as being related to infantile 
sexuality and as helping the client avoid making difficult decisions in 
his adult life. 
Aaron T. Beck 
Beck (1976) described a series of cases in which he used cognitive 
Cognitive therapy _ therapy to treat depression and anxiety disorders. His approach 
involved helping people identify and challenge negative automatic 
thoughts that underpinned their negative mood states. Socratic 
dialogue, behavioural experiments and other techniques were used to 
facilitate this process. 
Salvador Minuchin 
Minuchin and his team (1978) described how he conceptualized 
Family therapy 
anorexia as a process of triangulation within the family. He showed 
how structural family therapy was used to help an adolescent girl 
break the cycle of self-starvation and empower the parents to help 
their daughter recover and maintain normal eating pattern. 
Figure 10.2 Case studies 

10 
* EFFECTIVENESS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL THERAPIES 
313 
of assessment instruments. Because data are collected on more than 
one case, case series studies rule out the possibility that improvements 
reflect idiosyncratic responses of single cases. 
The main shortcoming with evidence from case series studies is that 
they leave open the possibility that improvements in clients’ functioning 
may have been due to the passage of time, rather than the effects of 
treatment. 
Controlled trials 
In controlled trials, to rule out the possibility that observed improvements 
in clients’ problems following treatment were due to the passage of time, 
gains made by treated cases are compared with gains made by a control 
group (case-control studies). In psychotherapy studies, clients in control 
groups usually receive routine clinical management of their problems. An 
example of results from a controlled trial - The London Depression 
Intervention Trial (Leff et al., 2000) —is given in Figure 10.3. The average 
score of the group that received couples therapy for chronic depression 
was lower after treatment than before therapy began, and this gain was 
maintained at follow-up a year later. This pattern of improvement was 
better than that for cases treated with antidepressants. 
There are many variations of the basic controlled trial, but the gold 
standard is the randomized controlled trial. In randomized controlled 
trials, cases are randomly assigned to treatment and control groups, to 
rule out the possibility that differences in improvement rates are due to 
responsive 
and unresponsive 
cases 
having 
been 
systematically 
assigned to treatment and control groups. There is a tradition in medical 
oi 
30 
ra 
9 25 
a 
5 
2 20 
2 
Antidepressants 
Eels 
2 
77) 
w) 
= 10 
o 
a 
Couples Therapy 
a 
3 
co 
Before 
1 year after 
2 years after 
Treatment 
Treatment 
Treatment 
Figure 10.3 Improvement in mean symptom scores on the Beck Depression Inventory for 
adults with chronic depression receiving systemic couples therapy or antidepressants before 
treatment, 1 year after treatment and 2 years after treatment. Based on Leff et al. (2000) 

314 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
randomized controlled trials to use ‘sugar pills’ as placebos, so patients 
in the control group do not receive the medicine that is being evaluated, 
but believe that they are being helped since they are receiving what 
looks like an active treatment (the placebo sugar pill). 
In some psychotherapy treatment outcome studies, clients receive 
placebo therapy. This usually involves having as much contact with a 
therapist as those in the treatment group, but receiving some innocu- 
ous, though credible, placebo psychotherapy, for example engaging in 
‘intellectual discussions’ about plausible topics. When placebo control 
groups are included in randomized controlled trials, they rule out the 
possibility that treatment gains were due simply to therapist contact 
rather than psychotherapeutic techniques and processes. 
Narrative reviews 
While an individual trial with positive results provides evidence that in 
one context, a particular form of treatment was effective for a group of 
clients with a specific type of problem, narrative reviews provide more 
convincing evidence because they show the extent to which positive 
results were replicated across a series of trials. However, the conclusions 
drawn in narrative reviews are inevitably biased by tne conscious and 
unconscious prejudices of the reviewer. 
Meta-analyses 
Meta-analysis 
is a systematic, quantitative approach to reviewing 
evidence from multiple trials. The impact of reviewer bias inherent in 
narrative reviews is greatly reduced in meta-analyses because data 
from many trials are synthesized using statistical methods. 
In a meta-analysis effect sizes are calculated for each trial and then 
averaged across all trials to provide a quantitative index of the effective- 
ness of a particular form of treatment with a specified population. Effect 
sizes calculated in meta-analyses express quantitatively the degree to 
which treated groups improved more than control groups. A graphic 
explanation of the calculation of an effect size is given in Figure 10.4. 
Table 10.1 gives a system for interpreting effect sizes. Using this 
table, it may be seen that an effect size of .8 is large. If such an effect 
size were obtained in a meta-analysis it would mean that the average 
treated case fared better than 79% of cases in the control group. It 
would also indicate that 69% of cases in the treatment group had a suc- 
cessful outcome compared with 31% of control group cases. Finally, a 
large effect size of .8 would indicate that 14% of the variance in out- 
come could validly be attributed to the effects of treatment, rather than 
other factors. 
How effective is psychotherapy? 
Mary Smith and Gene Glass published the first major meta-analysis of 
psychotherapy outcome studies in American Psychologist in 1977. 

10» EFFECTIVENESS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL THERAPIES 
315 
Mean of the 
Mean of the 
Control Group Treatment Group 
= 50 
= 60 
Score 
Score 
Score 
Score 
Score 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
-—2 SD 
-1 SD 
+1SD 
+2 SD 
2nd 
34th 
50th 
84th 
98th 
percentile 
percentile percentile 
percentile 
percentile 
Low Scores Indicate || Test || High Scores Indicate 
Poorer Adjustment || Score 
Better Adjustment 
d = Mean of the treatment group — Mean of the control group 
60-50 
Pooled standard deviation 
eT 
Rae, 
An effect size of 1 indicates that after treatment the average case in the treatment 
group is better adjusted than 84% of the control group. 
Figure 10.4 Graphic representation of an effect size of 1 
They included 375 controlled trials of psychotherapy in their analysis 
and found an average effect size of .68. They concluded that a typical 
therapy client was better off than 75% of untreated individuals. 
Since that seminal study many meta-analyses have been conducted. 
In asynthesis of 68 separate meta-analyses of psychotherapy with chil- 
dren, adolescents and adults with a wide range of different psychologi- 
cal problems, Grissom (1996) found an aggregate effect size of .75, 
indicating that the average treated case fared better than 77% of 
untreated controls. 

316 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Effect 
size 
d 
0 
] 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
a 
1 
Cohen’s 
designation’ 
Large 
Medium 
Small 
TABLE 10.1 
Interpretation of effect size 
Percentage of 
Success 
Success rate 
Percentage of 
untreated cases that 
rate for 
for untreated 
outcome variance 
the average treated 
treated group? 
group? 
accounted for by 
case fares better than? 
treatment? 
84 
72 
28 
20 
82 
7 
29 
At 
79 
69 
31 
14 
76 
67 
<5) 
11 
73 
64 
36 
8 
69 
62 
38 
6 
66 
60 
40 
4 
62 
Leif 
43 
2 
58 
55 
45 
1 
54 
53 
47 
0 
Note: Adapted from Wampold (2001, p. 53). 1. From Cohen (1988). 2. From Glass (1976). 3. From Rosenthal and Rubin 
(1982). Binomial effect size display, assuming overall success rate of .5, success rate for treated cases is .5 + correlation 
with outcome/2, and success rate for untreated cases is .5 — correlation with outcome/2. 4. From Rosenthal (1994, p. 239), 
percentage of variance = d?/(d? + 4). 
Effects of psychotherapy with adults 
While Smith and Glass’s (1977) meta-analysis, mentioned above, 
included mainly studies of psychotherapy with adults, it also included 
many studies of therapy with children. With a view to determining the 
effects of psychotherapy for adults with psychological problems, Shapiro 
and Shapiro (1982) conducted a meta-analysis of 143 studies of psy- 
chotherapy exclusively involving adult populations. They found an over- 
all effect size of 1.03, indicating that after treatment the average adult 
who participated in psychotherapy fared better than 84% of untreated 
control group cases. 
Effectiveness of psychotherapy with children and adolescents 
The results of four broad meta-analyses of studies involving children 
and adolescents under 18 years with a diverse range of psychological 
problems receiving a variety of forms of psychotherapy provide evi- 
dence for the overall effectiveness of psychotherapy with children 
(Casey & Berman, 1985; Kazdin et al., 1990; Weisz et al., 1987, 1995). 
These meta-analyses included more than 350 treatment outcome 
studies. Effect sizes ranged from .71 to .88, with a mean effect size 
of .77. This indicates that the average treated case fared better than 
78% of control group cases. 
Efficacy and effectiveness studies 
A useful distinction is made between efficacy and effectiveness trials 
(Cochrane, 1972). In efficacy studies clients with a specific type of 

10 
* EFFECTIVENESS 
OF PSYCHOLOGICAL THERAPIES 
317 
problem (and no comorbid difficulties) are randomly assigned to treat- 
ment and control groups. The treatment group receives a pure and 
potent form of a very specific type of psychotherapy from specialist psy- 
chotherapists in practice centres of excellence. 
Efficacy studies 
are 
typically conducted 
at university-affiliated 
centres, with carefully selected clients who meet stringent inclusion and 
exclusion criteria. For example, often patients with comorbid substance 
abuse and personality disorders or self-harming behaviour are excluded 
from efficacy studies of treatments for depression. Therapists are highly 
trained, intensively supervised, have small case loads, and the fidelity 
with which they offer treatment is scientifically checked by rating the 
degree to which recordings of therapy sessions conform to treatment 
protocols specified in therapy manuals. 
Effectiveness studies, in contrast, are conducted in routine clinical 
settings rather than centres of excellence, with typical therapists carry- 
ing normal case loads, offering treatment to clients who are representa- 
tive of typical referrals, and while therapy manuals and supervision are 
often employed, there is a greater degree of flexibility about their use 
than in efficacy studies. Efficacy studies tell us how well treatments 
work under ideal conditions. Information about the impact of treatments 
under routine conditions is provided by effectiveness studies. It is useful 
to think of effectiveness and efficacy studies as representing the 
extremes of a continuum along which a variety of trial designs fall. 
One of the criticisms of broad meta-analyses of psychotherapy trials 
is that many of the studies included in them are efficacy rather than effec- 
tiveness trials, and so are not representative of clients who attend typical 
services. To address this criticism, Shadish et al. (1997) conducted a 
meta-analysis of 56 effectiveness trials. The studies were conducted in 
non-university, community settings; included children, adolescents and 
adults referred for treatment, not solicited by the researcher; and involved 
experienced professional therapists with normal case loads. The aver- 
age effect size from these 56 clinically representative studies was .68, 
which is precisely the effect size found by Smith and Glass in their semi- 
nal meta-analysis mentioned above. The results of this meta-analysis 
show that psychotherapy is effective when conducted under clinically 
representative conditions. 
Psychodynamic psychotherapy 
Within the psychodynamic tradition, a distinction is made between 
short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy and intensive long-term psy- 
choanalysis. The former involves weekly sessions for periods of 6-12 
months, while the latter involves two or more sessions per week, usu- 
ally for periods longer than a year. 
Two important broad meta-analyses have been conducted to evalu- 
ate the effectiveness of psychodynamic psychotherapy with adult men- 
tal health problems (Leichsenring et al., 2004; Leichsenring & Rabung, 
2011). Ina meta-analysis of 17 studies, Leichsenring et al. (2004) found 
that short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy yielded an effect size of 

318 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
.7 for psychiatric symptoms in patients mainly diagnosed with anxiety 
and mood disorders when therapy was compared with waiting list or 
minimal intervention control groups. This indicates that after treatment 
the average treated case fared better than 76% of controls. In this meta- 
analysis, the outcome for psychodynamic psychotherapy did not differ 
from that of other forms of psychotherapy in the 14 studies where such 
comparisons were made. 
In a further meta-analysis of 10 studies, Leichsenring and Rabung 
(2011) found that long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy involving 
more than 50 sessions over periods longer than a year yielded an effect 
size of .54 for overall effectiveness for complex cases with severe 
symptomatology, comorbid diagnoses, or personality disorders, when 
long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy was compared with a range 
of other therapies including CBT, dialectical behaviour therapy, family 
therapy and short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy. This indicates 
that after treatment the average case treated with long-term psycho- 
dynamic psychotherapy fared better than 70% of cases treated with 
other therapies. Gains made during treatment were sustained at 1-8 
years’ follow-up. 
The results of these two meta-analyses show that short-term psy- 
chodynamic psychotherapy is as effective as other widely used forms of 
psychotherapy, including CBT, for common psychological problems 
such as anxiety and depression in adults; and that long-term psycho- 
dynamic psychotherapy is more effective than some other forms of 
therapy for adults with complex mental health difficulties. 
Client-centred humanistic psychotherapy 
Elliott et al. (2004) conducted a meta-analysis of trials of psycho- 
therapy that fall broadly within the client-centred humanistic psycho- 
therapy tradition. Over 90 trials of client-centred, experiential, gestalt 
and emotionally-focused therapy were included in the analysis. Clients 
in these studies had a wide variety of psychological problems including 
anxiety, mood, eating and personality disorders and relationship 
distress. The average duration of treatment was 22 sessions, reflecting 
about 6 months of therapy. An effect size of .78 was obtained, indicating 
that the average treated case fared better than 78% of cases in 
control groups. These results indicate that client-centred humanistic 
psychotherapy is an effective form of treatment for a range of common 
psychological problems in adulthood. 
Cognitive-behaviour therapy 
In a review of 16 meta-analyses that included 332 studies of the effec- 
tiveness of cognitive-behaviour therapy with 16 different disorders or 
populations, Butler et al. (2006) obtained a mean weighted effect size 
of .95 for depression and a range of anxiety disorders in children, ado- 
lescents and adults. Thus, the average treated case with anxiety 
and depression fared better than 83% of untreated controls. For marital 

10 
+ EFFECTIVENESS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL THERAPIES 
319 
distress, anger control and chronic pain in adults, and childhood somatic 
disorders, effect sizes were moderate, with a mean of .62. Thus, the 
average treated case with these problems fared better than 73% of 
untreated controls. 
For sexual offending the average effect size of .35 was relatively 
small. However, it was the most effective form of psychotherapy for 
reducing recidivism in this population. Thus, the average treated sex 
offender fared better than 64% of untreated controls. There was signifi- 
cant evidence for the long-term effectiveness of cognitive-behaviour 
therapy, with an average effect size of .79, indicating that the average 
treated case fared better than 79% of untreated controls at follow-up at 
least 6 months after therapy. 
Systemic therapy 
Shadish and Baldwin (2003) reviewed 20 meta-analyses of systemic 
marital and family interventions for a wide range of child- and adult- 
focused problems. These included child and adolescent conduct and 
emotional disorders; drug and alcohol abuse in adolescents and adults; 
adult anxiety, depression and psychosis; and marital distress. Sixteen 
of the 20 meta-analyses were of therapy studies and four included 
marital and family enrichment studies. 
For marital and family therapy the average effect size was .65 after 
therapy and .52 at follow-up 6 months to a year later. These results 
show that, overall, the average treated couple or family with clinically 
significant problems fared better after treatment than 75% of untreated 
controls, and at follow-up fared better than about 71% of cases in control 
groups. For marital and family enrichment, the effect sizes after therapy 
and at follow-up were .48 and .32 respectively. These results show that, 
overall, the average treated couple or family without clinically significant 
problems fared better after enrichment programmes than 68% of 
untreated controls, and at follow-up fared better than about 63% of 
cases in control groups. 
Shadish and Baldwin’s synthesis of the results of 20 meta-analyses 
supports the efficacy of systemic therapy for couples and families 
with a wide range of clinically significant problems, and for couples and 
families without clinical problems but who want to develop family 
strengths such as communication and problem-solving 
skills and 
greater emotional cohesion. 
Summary of the overall effects of psychotherapy 
Figure 10.5 summarizes the results of meta-analyses, described above, 
of the effectiveness of psychotherapy from a range of different traditions 
with adults and children. In this figure, where appropriate, effect sizes 
from multiple meta-analyses have been averaged, and graphed as 
success rates based on the system given in Table 10.1. 
From Figure 10.5 it may be seen that meta-analyses of psychother- 
apy trials yield moderate to large effect sizes that range from .65 to 

320 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
oy 
All 
Adult 
Child 
Psycho- 
 Client- 
CBT 
Systemic 
ES=.75 
ES=1.02 
ES=.77 dynamic 
centred 
ES=.79 
ES=.65 
Grissom 
Shapiro & 
Casey& 
ES=62 humanistic Butleretal. 
 Shadish & 
Shapiro 
Berman 1985 
- 
Baldwin 
ite 
1982 
Weisz et al. es 
ES=.89 
2003 
1987 
2004 
Elliott et al. 
Boe - 
al. teichsenring & 
2004 
Rabung 2011 
Weisz et al. 
1995 
Figure 10.5 Success rates of psychotherapy with adults and children, and therapy from 
different traditions based on effect sizes from meta-analyses 
1.02. When expressed as success rates, the results of meta-analyses 
indicate that 65-72% of people with psychological problems benefit 
from psychotherapy. Thus approximately two-thirds to three-quarters of 
people who engage in psychotherapy find that it leads to improvements 
in their mental health. 
Comparison of the relative effects of psychotherapy 
and medical procedures 
To place the evidence on the overall effectiveness of psychotherapy in 
a broader context, it is useful to ask: Are the moderate to large effect 
sizes associated with psychotherapy very different from those associ- 
ated with the medical and surgical treatment of physical illnesses, dis- 
eases and medical conditions? 
In a synthesis of 91 meta-analyses of various medical and surgical 
treatments for a range of medical conditions, Caspi (2004) found an 
average effect size of .5. This falls in the moderate range of effect sizes 
(.5—.8) and is not vastly dissimilar to the effect size of .75 from Grissom’s 
(1996) synthesis of 68 meta-analyses of psychotherapy trials men- 
tioned earlier. Thus it may be concluded that the moderate effect sizes 
associated with psychotherapy are similar to those associated with the 
treatment of medical conditions. 

10 
* EFFECTIVENESS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL THERAPIES 
321 
Deterioration and drop-out 
A consistent finding within the psychotherapy research literature is that 
up to 10% of clients deteriorate following treatment (Lambert and Ogles, 
2004; Lilienfeld, 2007). In a review of 46 studies on negative outcome in 
adult psychotherapy, Mohr (1995) found that deterioration was associ- 
ated with particular client and therapist characteristics and particular 
features of psychotherapy. Deterioration was more common among cli- 
ents with borderline personality disorder, obsessive compulsive disor- 
der, or severe interpersonal difficulties. Lack of motivation and the 
expectation of benefiting from psychotherapy without personal effort 
were also associated with deterioration. Deterioration was more com- 
mon when unskilled therapists lacked empathy and did not collaborate 
with clients in pursuing agreed goals. Failure to manage counter trans- 
ference appropriately and frequent transference interpretations were 
also associated with deterioration. 
Dropping out of psychotherapy is a relatively common event. In a 
meta-analysis of 125 studies, Wierzbicki and Pekarik (1993) found a 
mean dropout rate of 47%. Dropout rates were higher for minority ethnic 
groups, less educated clients, and those with lower incomes. Thus, we 
can conclude that about 1 in 10 clients deteriorate following therapy and 
that marginalized clients with particularly troublesome disorders and 
negative attitudes to psychotherapy are vulnerable to dropping out of 
psychotherapy and deterioration. 
Medical cost offset 
The evidence reviewed so far shows that psychotherapy is effective for 
a range of problems and populations. However, an important concern is 
the financial implications of providing such a psychotherapy service. In 
this context, two questions are of interest. First: Do clients who avail of 
psychotherapy services use fewer medical services and so incur 
reduced medical costs? This saving is referred to as the medical cost 
offset. The second question is: Is the medical cost offset associated 
with psychotherapy greater than the cost of providing psychotherapy? If 
so, we can conclude that psychotherapy has a total cost offset. Findings 
of meta-analyses and narrative reviews of the cost-offset literature 
throw light on both of these questions. 
In a meta-analysis of 91 studies conducted between 1967 and 1997, 
Chiles et al. (1999) found that psychotherapy and psychological inter- 
ventions led to significant medical cost offsets. Participants in reviewed 
studies included surgery inpatients, high health-service users, and 
people with psychological and substance use disorders who received 
psychotherapy or psychological interventions alone or as part of multi- 
modal programmes. Chiles and his team concluded that medical cost 
offsets occurred in 90% of studies and ranged from 20% to 30%. In 93% 
of studies where data were provided, cost offsets exceeded the cost 
of providing psychotherapy. Greater cost offsets occurred for older 
inpatients who required surgery, oncology, and cardiac rehabilitation 

322 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
than for outpatients who required care for minor injuries and illnesses. 
Structured psychological interventions, tailored to patient needs associ- 
ated with their medical conditions, led to greater medical cost offsets 
than traditional psychotherapy. 
In an earlier set of meta-analytic studies involving Blue Cross and 
Blue Shield US Federal Employees Plan claim files and 58 controlled 
studies, Mumford et al. (1984) found that in 85% of studies medical cost 
offset for psychotherapy occurred. This was due to shorter periods of 
hospitalization for surgery, cancer, heart disease and diabetes, particu- 
larly in patients over 55. In a review of psychological interventions for 
people with a variety of health-related difficulties, Groth-Marnat and 
Edkins (1996) found that medical cost offsets occurred when such inter- 
ventions targeted patients preparing for surgery and patients with diffi- 
culty adhering to medical regimens. Medical cost offset also occurred 
for smoking cessation programmes, rehabilitation programmes, and 
programmes for patients with chronic pain disorders, cardiovascular 
disorders and psychosomatic complaints. 
Three other important reviews of the medical cost-offset literature, 
which focused largely on mental health problems in adults rather than 
adjustment to physical illness, deserve mention. In a review of 30 studies 
of psychotherapy for psychological disorders and drug and alcohol 
abuse, Jones and Vischi (1979) found that medical cost offsets occurred 
in most cases. In a review of eight cost-effectiveness studies for sub- 
stance abuse, Morgan and Crane (2010) concluded that family-based 
treatments can be cost-effective and deserve inclusion 
in health- 
care delivery systems. In a review of 18 studies of psychotherapy for 
psychological disorders, Gabbard et al. (1997) found that in more than in 
80% of studies, medical cost offsets exceeded the cost of providing psy- 
chotherapy. Particularly significant cost offsets occurred for complex 
problems, notably in studies of psychoeducational family therapy for 
schizophrenia and dialectical behaviour therapy for personality disor- 
ders, by reducing the need for inpatient care and improving occupational 
adjustment. 
From the evidence reviewed here, it is clear that psychotherapeutic 
interventions have a significant medical cost offset. Those who partici- 
pate in psychotherapy use fewer other medical services at primary, sec- 
ondary and tertiary levels and are hospitalized less than those who do 
not receive psychotherapy. 
Common factors and specific psychotherapies 
Astriking feature of the evidence base for psychotherapy is the similarity 
in outcomes of diverse approaches with a range of populations and 
problems, as shown in Figure 10.5. All approaches to psychotherapy, 
when averaged across different populations, problems and studies, 
lead to moderate to large effect sizes, and benefits for two-thirds to 
three-quarters 
of treated 
cases. When therapies 
are compared, 
differences rarely exceed an effect size of .2, as shown in Figure 10.6, 
which is based on Grissom's (1996) synthesis of many meta-analyses. 

10 
+ EFFECTIVENESS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL THERAPIES 
323 
Large 0.8 
a 
"7 
ro 
= q 
_— 
‘is pra 
int 
eg i 
= 
= 
i 
Therapy 
Therapy 
Placebo 
Therapy 
Ss 
vs 
vs 
vs 
V 
Control 
Placebo 
Control 
Therapy 
75 
58 
44 
.23 
Figure 10.6 The effects of psychotherapy compared with placebo control groups. Based on 
Grissom (1996) 
The hypothesis 
that different psychotherapies 
lead to similar 
improvement rates was first referred to as the Dodo bird verdict by Saul 
Rosenzweig in 1936. The reference is to a quotation from Lewis Carroll's 
Alice in Wonderland — At last the Dodo said ‘Everybody has won, and 
all must have prizes’ — The Dodo’s remark was made after a caucus 
race in which competitors started at different points and ran in different 
directions for half an hour. This finding that most forms of psychotherapy 
have similar outcomes has led to the hypothesis that a set of common 
factors may underpin all effective psychotherapies. 
One possibility is that the underlying common factor is the placebo 
effect. That is, psychotherapy may be no more than a placebo, a psy- 
chological sugar pill that gives clients hope and creates the expectation 
of improvement. It was mentioned above that to evaluate this hypoth- 
esis researchers have conducted studies in which a specific form of 
psychotherapy is compared with a psychological or pharmacological 
placebo condition. Common psychological placebo conditions involve 
engaging in intellectual discussion groups, participating in recreational 
activities, or receiving an inert procedure that is described as providing 
subliminal treatment. 
In Grissom’s (1996) synthesis of many meta-analyses summarized 
in Figure 10.6, the effect size for psychotherapy compared with placebos 
was .58. Thus, the average treated case fared better than 72% of cases 
in control groups who received placebos. This shows that psychotherapy 
is not just a placebo that generates hope, but a set of procedures that 
actively influences the recovery process. From Figure 10.6 it may also 
be seen that the effect size for therapy versus waiting list control groups 
(.75) is larger than the effect size of placebo versus waiting list control 
groups (.44). This shows that the effects of psychotherapy are nearly 
double those of placebos. 

324 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Specific 
Therapeutic 
Techniques 
15% 
The results of two important analyses of the relative contribution of 
common and specific factors to psychotherapy outcome are summarized 
in Figure 10.7. In a narrative review of over 100 psychotherapy studies 
Michael Lambert (1992; Lambert & Barley, 2002) estimated 
that 
common factors were about twice as important as specific factors in 
contributing to the outcome of psychotherapy. From the left-hand panel 
in Figure 10.7, it may be seen that Lambert estimated that about 30% of 
psychotherapy outcome variance may be accounted for by common 
factors, and 15% by specific factors; 15% of the remainder of the 
variance in outcome, Lambert estimated, was due to placebo effects or 
creating the expectation of recovery. The remaining 40% of variance in 
outcome, according to Lambert’s analysis, was accounted for by factors 
outside therapy such as social support from family and friends. 
The results of an analysis conducted by Bruce Wampold (2001) are 
presented in the right-hand panel in Figure 10.7. Wampold, like Lambert, 
concluded that common factors are more important than specific factors 
in determining the outcome of psychotherapy, but the results of his rigor- 
ous analysis led to a far more extreme statement of this position. Wampold 
(2001) conducted a quantitative review of more than a dozen meta- 
analyses, and estimated that common factors are nine times more influ- 
ential than specific factors in determining the outcome of psychotherapy. 
He concluded that only 13% of the variance of outcome for psychother- 
apy clients is due to psychotherapy (including common, specific and 
other factors). This was based on his computation of an overall effect size 
for psychotherapy of between .7 and .8. He also concluded that only 1% 
of the variability in outcome for psychotherapy clients was due to specific 
factors. This was based on an average between-treatment effect size 
of .2, similar to that shown in Figure 10.6. He estimated that 3% of the 
variance in outcome was due to unexplained therapy factors, probably 
client characteristics. The remaining 9% of the variance in outcome, he 
concluded, was accounted for by common factors. 
Common 
Common 
Factors 
Factors 
30% 
9% 
Placebo 
Specific 
Client 
(expectancy) 
Therapeutic 
Factors 
Effects 
Techniques 
3% 
15% 
1% 
Extratherapeutic 
Extratherapeutic 
Factors 
Factors 
40% 
87% 
LAMBERT’S PIE 
WAMPOLD’S PIE 
Figure 10.7 Factors that affect the outcome of psychotherapy. Based on Lambert and Barley (2002) and Wampold (2001) 

10 
* EFFECTIVENESS 
OF PSYCHOLOGICAL THERAPIES 
325 
Lambert’s and Wampold’s analyses share one important conclusion. 
Common factors have a far greater impact than specific factors in deter- 
mining whether or not clients benefit from psychotherapy. The major 
impact of common factors on the outcome of psychotherapy provides a 
possible explanation for the similarity in outcome of different psycho- 
therapy approaches. However, therapists must engage in specific forms 
of therapy for common factors to have a medium through which to oper- 
ate. For example, in family therapy the process of convening family 
meetings, helping family members view individual problems as part of a 
pattern of family interaction, and exploring alternative interaction pat- 
terns creates a context within which therapists develop good working 
alliances with clients (which is one of the most important common fac- 
tors affecting treatment outcome). 
Categories of common factor 
In considering common factors, it is useful to distinguish between client 
factors, therapist factors and factors associated with the therapeutic 
context, including the dose of therapy received, the quality of the 
therapeutic alliance, and therapeutic procedures. Common factors that 
contribute to the effectiveness of psychotherapy are listed in Table 10.2. 
TABLE 10.2 
Therapy, client and therapist ‘common factors’ that affect positive psychotherapy outcome 
Therapeutic context factors 
Dose of 20-45 sessions 
Positive therapeutic alliance 
Empathy 
Collaboration and goal 
consensus 
Positive regard and 
genuineness 
Relevant feedback and 
relevant self-disclosure 
Repair alliance ruptures 
Manage transference and 
countertransference 
Common procedures 
Problem exploration 
Credible rationale 
Mobilizing client 
Support and catharsis 
Reconceptualizing problem 
Behavioural change 
Combining psychotherapy 
Client factors 
High personal distress 
Low symptom severity 
Low functional impairment 
Low problem complexity, 
chronicity and comorbidity 
Readiness to change and 
lack of resistance 
Early response to therapy 
Psychological mindedness 
Ego strength 
Capacity to make and 
maintain relationships 
Social support 
High socio-economic status 
Therapist factors 
Personal adjustment 
Therapeutic competence 
Matching therapy style to patients’ needs 
Over-controlled patients — facilitate insight 
Under-controlled patients — build symptom 
management skills 
Positive past relationships — facilitate insight 
Negative past relationships — provide 
support 
Compliant clients — use directive 
interventions 
Resistant clients — use self-directed 
interventions 
Credibility of rationales 
Problem-solving creativity 
Specific training 
Flexible manual use 
Supervision and personal therapy 
Feedback on client recovery 
and medication 
; 

326 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Client characteristics 
A range of client characteristics are associated with a positive response 
to any type of psychological intervention (Clarkin & Levy, 2004; Lambert, 
2005). Distressed clients with circumscribed problems of low severity 
with little functional impairment who are ready to change, and who show 
an improvement early in treatment, respond well to psychotherapy. 
High socio-economic status, social support, the capacity to make and 
maintain relationships, psychological-mindedness and ego strength are 
other client attributes associated with a positive response to psycho- 
therapy. Psychologically minded people understand their problems in 
intrapsychic terms, rather than blaming them on external factors. Ego 
strength is the capacity to tolerate conflict and distress, while showing 
flexibility and persistence in pursuing valued goals. 
Therapist characteristics 
Effective therapists have distinctive profiles (Addis, 2002; Beutler et al., 
2004; Lambert et al., 2003; Lambert & Ogles, 1997; Miller et al., 2005; 
Norcross, 2005; Stein & Lambert, 1995). They are technically competent, 
credible and creative in their approach to helping clients solve problems. 
They have engaged in personal therapy, are well adjusted, well trained, 
use therapy manuals flexibly, and use feedback on client progress to 
match their therapeutic style to clients’ needs. 
There is evidence for the effectiveness of three types of matching. 
For reflective, over-controlled clients, an insight-oriented approach is 
particularly 
effective, 
whereas 
a symptom-focused, 
skills-building 
approach is more effective with impulsive, under-controlled clients. For 
clients who are resistant to directives, a self-directed approach is most 
effective, whereas a directive approach is effective with non-resistant 
clients. For clients with a history of gratifying early relationships, con- 
frontative insight-oriented approaches are effective, whereas supportive 
approaches are more effective for clients with histories of problem- 
atic early relationships. 
Therapeutic common factors 
For 50-75% of psychotherapy clients to recover, 20-45 sessions of 
therapy are necessary (Hansen et al., 2002). The therapeutic alliance is 
the single most important therapeutic common factor and accounts for 
about 38% of the effectiveness of psychotherapy (Martin et al., 2000; 
Shirk & Karver, 2003). Strong therapeutic alliances have distinctive 
features (Norcross, 2002; Orlinsky et al., 2004). For a strong therapeutic 
alliance, the therapist must be empathic and collaborative, and the 
client must be co-operative and committed to recovery. 
Within the therapy relationship, effective therapists show positive 
regard, genuineness, and provide clients with both relevant feedback 
and relevant self-disclosure information. Ruptures in the therapeutic alli- 
ance are common. These may be associated with client transference, 
therapist countertransference or a mismatch between clients’ needs and 
the therapist's way of conducting therapy. Strong therapeutic alliances 

10 
* EFFECTIVENESS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL THERAPIES 
327 
are maintained by managing such ruptures in therapeutic alliances and 
customizing therapeutic relationships to take account of clients’ needs. 
Certain common procedures characterize effective therapy (Frank & 
Frank, 1991; Hubble et al., 1999; Karasu, 1986; Lambert & Ogles, 2004; 
Norcross & Goldfried, 2003; Sprenkle & Blow, 2004; Wampold, 2001). 
Effective therapy involves exploration and reconceptualization of both 
conscious and unconscious aspects of clients’ problems; provision of a 
credible rationale for conducting therapy; generating hope and the 
expectation of improvement; and mobilizing clients to engage in problem 
resolution. This mobilization process may involve helping clients develop 
more adaptive behaviour patterns and belief systems; more effective 
ways of regulating their emotions; and more supportive emotional con- 
nections with themselves, their family members and their therapists. 
There is also a developmental sequence common to most forms of 
psychotherapy in which interventions that support clients (such as reas- 
surance and facilitating catharsis and emotional expression) precede 
interventions that promote learning to see problems in new ways (such 
as reframing and interpretation), and these in turn precede inter- 
ventions that promote new forms of behaviour such as facing fears, 
regulating behaviour, interpersonal risk-taking, and practising new 
skills. 
For specific disorders, multimodal programmes in which psychother- 
apy and psychotropic medication are combined are more effective than 
either alone (Kazdin, 2004; Thase & Jindal, 2004). For example, in chil- 
dren with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, the effectiveness of 
psychotherapy, which includes parent-management training, school 
intervention, and self-instructional training for the child, can be enhanced 
by combining this with stimulant therapy as discussed in Chapter 2. In 
adults being treated with antipsychotic medication for schizophrenia, 
relapse rates may be reduced by offering psychoeducational family 
therapy to reduce family stress and cognitive-behaviour therapy to 
improve symptom management, as discussed in Chapter 7. 
Specific factors 
Common factors have a profound impact on the effectiveness of psycho- 
therapy. However, therapists must engage in specific forms of therapy 
for common factors to have a medium through which to operate. In 
Chapters 2-8, examples of specific evidence-based psychological treat- 
ments for particular problems have been given. Comprehensive reviews 
of the literature on the effectiveness of psychological interventions con- 
cur that effective interventions have been developed for a range of prob- 
lems (Carr, 2009a; Nathan & Gorman, 2007; Roth & Fonagy, 2005). 
These include mood, anxiety, eating, substance use and sleep disorders 
in both children and adults; family relationship problems, pain manage- 
ment, adjustment to illnesses such as asthma and diabetes, and adjust- 
ment to physical and intellectual disabilities in children and adults; 
disruptive behaviour disorders and toileting problems in childhood; and 
personality disorders and psychosis in adults. 

328 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Summary 
Clinical psychologists provide psychotherapy to children and 
adults on an individual, couple, family, or group basis, often as 
one element of a multimodal programme offered by a multidis- 
ciplinary team. In doing so, they engage in evidence-based 
practice by taking account of available scientific evidence 
about ‘what works’ on one hand, and clients’ unique problems, 
needs, rights and preferences on the other, and making bal- 
anced, compassicnate judgements. 
Scientific evidence for the effectiveness of psychotherapy 
ranges in persuasiveness from case studies to meta-analyses 
of controlled trials. Results of meta-analyses show that approx- 
imately two-thirds to three-quarters of people who engage in 
psychotherapy improve. Similar improvement rates occur for 
children and adults, individuals and families, and for psycho- 
therapy from a range of different traditions. The moderate 
effect sizes associated with psychotherapy for mental health 
problems are similar to those associated with the medical and 
surgical treatments for physical health problems. 
About one in 10 clients deteriorate following psychotherapy. 
Marginalized clients with particularly troublesome disorders 
and negative attitudes to psychotherapy are vulnerable to 
dropping out of psychotherapy and deterioration. Psychotherapy 
has a significant medical cost offset, and those who participate 
in psychotherapy use fewer other medical services than those 
who do not. 
Most forms of psychotherapy are equally effective. This is 
due to the fact that they share common factors that contribute 
to effectiveness. These common factors include those associ- 
ated with the client, the therapist and the therapeutic context. 
Distressed clients with circumscribed problems of low severity 
and little functional impairment who are ready to change, 
who show an improvement early in treatment, are of high 
socio-economic status, have a high level of social support, 
the capacity to make and maintain relationships, psychological- 
mindedness and ego strength respond well to psychotherapy. 
Particularly effective therapists are technically competent, 
credible and creative in their approach to helping clients solve 
problems, have engaged in personal therapy, are well adjusted, 
well trained, use therapy manuals flexibly, and use feedback on 
client progress to match their therapeutic style to clients’ needs. 
At least 20 sessions are required for most clients to recover, 
and the therapeutic alliance is the single most important com- 
mon therapeutic common factor. For a strong therapeutic alli- 
ance, the therapist must be empathic and collaborative, and the 
client must be co-operative and committed to recovery. 

10 
* EFFECTIVENESS 
OF PSYCHOLOGICAL THERAPIES 
329 
The common procedures that characterize effective therapy 
include 
exploration 
and 
reconceptualization 
of conscious 
and unconscious aspects of problems; provision of a credible 
rationale for conducting therapy; generating hope and the 
expectation of improvement; and mobilizing clients to engage 
in problem resolution. These broad procedures may involve 
using therapeutic techniques such as providing support and 
encouraging emotional expression; facilitating new ways of 
viewing problems; and helping clients to develop new ways of 
behaving adaptively. 
For certain disorders, multimodal programmes in which 
psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy are combined are more 
effective than either alone. Therapists must engage in specific 
forms of therapy for common factors to have a medium through 
which to operate. 
Questions 
e 
What is evidence-based practice in clinical psychology? 
e 
What is the hierarchy of evidence that informs evidence-based 
practice in clinical psychology? 
e 
What do the results of broad meta-analyses indicate about the 
overall effectiveness of psychotherapy? 
e 
Is there a medical cost offset associated with psychotherapy? 
e 
What is the ‘Dodo bird’ verdict? 
e 
How important are common factors in contributing to the effective- 
ness of psychotherapy? 
e 
What common factors contribute to the effectiveness of psycho- 
therapy? 
e 
Howdo specific models of practice contribute to the effectiveness of 
psychotherapy? 
oo 
———————— 
FURTHER READING 
* 
Carr, A. (2009a). What works with children, adolescents and adults? 
A review of research on the effectiveness of psychotherapy. London: 
Routledge. 
« 
Nathan, P. & Gorman, J. (2007). A guide to treatments that work (third 
edition). New York: Oxford University Press. 
* 
Roth, T. & Fonagy, P. (2005). What works for whom? A critical review of 
psychotherapy research (second edition). London: Guilford. 
eee 
WEBSITE 
e 
Society for Psychotherapy Research: 
www.psychotherapyresearch.org 

Glossary 
A-CRA. Adolescent Contingency Reinforcement Approach, an evidence-based 
therapy for adolescent drug problems in which operant conditioning is the 
central intervention. 
AACAP practice parameters. Clinical guidelines produced by the American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, which is the US professional 
association for child and adolescent psychiatrists. (www.aacap.org/cs/root/ 
member_information/practice_information/practice_parameters/practice_ 
parameters) 
AACBT. Australian Association for Cognitive and Behaviour Therapy. (www. 
aacbtqld.org.au) 
AAMFT. American Association for Marital and Family Therapy. (www.aamft.org) 
ABCT. Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies (US). (www.abct. 
org) 
ACPA. Australian Clinical Psychology Association. (www.acpa.org.au) 
Addictive personality. A profile of personality traits that predisposes a person 
to addiction. 
ADHD. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. 
A syndrome characterized by 
persistent overactivity, impulsivity and difficulties in sustaining attention. Also 
known as attention deficit disorder, hyperkinetic disorder, hyperkinesis and 
minimal brain dysfunction. 
ADIS. .Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule, for assessing DSM-IV anxiety 
disorders. There are adult and child versions. 
AFT. Association for Family Therapy (UK) (www.aft.org.uk) 
Agoraphobia. A fear of public places, often due to a fear of having panic attacks 
in public places. 
Alogia. Impoverished thought inferred from speech, common in schizophrenia. 
Brief concrete replies are given to questions (poverty of speech) or a normal 
amount of speech is produced but conveys little information (poverty of 
content) due to repetition, being overly concrete or being overly abstract. 
Amygdala. An almond-shaped brain structure within the limbic system, located 
in the medial temporal lobes, that subserves the processing of emotional 
information and memories. Abnormalities of the amygdala occur in many 
psychological disorders. 
Anaclitic depression. In Blatt's psychoanalytic theory, anaclitic (or depen- 
dent) depression is characterized by feelings of abandonment in response 
to interpersonal loss. It is contrasted with introjective (or self-critical) depres- 
sion which is characterized by self-criticism 
in response to perceived 
failure. 
Anakastic personality disorder. See Obsessive compulsive personality 
disorder. 
Anomie. A state characterized by normlessness where the social structures 
provided by family, religion and other institutions become destabilized and 
leave members of a community feeling alienated. Some disadvantaged 

communities 
in which delinquency, drug abuse and suicide occur are 
characterized by anomie. 
Anorexia nervosa. An eating disorder characterized by over-evaluation of 
weight and shape and their control, and a severe weight loss. 
Antisocial personality disorder. A personality disorder characterized by a 
pervasive disregard for the rights of others and consistent violation of these 
rights. Has also been referred to as psychopathy, sociopathy and dissocial 
personality disorder. 
APA practice guidelines. Evidence-based clinical practice guidelines produced 
by the American Psychiatric Association, which is the US professional 
association for psychiatrists. (www.psychiatryonline.org) 
APA. American Psychological Association (www.apa.org); American Psychiatric 
Association (www.psych.org). American Psychoanalytical Association (www. 
apsa.org). 
APS. Australian Psychological Society (www.psychology.org.au); Australian 
Psychoanalytical Society (www.psychoanalysis.asn.au). 
ASEBA. Achenbach System of Empirically Based Assessment. Parent, teacher 
and self-report rating scales widely used for assessing internalizing and 
externalizing behaviour problems in children and adolescents. 
Assertive community treatment. An integrated community mental health 
service delivery model in which hard-to-reach people with psychosis receive 
intensive, continuous individualized treatment, rehabilitation and support 
services from community-based multidisciplinary teams. 
Assessment. Procedures such as interviewing, psychological testing and 
behavioural observation used to evaluate individuals with psychological 
problems. 
Assistant Psychologists Ireland Google groups. A forum for discussing 
issues relevant to getting onto clinical psychology training programmes in 
Ireland (ap_ireland@googlegroups.com). 
AVE (abstinence violation effect). The cognitive process that leads to the 
experience of loss of control and relapse during recovery from drug problems 
when a minor slip occurs. 
Avoidant personality disorder. A personality disorder characterized by a 
pervasive pattern of social inhibition and shyness beginning in adolescence 
or early adulthood. 
Avolition. A lack of goal-directed activity common in schizophrenia. 
BABCP. British Association for Behavioural & Cognitive Psychotherapies. 
(www.babcp.com) 
Basal ganglia. A subcortical region of the brain which subserves the initiation, 
control and modulation of voluntary movement. Damage to the basal 
ganglia may lead to excessive involuntary movement or to a slowing 
of voluntary movement. 
Parkinson's disease, Sydenham’s chorea and 
Huntington’s chorea all involve damage to the basal ganglia. Dysfunction of 
the basal ganglia underpins obsessive compulsive disorder and Tourette’s 
syndrome. 
BDI-Il. Beck Depression Inventory, second edition, a self-report instrument for 
assessing depression. 
Behaviourally inhibited temperament. A temperamental trait involving the 
tendency to become nervous and withdraw from unfamiliar stimuli and 
situations. 
Biological model. A conceptual framework which assumes that psychological 
problems are symptoms of ‘mental illnesses’ each of which has a discrete 
neurobiological cause, a unique course and prognosis, and for which a 
GLOSSARY 
331 

332 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
specific physical treatment or psychotropic medication will be found. Also 
referred to as the biomedical, neurobiological, organic, medical or disease 
model. 
Biomedical model. See Biological model. 
Bipolar disorder. A recurrent mood disorder characterized by episodes of 
mania and depression, previously known as manic-depression. 
BMI. Body mass index. BMI = W/H2, where W = weight in kilograms and H = 
height in metres. The normal range for BMI is 18.5-24.9. 
Borderline personality disorder. A personality disorder characterized by 
fear of abandonment, impulsivity and a pattern of pervasive instability in 
interpersonal relationships, self-image and mood, often leading to self- 
harm. 
BPRS. Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale, a scale for monitoring psychotic symptom 
severity. 
BPS. British Psychoanalytical Society (www.psychoanalysis.org.uk); 
British 
Psychological Society (www.bps.org.uk). 
BSFT. 
Brief strategic family therapy, 
an evidence-based 
family therapy 
intervention for adolescent conduct and drug problems. 
Bulimia nervosa. An eating disorder characterized by over-evaluation of weight 
and shape and their control, and a cycle of bingeing in response to stressful 
events and compensatory purging. 
BYI-Il. Beck Youth Inventories, second edition, self-report instruments for 
assessing depression, anxiety, anger, disruptive behaviour and self-esteem 
in children and adolescents. 
CAN. Camberwell Assessment of Need, a scale for assessing mental health 
service users’ needs in areas such as mental and physical health, drug use, 
social relationships, accommodation, transport, budgeting, and activities of 
daily living. 
Case-control study. A study design in which a group of diagnostically 
homogeneous cases about which the researcher is trying to find out more 
information is compared to another group of patients with a known condition 
or with a normal control group. 
Catatonic behaviour. Behaviour that occurs in some cases of schizophrenia, 
characterized by a marked reduction or increase in motor activity. 
Catatonic schizophrenia. A form of schizophrenia in which catatonic behaviour 
is the predominant symptom. 
CBCL. Child Behaviour Checklist, for screening children for psychological 
problems. There are parent, teacher and child self-report versions. Also 
called ASEBA — Achenbach’s System for Empirically Based Assessment. 
CBT. Cognitive-behaviour therapy, a form of psychotherapy that involves 
helping people improve their mood and adjustment by directly changing 
their behaviour and thinking patterns using principles of learning theory and 
cognitive psychology. 
CDRS. Children’s Depression Rating Scale, for rating severity of depressive 
symptoms in children and adolescents. 
CFI. Camberwell 
Family Interview, 
a structured 
interview for assessing 
expressed emotion which includes criticism, hostility and emotional over- 
involvement. 
Classical conditioning. An associative learning process that occurs when 
two stimuli are regularly paired so that the response originally given to the 
second stimulus comes to be given to the first. 
Clearing House for Postgraduate Courses in Clinical Psychology. A web- 
based system for applying for UK courses. (www.leeds.ac.uk/chpccp) 

Cognitive rehabilitation. A set of cognitive drills that helps patients ameliorate 
or compensate for cognitive deficits due to neurological conditions. 
Common factors. Factors common to many forms of psychotherapy that 
account for their similar levels of effectiveness. 
Comorbid. Having more than one diagnosed psychological disorder or problem 
at a time. 
Compulsions. Repetitive, ritualistic, stereotyped behaviours that people with 
OCD feel compelled to perform to regulate anxiety caused by obsessions. 
Conduct disorder. A pervasive and persistent pattern of antisocial behaviour 
that extends beyond the family to the school and community and involves 
serious violations of rules, characterized by defiance of authority, aggression, 
destructiveness, deceitfulness and cruelty. 
Conversion hysteria. A condition characterized by deficits in sensory or 
motor functioning in the absence of an organic illness, also referred to as 
conversion disorder. 
Counselling psychology. An applied psychology specialism that places a strong 
emphasis on psychotherapeutic processes in effecting change in people facing 
a range of normal life challenges as well as psychological disorders. 
Countertransference. Therapists’ emotional responses to clients. 
CPA. Canadian Psychological Association. (www.cpa.ca) 
CRS. Conners Rating Scales: parent, teacher and self-report rating scales 
widely used for assessing the severity of ADHD symptoms and other 
childhood problems. 
Cue exposure treatment. A treatment, based on the classical conditioning 
model of addiction, in which recovering drug addicts are exposed to cues that 
elicit craving and concurrently use a variety of coping strategies to tolerate 
their discomfort and avoid drug-taking. 
Cyclothymia. A persistent bipolar disorder characterized by continuous mood 
swings from elation to sadness. 
DAWBA. Development and Well-Being Assessment, a structured interview 
and set of self-report instruments (the Strengths and Difficulties Scales) for 
diagnosing childhood psychological disorders. 
Defence mechanism. An unconscious psychological strategy for regulating 
anxiety about unacceptable emotions or impulses such as sex or aggression. 
Delusions. Unfounded and culturally alien beliefs. 
Dependent personality disorder. A personality disorder characterized by a 
pervasive pattern of submissiveness and dependence on other people. 
Depersonalization. A perceptual distortion in which there is a sense of being 
detached from the self or observing the self. 
Derailment. A speech pattern common in schizophrenia marked by cons- 
tant jumping from one topic to another, with only very loose associations 
between topics and little logic to what is said, reflecting an underlying thought 
disorder. 
Derealization. A perceptual distortion in which there is sense of unreality, or 
being in a dream. 
Dialectical behaviour therapy. An evidence-based 
cognitive-behavioural 
treatment for borderline personality disorder. 
Diathesis—stress theory. A model in which a psychological disorder is proposed 
to occur when a genetically vulnerable person is exposed to stress. 
DID. Dissociative identity disorder, a condition in which two or more distinct 
personalities exist within the individual, also known as multiple personality 
disorder. 
Disease model. See Biological model. 
GLOSSARY 
333 

334 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
Dissociation. An abnormality of perception, memory or identity that occurs 
in response to trauma and may include derealization (seeing the world as 
dream-like), depersonalization (viewing the self from an external perspective) 
and inability to recall important personal information. 
Dizygotic twins. Fraternal twins that come from two separate ova. 
Dodo bird verdict. The hypothesis that different forms of psychotherapy have 
similar effects: refers to a quotation from Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland — 
At last the Dodo said ‘Everybody has won, and ai/ must have prizes’. 
Dopamine. A neurotransmitter involved in the reward system or mesolimbic 
dopamine pathway. 
DSM-IV-TR. 
American 
Psychiatric 
Association’s 
(2000) 
Diagnostic 
and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition, text revision. 
Dual diagnosis. A term used to describe cases in which there is a diagnosis 
of a substance use disorder and another disorder, e.g. an anxiety, mood or 
psychotic disorder. 
Dysthymia. A non-episodic chronic mood disorder characterized by depressive 
symptomatology. 
ECT. Electroconvulsive therapy, an intervention for severe treatment-resistant 
depression in which seizures are induced by briefly passing an electric cur- 
rent through the brain via electrodes applied to the scalp. ECT is conducted 
under general anaesthetic and muscle relaxants are used to prevent body 
spasms. 
EDE. Eating Disorder Examination, a detailed interview for assessing anorexia, 
bulimia and other eating disorders. 
EDI. Eating Disorder Inventory, 
a comprehensive self-report psychological 
assessment 
instrument 
for evaluating 
eating 
pathology 
and 
related 
psychological traits such as perfectionism and ineffectiveness. 
Educational psychology. An applied psychology specialism concerned with 
learning problems, and social and emotional problems encountered by 
young people in educational settings. 
EEG. Electroencephalogram, 
a procedure for assessing electrical activity 
within the brain. Electrodes placed on the scalp are attached by wires to a 
machine that records electrical impulses from the brain and displays these as 
‘brain waves’ on a paper printout or a computer screen. Used for assessing 
seizures, sleep stages and as biofeedback for ADHD. 
EFPA. European Foundation for Psychologists and Analysts. (www.efpa.be) 
EFTA. European Family Therapy Association. (www.europeanfamilytherapy.eu) 
Ego strength. The capacity to tolerate conflict and distress, while showing 
flexibility and persistence in pursuing valued goals. 
Epidemiology. The study of the distribution of disorders and their correlates 
within populations. 
Evidence-based practice. The judicious and compassionate use of the best 
available scientific evidence to make decisions about patient or client 
care. 
Executive function. Cognitive processes involved in decision making, following 
through on plans and troubleshooting difficulties without being distracted by 
irrelevant stimuli or habitual reactions. 
Expressed emotion. An attitude of criticism, hostility or emotional over- 
involvement expressed by family members of mental health service users, 
assessed with the Camberwell Family Interview, and associated with relapse 
in mood, and psychotic and other disorders. 
Family systems model. A model which assumes that psychological problems 
are maintained by patterns of interaction and belief systems within the family 

and the wider social system of the client, and may be resolved by disrupting 
these processes in family therapy. 
Family therapy. A psychosocial intervention where the family is the unit of 
treatment. 
FFT. Functional family therapy, an evidence-based family therapy intervention 
for adolescent conduct and drug problems. 
Five-factor model of personality traits. A theory which proposes that the ‘Big 
5’ personality traits offer the most parsimonious description of personality. 
The Big 5 are neuroticism, extraversion, openness to experience, conscien- 
tiousness and agreeableness. 
Flooding. A behavioural treatment for phobias in which clients are exposed 
for a prolonged period to their most anxiety-provoking stimuli until anxiety 
responses are extinguished; also called implosion. 
Forensic psychology. An applied psychology specialism concerned with the 
application of psychology to criminal investigation and the assessment and 
treatment of offending behaviour. 
FTAI. Family Therapy Association of Ireland. (www.familytherapyireland.com) 
GAF. Global Assessment of Functioning scale, a single 100-point scale for 
rating the functioning of adult mental health service users. 
GAIN. Global Appraisal of Individual Needs, a comprehensive structured 
interview for assessing drug use severity and personal, family and school- 
related adjustment problems in adolescents. 
Gateway drugs. Nicotine, alcohol and cannabis, which may lead to the use of 
other drugs such as cocaine and heroin. 
Generalized anxiety disorder. Ongoing apprehension that misfortunes of 
various sorts will occur and anxiety that this worrying process is uncontrollable. 
GRE. Graduate Record Examination. (www.ets.org/gre). 
Hallucination. Experiencing a sensation in the absence of an external stimulus. 
Harm-avoidance. Interventions such as needle exchanges and safe injection 
sites that reduce the harm caused by drug misuse. 
HCR-20. Historical, Clinical, Risk Management—20, a rating scale for assessing 
risk of violence. 
Health psychology. An applied psychology specialism concerned with the 
application of psychology to address physical health problems. 
Hebephrenic schizophrenia. A form of schizophrenia characterized 
by 
inappropriate or flat affect and disorganization of behaviour and speech. 
Histrionic personality disorder. A condition characterized by pervasive 
attention-seeking behaviour including inappropriately seductive behaviour 
and shallow or exaggerated emotions. 
HPA axis. Hypothalamic-—pituitary—adrenal axis, a major part of the neuro- 
endocrine system involving the hypothalamus, the pituitary gland located 
below the hypothalamus, and the adrenal glands (located on top of the 
kidneys), which controls stress reactions and other processes including the 
immune system, sexuality and digestion, and is dysregulated in anxiety 
and mood disorders. 
HRS. Hamilton Rating Scale, for rating severity of depressive symptoms in adults. 
HSE. Health Service Executive (www.hse.ie), the Irish public health service. 
Hull University. The only university in the UK or Ireland that offers an integrated 
6-year BSc/DClinPsych (www2.hull.ac.uk). 
Humanistic psychotherapy. An overarching term for approaches to explaining 
psychological problems using the concepts of self-actualization, the self, the 
ideal self and the organism, and treating such problems with non-directive 
client-centred therapy. 
GLOSSARY 
335 

336 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
IAPT. Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (www.iapt.nhs.uk) 
is 
an 
NHS 
programme 
to improve 
access 
to evidence-based 
talking 
therapies through an expansion of the psychological therapy workforce and 
services. 
ICD-10. The World Health Organization’s (1992) International Classification of 
Diseases — Tenth Edition. Psychological problems are classified in Chapter 5. 
ICP. Irish Council of Psychotherapy. (www.psychotherapy-ireland.com) 
Ideas of reference. Incorrect interpretation of events as referring directly to 
oneself. 
Implosion. A behavioural treatment for phobias in which clients are exposed 
for a prolonged period to their most anxiety-provoking stimuli until anxiety 
responses are extinguished; also called flooding. 
Introjective depression. In Blatt’s psychoanalytic theory introjective (or self- 
critical) depression is characterized by self-criticism in response to perceived 
failure. It is contrasted with anaclitic (or dependent) depression, which is 
characterized by feelings of abandonment in response to interpersonal loss. 
IPA. International Psychoanalytical Association. (www.ipa.org.uk) 
IPDE. International Personality Disorder Examination, a structured interview for 
the diagnosis of personality disorders. 
IPT. Interpersonal therapy, an evidence-based treatment for depression and 
bulimia in which the focus is on resolving interpersonal difficulties, notably 
grief, role disputes, role transitions, and interpersonal deficits, which maintain 
the presenting problem. 
IUPsyS. International Union of Psychological Science. (www.iupsys.org) 
Learning theory. A theoretical framework which posits that behaviour is learned 
through the processes of operant and classical conditioning. 
Limbic system. A complex of brain structures that subserves the experience 
and expression of emotions, which includes the amygdala, hippocampus, 
insula and parts of the anterior cingulated cortex 
Longitudinal study. A study design in which a group of cases is assessed on 
a number of occasions to discover the course of their development over 
time. 
Major depression. A unipolar recurrent episodic mood disorder involving 
low mood, selective attention to negative features of the environment, a 
pessimistic belief system, self-defeating behaviour patterns, particularly 
within intimate relationships, and a disturbance of sleep and appetite. 
MAOI. Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors, a type of antidepressant, such as 
phenelzine/Nardil which prevents the enzyme monoamine oxidase from 
breaking down neurotransmitters in the synaptic cleft and leads to an 
increase in neurotransmitter levels. 
MCMI-IIl. Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory—ill, a self-report inventory for 
assessing personality disorders. 
MDFT. Multidimensional family therapy, an evidence-based family therapy 
intervention for adolescent drug problems. 
Medical cost offset. The extent to which clients who avail of psychotherapy 
services use fewer medical services and so incur reduced medical costs. 
Medical model. See Biological model. 
Mentalization-based treatment. An evidence-based psychodynamic treatment 
that aims to improve adjustment in borderline personality disorder by 
enhancing mentalization skills. 
Mentalization. The capacity to understand mental states, motives and intentions 
of the self and others, and to conceptualize these states as being separate 
from behaviour. 

Mesolimbic dopamine pathway. The neurobiological system that underpins 
reward or reinforcement, involving the ventral tegmental area, the nucleus 
accumbens and the prefrontal cortex. 
Meta-analysis. A systematic, quantitative approach to reviewing evidence from 
multiple studies in which effect sizes are calculated for each study and then 
averaged across all studies. 
Methadone maintenance. An intervention for opioid dependency involving the 
prescription of a daily dose of methadone as a substitute for street opioids 
such as heroin. 
Minnesota Model. An approach to treating drug problems that integrates the 
Narcotics Anonymous/Alcoholics Anonymous 12-step approach with group 
and family therapy. 
MMPI-2. Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory—2, a self-report inventory 
for assessing personality functioning and psychopathology. 
Monozygotic twins. Identical twins that come from a single ovum. 
Motivational interviewing. A non-directive intervention that motivates people 
with drug problems to take steps towards reducing drug use, also called 
motivational enhancement therapy. 
MST. 
Multisystemic therapy, 
a comprehensive evidence-based 
treatment 
approach to treating conduct disorder in which family therapy is the core 
intervention but which also involves individual intervention and interventions 
with the young person’s wider social network. 
Multidisciplinary team. A team of health professionals from a variety of 
disciplines such as psychology, medicine and social work. 
Multimodal programme. 
In the mental health field, 
a programme usually 
offered by multidisciplinary teams that includes a number of different types of 
intervention; for example, psychotherapy and psychotropic medication. 
Multiple personality disorder. A condition in which two or more distinct 
personalities exist within the individual, with only one being evident at a time; 
also known as dissociative identity disorder. 
NA. Narcotics Anonymous, a self-help organization for drug addicts involving a 
12-step recovery programme like that used in Alcoholics Anonymous. 
Narcissistic personality disorder. A personality disorder characterized by a 
pervasive pattern of grandiosity, a need for admiration, and a lack of empathy 
for others. 
Negative symptoms. Collective term for flattening of affect, poverty of speech 
and lack of goal-directed behaviour common in schizophrenia. 
NEO-PI-R. Revised NEO Personality Inventory, a self-report inventory for 
assessing the Big 5 personality traits and 30 related facets. 
Neologisms. Made-up words that only have meaning for the individual, common 
in schizophrenia. 
Neuroadaptation. A neurobiological process that accompanies drug addiction 
and accounts for the phenomena of tolerance, dependence, withdrawal, and 
the high rate of relapse among recovered addicts. 
Neurobiological model. See Biological model. 
Neurodevelopmental hypothesis. The view that prenatal and perinatal adver- 
sities interact with a genetic vulnerability to psychosis to give rise to atypical 
neuroanatomical development initially in infancy, and later in adolescence, 
to cause schizophrenia. 
Neuropsychology. A branch of applied psychology concerned 
with the 
assessment and rehabilitation of people with neurological disorders. 
Neuroticism. A personality trait characterized by the tendency to experience 
negative affect including anxiety, depression and hostility. 
GLOSSARY 
337 

338 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Neurotransmitters. Chemicals released into synapses between neurons which 
permit messages to be transmitted from one neuron to the next. Dysregulations 
of neurotransmitters may occur in certain conditions. For example, there is 
dysregulation of the dopamine system in schizophrenia, and the serotonin 
system in depression. 
NHS. National Health Service (www.nhs.uk): the UK public health service. 
NICE Guidelines. Evidence-based guidelines for the treatment of mental and 
physical health problems produced by the National Institute for Clinical 
Excellence. (http://guidance.nice.org.uk/topic/mentalhealthbehavioural) 
NUIG. National University of Ireland Galway (www.nuigalway.ie), which runs 
one of the five clinical psychology training programmes in Ireland. 
NZPS. New Zealand Psychological Society. (www.psychology.org.nz) 
Obsessions. Involuntary, recurrent, persistent and stereotyped thoughts, images 
or impulses that concern issues such as danger, violence and obscenity. 
Obsessive compulsive personality disorder. A personality disorder charac- 
terized by a pervasive pattern of preoccupation with orderliness, perfec- 
tionism, ethics, interpersonal control, and fiscal economy, also referred to as 
anakastic personality disorder. 
OCD. Obsessive compulsive disorder, a condition characterized by distressing 
obsessions on one hand and compulsive rituals which reduce the anxiety 
associated with the obsessions on the other. 
Operant conditioning. A learning process in which responses are strengthened 
by reinforcement. 
Oppositional defiant disorder. A disorder of conduct confined to the home and 
characterized by difficulties with rule-following. 
Organic model. See Biological model. 
Panic disorder. A condition in which there are recurrent unexpected panic 
attacks and an ongoing fear of further attacks, often accompanied by 
agoraphobia. 
PANSS. Positive and Negative Symptom Scale, a scale for monitoring psychotic 
symptom severity. 
Paranoid personality disorder. A personality disorder characterized by a 
pervasive distrust of others. 
Paranoid schizophrenia. A form of schizophrenia in which paranoid delusions 
are the predominant feature. 
PCL-R. The Psychopathy Checklist, a rating scale for assessing antisocial 
personality disorder and risk of violence. 
PEI. Personal 
Experience 
Inventory, 
a comprehensive 
questionnaire 
for 
assessing drug use severity and personal, family and school-related 
adjustment problems. 
Personality 
disorder. 
Conditions 
characterized 
by pervasive, 
enduring, 
inflexible patterns of behaviour and experience that deviate markedly 
from cultural expectations and that lead to significant personal distress or 
significant impairment in social functioning. 
PESQ. 
Personal 
Experience Screening Questionnaire, 
a_ brief screening 
instrument for adolescent drug problems. 
Phobia. An anxiety disorder characterized by intense fear which occurs when 
faced with an object, event or situation from a clearly defined class of stimuli 
that is out of proportion to the danger posed by the stimulus. 
Positive symptoms. Collective term for delusions and hallucinations common 
in schizophrenia. 
PRIME theory. PRIME represents pians, responses, impulses and _inhibi- 
tory forces (felt as urges), motives (felt as wants or needs), and evaluative 

beliefs — the five components of the motivational system in the PRIME or 
synthetic theory of motivation and addiction. 
Prodromal phase. The period before the onset of a disorder during which 
individuals may show subclinical symptoms. 
PsSl. Psychological Society of Ireland (www.psihq.ie) 
Psychiatry. A medical specialty concerned with the assessment and treatment 
of psychological disorders using both physical and psychological treatments. 
Psychoanalytic model. A conceptual framework which assumes that psycho- 
logical problems are symptoms of underlying unconscious conflict, which 
may be treated with psychoanalytically informed interventions derived from 
Sigmund Freud’s psychoanalysis, also referred to as the psychodynamic 
model. 
Psychological-mindedness. The capacity to understand problems in intrapsy- 
chic terms, rather than inaccurately explaining them in terms of external or 
physical factors. 
Psychotherapy. A contractual process in which trained professionals with 
expert knowledge of their discipline interact with clients to help them resolve 
psychological problems. 
Psyclick. A website giving information about getting onto UK clinical psychology 
training programmes (www.psyclick.org.uk) 
PTSD. Posttraumatic stress disorder, an anxiety disorder which occurs in 
response to a catastrophic trauma perceived to be potentially life-threatening, 
characterized by recurrent intrusive memories of the trauma that lead 
to intense anxiety coupled with attempts to avoid this by suppressing the 
memories and avoiding situations that remind the individual of the trauma. 
QUB. Queen's University Belfast (www.qub.ac.uk), which runs one of the five 
clinical psychology training programmes in Ireland. 
RANZCP. The Royal Australian & New Zealand College of Psychiatry (www. 
ranzcp.org) 
RAS. Recovery Assessment Scale: assesses hope, meaning of life, quality of 
life, symptoms and empowerment. 
RCPsych. Royal College of Psychiatrists (www.rcpsych.ac.uk) 
RCT. Randomized controlled trial: an experimental design for evaluating the 
effectiveness of a treatment programme, in which cases are randomly 
assigned to treatment and control groups and evaluated with pre-tests and 
post-tests. 
Recovery model. A rehabilitation model that privileges the concepts of optimism, 
well-being, 
personal 
strengths, 
supportive 
relationships, 
collaboration, 
personal choice, adaptive coping, developing a meaningful life, civil rights, 
empowerment and inclusion. 
Reward system. The mesolimbic dopamine pathway, which involves the ventral 
tegmental area, the nucleus accumbens and the prefrontal cortex, and is 
activated by drug use and reinforcement. 
Schizoid personality disorder. A personality disorder characterized by a 
pervasive pattern of detachment from social relationships. 
Schizophrenia. A set of conditions characterized by positive symptoms 
(delusions and hallucinations), negative symptoms (lack of goal-directed 
activity, flattening of affect, poverty of speech) and disorganized speech 
(frequent incoherence and derailment or loosening of associations). 
Schizotypal personality disorder. A personality disorder characterized by 
unusual perceptual experiences, eccentric thoughts and speech, inappropri- 
ate or constricted affect, peculiar or eccentric behaviour, and a lack of close 
relationships. 
GLOSSARY 
339 

340 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Schizotypy. A personality structure or set of traits conferring vulnerability to 
schizophrenia, characterized primarily by disorganized thinking similar to 
(though less extreme than) that shown in schizophrenia. 
SCID-I. Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis | Disorders. 
SCID-II. Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Personality Disorders. 
SDQ. Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire: brief parent, teacher and self- 
report rating scales widely used in the UK for assessing emotional and 
behaviour problems in children and adolescents. 
Seasonal affective disorder. A unipolar mood disorder in which episodes of 
depression occur during the winter months. 
Self-medication. The use of street drugs to alleviate negative affective 
states. 
Separation anxiety disorder. An anxiety disorder that occurs most commonly 
in children, characterized by a recurrent and persistent fear when separa- 
tion from parents, or other important attachment figures, is anticipated. 
Headaches, stomach aches and school refusal may occur. 
Serotonin. 5-Hydroxytryptamine or 5-HT, a neurotransmitter involved in the 
regulation of mood and appetite. Dysregulation of the serotonin system in 
the brain subserves depression and eating disorders. 
SNAP-2. Schedule for Nonadaptive and Adaptive Personality—ll, a self-report 
inventory for assessing personality disorders. 
Sociotropy. In Beck’s cognitive theory of depression, sociotropy is a depressive 
schema characterized by interpersonal dependency and is contrasted with 
the autonomy schema, which is characterized by perfectionism and self- 
criticism. 
SSRIs. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (e.g., fluoxetine/Prozac), a type 
of antidepressant that prevents serotonin from being reabsorbed into the 
presynaptic membrane and so increases the efficiency of this neurotransmitter 
system. Used for the treatment of depression, anxiety and eating disorders. 
Stepped care. A service delivery model in which more intensive interventions 
are preceded by less intensive interventions. 
Systematic desensitization. A behavioural treatment for phobias in which a 
client in a deeply relaxed state is exposed to increasingly anxiety-provoking 
stimuli, with progression to the next stimulus occurring once habituation to 
the previous one has occurred. 
Systemic 
model. 
An 
overarching 
term 
for approaches 
to explaining 
psychological problems using ideas from general systems theory and treating 
such problems with couples and family therapy. 
TCAs. 
Tricyclic 
antidepressants 
(e.g., 
imipramine/Tofranil), 
a 
type 
of 
antidepressant that increases efficiency neurotransmitter systems, which are 
dysregulated in depression. They were developed and widely used before 
the advent of SSRIs. 
TCD. Trinity College Dublin (www.tcd.ie), which runs one of the five clinical 
psychology training programmes in Ireland. 
Therapeutic community. 
Residential 
treatment programme 
in which 
a 
democratic, participative approach to decision-making is used to facilitate 
recovery of people with addictions and chronic, complex mental health 
problems. 
Thought broadcasting. The feeling that one’s thoughts are known by others. 
Thought disorder. Confused thinking common in schizophrenia, characterized 
by disorganized and illogical speech. 
Thought echo. A form of auditory hallucination in which thoughts are heard 
spoken aloud, as they are being thought or a moment or two afterwards. 

Thought insertion. The feeling that thoughts in one’s mind are not one’s 
own, ‘explained’ by the delusion that they have been inserted by an outside 
agency. 
Thought withdrawal. The feeling that thoughts are missing from one’s mind, 
‘explained’ by the delusion that they have been withdrawn by an outside 
agency. 
Token economy. A therapeutic system used in residential or inpatient settings, 
based on learning theory, in which tokens are used as secondary reinforcers 
to encourage patients to engage in positive behaviours and to use adaptive 
skills. Tokens earned for completing positive behaviours or using adaptive 
skills may be exchanged for privileges or valued items. 
Transference-focused psychotherapy. An evidence-based psychodynamic 
treatment for borderline personality disorder. 
Transference. The unconscious repetition in significant adult relationships 
of relationship patterns that occurred in childhood with parents. People 
unconsciously transfer feelings that they had towards their parents onto 
their partners, friends, colleagues and psychotherapists. In psychoanalytic 
practice, interpreting transference is a central aspect of therapy. 
Transtheoretical stages of change model. An integrative model, widely 
influential in the field of drug use and health behaviour, which proposes 
that therapeutic change involves movement through the stages of pre- 
contemplation, contemplation, preparation, action and maintenance, and 
that interventions must be designed to suit the client’s stage of change. 
UCD. University College Dublin (www.ucd.ie), which runs one of the five clinical 
psychology training programmes in Ireland. 
UKCP. UK Council for Psychotherapy (www.psychotherapy.org.uk) 
UL. University of Limerick (www.ul.ie), which runs one of the five clinical 
psychology training programmes in Ireland. 
Unconscious. 
In psychoanalytic theory, a set of processes, of which the 
individual is unaware, that motivate behaviour. 
WIAT. Wechsler Individual Achievement Test, a widely used set of attainment 
tests for school-aged children. It is now in its third revision. It is designed to 
be interpreted in conjunction with the WISC. 
Wilderness/adventure therapy. A psychotherapeutic treatment for drug 
problems and antisocial behaviour where adolescents are challenged to take 
risks and master skills by doing outdoor activities in a ‘wilderness’ location 
away form their home community. 
WISC. Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, the most widely used intelligence 
test for school-aged children in the world. It is now in its fourth revision. It is 
a downward extension of the WAIS. 
WPPSI. Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence, a widely used 
intelligence test for preschoolers. It is now in its third revision. It is a downward 
extension of the WISC. 
GLOSSARY 
341 

References 
Abraham, K. (1924). The influence of oral eroticism on character formation. In 
C. Bryan & A. Strachey (Ed. & trans.), Selected papers on psychoanalysis 
(pp. 393-406). London: Hogarth Press. 
Abramson, L., Seligman, M., & Teasdale, J. (1978). Learned helplessness in 
humans: Critique and reformulation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 87, 
49-74. 
Achenbach, 
T. M. (2009). ASEBA: Development, 
findings, 
theory, and 
applications. Burlington, VT: University of Vermont Research Centre for 
Children, Youth and Families. 
Achenbach, T. M., & Rescorla, L. A. (2000). Manual for ASEBA preschool 
forms & profiles. Burlington, VT: University of Vermont, Research Centre for 
Children, Youth, & Families. 
Achenbach, T. M., & Rescorla, L. A. (2001). Manual for ASEBA school-age 
forms & profiles. Burlington, VT: University of Vermont, Research Centre for 
Children, Youth, & Families. 
Addis, M. (2002). Methods for disseminating research products and increasing 
evidence-based practice: Promises, obstacles, and future directions. Clinical 
Psychology: Science and Practice, 9, 367-378. 
Afifi, T. O., Asmundson, G. H., Taylor, S., & Jang, K. L. (2010). The role of 
genes and environment on trauma exposure and posttraumatic stress dis- 
order symptoms: A review of twin studies. Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 
101-112. 
Agras, W. (2010). The Oxford handbook of eating disorders. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Aichorn, A. (1935). Wayward youth. New York: Viking Press. 
Aldao, A., Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Schweizer, S. (2010). Emotion-regulation 
strategies 
across 
psychopathology: 
A meta-analytic 
review. 
Clinical 
Psychology Review, 30, 217-237. 
Allen, J., Fonagy, P., & Bateman, A. (2008). Mentalizing in clinical practice. 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. 
Alwin, N., Blackburn, R., Davidson, K., Hilton, M., Logan, C., & Shine, J. (2006). 
Understanding personality disorder: A report by the British Psychological 
Society. Leicester, UK: British Psychological Society. 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (2001). Practice 
parameter for the assessment and treatment of children and adolescents 
with suicidal behaviour. Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 40 (7 Supplement), 24S—51S. 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (2004). Practice 
parameters for use of electroconvulsive therapy with adolescents. Journal of 
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 43(12), 1521- 
1539. 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (2005). Practice 
parameters for the assessment and treatment of children and adolescents 

REFERENCES 
343 
with substance use disorders. American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, 44(6), 609-621. 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (2007a). Practice 
parameters for the assessment and treatment of children, adolescents, and 
adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Journal of the American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46, 894-921. 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (2007b). Practice 
parameters for the assessment and treatment of children and adolescents 
with oppositional defiant disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46, 126-141. 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (2007c). Practice 
parameters for the assessment and treatment of children and adolescents 
with anxiety disorders. Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 36, 267-283. 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (2007d). Practice 
parameters for the assessment and treatment of children and adolescents 
with depressive disorders. Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 46, 1503-1526. 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (2009). Practice param- 
eters on the use of psychotropic medication in children and adolescents. 
Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 48, 
961-973. 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (2010). Practice 
parameters for the assessment and treatment of children and adolescents 
with posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of the American Academy of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 49, 414-430. 
American Academy of Paediatrics (2001). Clinical practice guideline: Treatment 
of the 
school-aged 
child 
with 
attention-deficit/nyperactivity 
disorder. 
Paediatrics, 
108(4), 
1033-1104. 
American Psychiatric Association (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
the Mental Disorders (fourth edition, text revision, DSM-IV-TR). Washington, 
DC: APA. 
American Psychiatric Association (2001a). Task force report of the American 
Psychiatric Association 
on the practice 
of electroconvulsive 
therapy: 
Recommendations for treatment, training, and privileging (second edition). 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. 
American Psychiatric Association (2001b). American Psychiatric Association 
practice guideline for the treatment of patients with borderline person- 
ality disorder (second edition). Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric 
Association. 
American Psychiatric Association (2003). American Psychiatric Association 
practice guideline for the assessment and treatment of suicidal behaviour. 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. 
American Psychiatric Association (2004a). American Psychiatric Association 
practice guideline for the treatment of patients with acute stress disorder 
and posttraumatic stress disorder. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Association. 
American Psychiatric Association (2004b). American Psychiatric Association 
practice guideline for the treatment of patients with schizophrenia (second 
edition). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. 
American Psychiatric Association (2006). American Psychiatric Association 
practice guidelines for the treatment of eating disorders (third revision). 
Washington, DC: APA. 

344 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
American Psychiatric Association (2007). American Psychiatric Association 
practice guideline for the treatment of patients with obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. 
American Psychiatric Association (2009). American Psychiatric Association 
practice guideline for the treatment of patients with panic disorder (second 
edition). Washington, DC: APA. 
American Psychiatric Association (2010). American Psychiatric Association 
practice guideline for the treatment of patients with major depressive disorder 
(third edition). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. 
American Psychological Association (2007). Getting in: A step-by-step plan 
for gaining admission to graduate school in psychology (second edition). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
American Psychological Association Presidential Task Force on Evidence 
Based Practice (2006). Evidence-based practice in psychology. American 
Psychologist, 61, 271-285. 
Anastopoulos, A., Barkley, R., & Shelton, T. (2005). Family based treatment: 
Psychosocial 
intervention 
for children and adolescents 
with attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder. In E. Hibbs & P. Jensen (eds.), Psychosocial 
treatments for child and adolescent disorders. Empirically based strategies 
for clinical practice (second edition, pp. 327-350). Washington, DC: APA. 
Anderson, D. A., & Murray, A. D. (2010). Psychological assessment of the eating 
disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of eating disorders 
(pp. 249=258). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Anderson, H. (2003). Postmodern social construction therapies. |n T. Sexton, 
G. Weeks, & M. Robbins (Eds.), Handbook of family therapy: The science 
and practice of working with families and couples (pp. 125-146). New York: 
Brunner-Routledge. 
Andrews, G., Cuijpers, P., Craske, M. G., McEvoy, P., & Titov, N. (2010). Com- 
puter therapy for the anxiety and depressive disorders is effective, acceptable 
and practical health care: A meta-analysis. PLoS ONE, 5(10), e13196. 
Andrews, J. A., & Hops, H. (2010). The influence of peers on substance use. 
In L. Scheier (Ed.), Handbook of drug use aetiology: Theory, methods, and 
empirical findings (pp. 403-420). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 
Angst, J. (2009). Course and prognosis of mood disorders. In M. Gelder et al. 
(Eds.), New Oxford textbook of psychiatry (second edition, Vol. 1, pp. 665— 
669). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Antony, M., & Stein, M. (2009a). Oxford handbook of anxiety and related 
disorders. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Antony, M., & Stein, M. (2009b). Future directions in anxiety disorders research. 
In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook of anxiety and related 
disorders (pp. 667-677). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Aouizerate, B., Rotge, J.-Y., & Martin-Guehl, C. (2006). A systematic review 
of psychosurgical treatments for obsessive-compulsive 
disorder: Does 
deep brain stimulation represent the future trend in psychosurgery? Clinical 
Neuropsychiatry, 3, 391-403. 
Arnett, J. J. (2005). The developmental context of substance use in emerging 
adulthood. Journal of Drug Issues, 35, 235-254. 
Baer, R. (2003). Mindfulness training as a clinical intervention: A conceptual 
and empirical review. Clinical Psychology Science and Practice, 10, 125- 
143. 
Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., & van lJzendoorn, M. H. (2009). The first 
10,000 Adult Attachment 
Interviews: 
Distributions of adult attachment 

REFERENCES 
345 
representations in non-clinical and clinical groups. Attachment and Human 
Development, 11, 223-263. 
Ballenger, J. (2009). Panic disorder and agoraphobia. In M. Gelder et al. (Eds.), 
New Oxford textbook of psychiatry (second edition, Vol. 1, pp. 750-765) 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Bandura, A., & Walters, R. (1959). Adolescent aggression. New York: Ronald 
Press. 
Barkley, R. (2003). Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. In E. Mash & R. 
Barkley (Eds.), Child psychopathology (second edition, pp. 75-143). New 
York: Guilford. 
Barkley, R. (2005). Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: 
A handbook for 
diagnosis and treatment (third edition). New York: Guilford. 
Barkley, R., Guevremont, A., Anastopoulas, A., & Fletcher, K. (1992). A com- 
parison of three family therapy programs for treating family conflicts in 
adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 60, 450-462. 
Barkus, E., & Murray, R. M. (2010). Substance use in adolescence and 
psychosis: Clarifying the relationship. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 
6, 365-389. 
Barlow, D. H., Allen, L. B., & Basden, S. L. (2007). Psychological treatments for 
panic disorders, phobias, and generalized anxiety disorder. In P. E. Nathan 
& J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments that work (third edition, pp. 
351-394). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Barron (2009a). Barron’s GRE (18th edition). New York: Barron’s Educational 
Series. 
Barron (2009b). Barron’s GRE psychology: Barron’s how to prepare for the GRE 
psychology graduate record examination in psychology (sixth edition). New 
York: Barron’s Educational Series. 
Barrowclough, C., & Lobban, F. (2008). Family intervention. In K. Mueser & D. 
Jeste (Eds.). Clinical handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 214-225). New York: 
Guilford Press. 
Bartlett, P. & Sandland, R. (2007). Mental health law: Policy and practice (third 
edition). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (2000). Effectiveness of psychotherapeutic treatment 
of personality disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 177, 138-143. 
Bateman, 
A. & Fonagy, 
P. (2010a). 
Mentalization-based 
treatment and 
borderline personality disorder. In J. Clarkin, O. Fonagy & G. Gabbard (Eds.). 
Psychodynamic psychotherapy for personality disorders: A clinical handbook 
(pp. 187-208). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Bateman, A., & Fonagy, P. (2010b). Mentalization based treatment for borderline 
personality disorder. World Psychiatry, 9, 11-15. 
Beach, S. R. H., Jones, D. J., & Franklin, K. J. (2009). Marital, family, and 
interpersonal therapies for depression in adults. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen 
(Eds.), Handbook of depression (second edition, pp. 624-641). New York: 
Guilford Press. 
Bebbington, P., & Kuipers, E. (2008). Psychosocial factors. In K. Mueser & D. 
Jeste (Eds.). Clinical handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 74-81). New York: 
Guilford Press. 
Bech, P. (2009). Clinical features of mood disorders and mania. In M. Gelder 
et al. (Eds.), New Oxford textbook of psychiatry (second edition, Vol. 1, 
pp. 632-637). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Beck, A. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New York: 
Meridian. 

346 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Beck, A. (2005). The current state of cognitive therapy: A 40-year retrospective. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 953-959. 
Beck, A. (2008). The evolution of the cognitive model of depression and its 
neurobiological correlates. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
165, 969-977. 
Beck, A., Epstein, N., Harrison, R. P., & Emery, G. (1983). Development of 
the Sociotropy-Autonomy Scale: A measure of personality factors in psycho- 
pathology. Unpublished manuscript, University of Pennsylvania, Philadel- 
phia. 
Beck, A., Freeman, A., & Davis, D. (2003). Cognitive therapy of personality 
disorders (second edition). New York: Guilford Press. 
Beck, A. Rector, N., Stolar, N., & Grant, P. (2011). Schizophrenia: Cognitive 
theory, research and therapy. New York: Guilford. 
Beck, A., Rush, A., Shaw, B., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive therapy of 
depression. New York: Guilford Press. 
Beck, A., & Steer, R. (1991). Beck Scale for Suicide Ideation. San Antonio, TX: 
Psychological Corporation. 
Beck, A., Steer, R., & Brown, G. (1996). Beck Depression Inventory — Second 
edition (BDI-Il). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. 
Becker, D. R. (2008). Vocational rehabilitation. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), 
Clinical handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 261-267). New York: Guilford Press. 
Becker, S. P. (2010). Wilderness therapy: Ethical considerations for mental 
health professionals. Child & Youth Care Forum, 39, 47-61. 
Beinart, H., Kennedy, P., & Llewelyn, S. (2009). Clinical psychology in practice. 
London: British Psychological Society—Blackwell. 
Bellack, A., Mueser, K., Gingerich, S., & Agresta, J. (2004). Social skill training 
for schizophrenia: A step-by-step guide (second edition). New York: Guilford. 
Benjamin, L. T., Jr. (2005). A history of clinical psychology as a profession in 
America (and a glimpse at its future). Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 
1(1), 1-30. 
Bentall, R. (2003). Madness explained: Psychosis and human nature. London: 
Penguin. 
Berle, D., & Starcevic, V. (2005). Thought-action fusion: Review of the literature 
and future directions. Clinical Psychology Review, 25, 263-284. 
Berman, A. (2009). Depression and suicide. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), 
Handbook of depression (second edition, pp. 510-533). New York: Guilford 
Press, 
Bertram, L. (2008). Genetic research in schizophrenia: New tools and future 
perspectives. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34, 806-812. 
Beutler, L., Malik, M., Alimohamed, S., Harwood, T., Talebi, H., Noble, S., et 
al. (2004). Therapist variables. In M. Lambert (Ed.), Bergin and Garfield’s 
handbook of psychotherapy and behaviour change (fifth Edition, pp. 227— 
306). New York: Wiley. 
Bibring, E. (1965). The mechanism of depression. In P. Greenacre (Ed.), 
Affective Disorders (pp. 13-48). New York: International Universities Press. 
Bitran, S., Barlow, D., & Spiegel, D. (2009). Generalized anxiety disorders. In 
M. Gelder et al. (Eds.), New Oxford textbook of psychiatry (second edition, 
Vol. 1, pp. 729-739). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Blackmore, M., Erwin, B., Heimberg, R., Magee, L., & Fresco, D. (2009). Social 
anxiety disorder and specific phobias. In M. Gelder et al. (Eds.), New Oxford 
textbook of psychiatry (second edition, Vol. 1, pp. 739-750). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Blatt, S. (2004). Experiences of depression: Theoretical, clinical and research 
perspectives. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 

REFERENCES 
347 
Bleuler, E. (1911). Dementia praecox or the group of schizophrenias. New York: 
International University Press. 
Bleuler, E. (1924). Textbook of psychiatry. New York: Macmillan. 
Bloch, S., Hanfer, J., Harari, E., & Szmukler, G. (1994). The family in clinical 
psychiatry. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Bogels, S. M., & Brechman-Toussaint, M. L. (2006). Family issues in child 
anxiety: Attachment, family functioning, parental rearing and beliefs. Clinical 
Psychology Review, 26, 834-856. 
Boland, R. J., & Keller, M. B. (2009). Course and outcome of depression. |n H. 
Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (second edition, pp. 
23-43). New York: Guilford Press. 
Bond, G., Drake, R., Mueser, K., & Latimer, E. (2001). Assertive community 
treatment for people with severe mental illness. Critical ingredients and impact 
on patients. Disease Management & Health Outcomes, 9(3), 141-159. 
Bora, E., Fornito, A., Radua, J., Walterfang, M., Seal, M., Wood, S. J., et al. 
(2011). Neuroanatomical 
abnormalities 
in schizophrenia: A multimodal 
voxelwise 
meta-analysis 
and meta-regression 
analysis. 
Schizophrenia 
Research, 127, 46-57. 
Bota, R., Munro, S., Nguyen, C., & Preda, A. (2011). The course of schizophrenia: 
What has been learned from longitudinal studies? In M. Ritsner (Ed.), 
Handbook of schizophrenia spectrum disorders, Volume II. Phenotypic and 
endophenotypic presentations (pp. 281-300). New York: Springer. 
Bowlby, J. (1944). Forty-four juvenile lives: Their characters and homelife. 
International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 25, 1-57. 
Bowlby, J. (1980). Attachment and loss, Volume 3. Loss, sadness and 
depression. New York: Basic Books. 
Boyle, M. (2002). Schizophrenia: A scientific delusion (second Edition). London: 
Routledge. 
Bradley, A. J., & Dinan, T. G. (2010). A systematic review of hypothalamic— 
pituitary—adrenal axis function in schizophrenia: Implications for mortality. 
Journal of Psychopharmacology, 24, 91-118. 
Bradley, C. (1937). The behaviour of children receiving Benzedrine. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 94, 577-585. 
Brandes, M., & Bienvenu, O. J. (2009). Anxiety disorders and personality 
disorders comorbidity. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook 
of anxiety and related disorders (pp. 587-595). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Breggin, P. (1991). Toxic psychiatry. London: Harper Collins. 
Breggin, P. (2001). Talking back to Ritalin: What doctors aren't telling you about 
stimulants and ADHD. New York: Da Capo Press 
Bremner, D. (2005). Brain imaging handbook. New York: Norton. 
Brent, D., & Weersing, R. (2008). Depressive disorders in childhood and 
adolescence. 
In M. Rutter et al. (Eds.), Rutter’s child and adolescent 
psychiatry (fifth edition, pp. 587-612). London: Blackwell. 
Bridge, J. A., lyengar, S., & Salary, C. B. (2007). Clinical response and risk for 
reported suicidal ideation and suicide attempts in paediatric antidepressant 
treatment: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 297, 1683-1696. 
Britton, J. C., & Rauch, S. L. (2009). Neuroanatomy and neuroimaging of anxiety 
disorders. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook of anxiety 
and related disorders (pp. 97-110). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Bronfenbrenner, U., & Morris, P. A. (2006). The bioecological model of human 
development. In R. M. Lerner (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology, Volume 

348 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
1: Theoretical models of human development (sixth Edition, pp. 793-828). 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
Brown, T. (2009). ADHD comorbidities: Handbook for ADHD complications in 
children and adults. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Brown, T., DiNardo, P., & Barlow, D. (1994). Anxiety Disorders Interview 
Schedule for DSM-IV. (ADIS-IV). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Bruch, H. (1973). Eating disorders. New York: Basic Books. 
Bruch, H. (1978). The golden cage: The enigma of anorexia nervosa. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Brunwasser, S. M., Gillham, J. E., & Kim, E. S. (2009). A meta-analytic review 
of the Penn Resiliency Program's effect on depressive symptoms. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77(6), 1042-1054. 
Buchanan, R. W., Kreyenbuhl, J., Kelly, D. L., Noel, J. M., Boggs, D. L., & 
Fischer, B. A. (2010). The 2009 schizophrenia PORT psychopharmacological 
treatment 
recommendations 
and summary 
statements. 
Schizophrenia 
Bulletin, 36, 71-93. 
Busch, F. N., Milrod, B. L., & Shear, K. (2010). Psychodynamic concepts of 
anxiety. In D. J. Stein, E. Hollander, & B. O. Rothbaum (Eds.), Textbook of 
anxiety disorders (second edition, pp. 117-128). Arlington, VA: American 
Psychiatric Publishing. 
Butler, A., Chapman, J., Forman, E., & Beck, A. (2006). The empirical status 
of cognitive-behavioural 
therapy: A review of meta-analyses. 
Clinical 
Psychology Review, 36, 17-31. 
Byrne, M., Carr, A., & Clarke, M. (2004). The efficacy of couples based 
interventions for panic disorder with agoraphobia. Journal of Family Therapy, 
26(2), 105-125. 
Cain, 
D., & Seeman, 
J. (2001). Humanistic psychotherapies: Handbook 
of research 
and practice. 
Washington, 
DC: American 
Psychological 
Association. 
Caligor, E. (2010). An object relations model of personality and personality 
pathology. In J. Clarkin, O. Fonagy, & G. Gabbard (Eds.), Psychodynamic 
psychotherapy for personality disorders: A clinical handbook (pp. 3-36). 
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Campbell, D., Draper, R., & Crutchley, E. (1991). The Milan systemic approach 
to family therapy. In A. Gurman & D. Kniskern (Eds.), Handbook of family 
therapy (Vol. Il, pp. 325-362). New York: Brunner Mazel. 
Carlson, G. A., & Cantwell, D. P. (1980). Unmasking masked depression in 
children and adolescents. American Journal of Psychiatry, 137(4), 445— 
449, 
Carney, S., Cowen, P., Geddes, J., Goodwin, G., Rogers, R., Dearness, K., et al. 
(2003). Efficacy and safety of electroconvulsive therapy in depressive disorders: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet, 361(9360), 799-808. 
Carpenter, L., Philip, N., & O'Riordan, J. (2009). Advances in neurostimulation 
for depression: Electroconvulsive therapy, transcranial magnetic stimulation, 
vagus nerve stimulation and deep brain stimulation. In T. L. Schwartz & 
T. J. Petersen (Eds.), Depression: Treatment strategies and management 
(second edition, pp. 166-185). London: Inform Healthcare 
Carr, A. (2000). Clinical psychology in Ireland, Volume 1: Empirical studies of 
professional practice. Lampeter, UK: Edwin Mellen Press. 
Carr, A. (2006a). Handbook of child and adolescent clinical psychology: A 
contextual approach (second edition). London: Routledge. 
Carr, A. (2006b). Family therapy: Concepts, process and practice (second 
edition). Chichester, UK: Wiley, 

REFERENCES 
349 
Carr, A. (2009a). What works with children, adolescents and adults? A review of 
research on the effectiveness of psychotherapy. London: Routledge. 
Carr, A. (2009b). The effectiveness of family therapy and systemic interventions 
for child-focused problems. Journal of Family Therapy, 31, 3-45. 
Carr, A. (2009c). The effectiveness of family therapy and systemic interventions 
for adult-focused problems. Journal of Family Therapy, 31, 46-74. 
Carr, A. (2011). Positive psychology: The science of happiness and human 
strengths (second edition). London: Routledge. 
Carr, A., & McNulty, M. (2006). Handbook of adult clinical psychology: An 
evidence based practice approach. London: Brunner-Routledge. 
Carr, A., O'Reilly, G., Walsh, P., & McEvoy, J. (2007). Handbook of intellectual 
disability and clinical psychology practice. London; Brunner-Routledge. 
Casey, R. J., & Berman, J. S. (1985). The outcome of psychotherapy with 
children. Psychological Bulletin, 98, 388-400. 
Caspi, A., Hariri, A., Holmes, A., Uher, R., & Moffitt, T. (2010). Genetic sensitivity 
to the environment: The case of the serotonin transporter gene and its 
implications for studying complex diseases and traits. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 167, 509-527. 
Caspi, A., McClay, J., Moffitt, T., Mill, J., Martin, J., Craig, |., et al. (2002). Role of 
genotype in the cycle of violence in maltreated children. Science, 297, 851-854. 
Caspi, O. (2004). How good are we? A meta-analytic study of effect sizes in 
medicine. Dissertation Abstracts International, Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering, 65(5-B), 2607. 
Cassidy, J., & Shaver, P. (2008). Handbook of attachment (second edition). 
New York: Guilford. 
Cassin, S., & von Ranson, K. M. (2005). Personality and eating disorders: A 
decade in review. Clinical Psychology Review, 25, 895-916. 
Castonguay, L., Grosse Holtforth, M., Coombs, M., Beberman, R., Kakouros, A., 
Boswell, J., et al. (2006). Relationship factors in treating dysphoric disorders. 
In L. Castonguay & L. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of therapeutic change that 
work (pp. 65-82). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Catalano, R. F., Haggerty, K. P., Hawkins, J. D., & Elgin, J. (2011). Prevention 
of substance use and substance use disorders: Role of risk and protective 
factors. In Y. Kaminer & K. C. Winters (Eds.), Clinical manual of adolescent 
substance abuse treatment (pp. 25-63). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric 
Publishing. 
Chambers, R. A., Taylor, J. R., & Potenza, M. N. (2003). Developmental 
neurocircuitry of motivation in adolescence: A critical period of addiction 
vulnerability. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 1041-1052. 
Chan, R., Di, X., McAlonan, G. M., & Gong, Q. (2011). Brain anatomical 
abnormalities in high-risk individuals, first-episode, and chronic schizophrenia: 
An activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis of illness progression. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37, 177-188. 
Cherkasova, M. V., & Hechtman, L. (2009). Neuroimaging in attention-deficit 
hyperactivity disorder: Beyond the frontostriatal circuitry. Canadian Journal 
of Psychiatry, 54(10), 651-664. 
Cheshire, K., & Pilgrim, D. (2004). A short introduction to clinical psychology. 
London: Sage. 
Chess, S., & Thomas, A. (1995). Temperament in clinical practice. New York: 
Guilford. 
Cheung, S. (2009). Solution-focused brief therapy. In J. Bray & M. Stanton 
(Eds.), The Wiley-Blackwell handbook of family psychology (pp. 212-225). 
Chichester, UK: Wiley—Blackwell. 

350 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
Chiles, J., Lambert, M., & Hatch, A. (1999). The impact of psychological 
interventions 
on medical 
cost offset: A meta-analytic 
review. 
Clinical 
Psychology: Science and Practice, 6, 204—220. 
Chung, T., & Martin, C. S. (2011). Prevalence and clinical course of adolescent 
substance use and substance use disorders. In Y. Kaminer & K. C. Winters 
(Eds.), Clinical manual of adolescent substance abuse treatment (pp. 1-23). 
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Clare, L. (1995). Successful applicants for clinical training: A descriptive profile 
of one trainee cohort. Clinical Psychology Forum, 77, 31-34. 
Clark, D., & Beck, A. (2010). Cognitive theory and therapy of anxiety and 
depression: Convergence with neurobiological findings. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 14(9), 418-424. 
Clark, D. A., & Beck, A. T. (2010a). Cognitive therapy of anxiety disorders. New 
York: Guilford Press. 
Clark, D. A., & Beck, A. T. (2010b). Cognitive theory and therapy of anxiety and 
depression: Convergence with neurobiological findings. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 14(9), 418-424. 
Clark, L. A., Simms, L. J., Wu, K. D., & Casillas, A. (2008). Schedule for 
Nonadaptive and Adaptive Personality — Second edition. 
Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. 
Clark, L. A., & Watson, D. (2008). Temperament: An organizing paradigm for 
trait psychology. In O. John, R. Robins & L. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of 
personality psychology: Theory and research (third edition, pp. 265-286). 
New York: Guilford Press. 
Clarkin, J., & Levy, K. (2004). The influence of client variables on psychotherapy. 
In M. Lambert (Ed.), Bergin and Garfield’s handbook of psychotherapy and 
behaviour change (fifth edition, pp. 194-226). New York: Wiley. 
Cleckley, H. (1941). The mask of sanity. St Louis, MO: Mosby Medical Library. 
Cloninger, C., Svrakic, D. & Przybeck, T. (1993). A psychobiological model of 
temperament and character. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50, 975-990. 
Cloward, R., & Ohlin, L. (1960). Delinquency and opportunity. Glencoe, IL: Free 
Press. 
Coccaro, E. F., & Siever, L. J. (2009). Neurobiology. In J. Oldham, A. Skodol, 
& D, Bender (Eds.), Essentials of personality disorders (pp. 103-122). 
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Cochrane, A. (1972). Effectiveness and efficiency: Random reflections on health 
services. London: Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust. 
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioural sciences (second 
edition). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Colapinto, J. (1991). Structural family therapy. In A. Gurman & D. Kniskern (Eds.), 
Handbook of family therapy (Vol. ll, pp. 417-443). New York: Brunner/Mazel. 
Coldwell, C., & Bender, W. (2007). The effectiveness of assertive community 
treatment for homeless populations with severe mental illness: A meta- 
analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 393-399. 
Collier, D., & Treasure, J. (2004). The aetiology of eating disorders. British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 185, 363-365. 
Colligan, R., Morey, L., & Offord, K. (1994), MMPI/MMPI-2 personality disorder 
scales: Contemporary norms for adults and adolescents. Journal of Clinical 
Psychology, 50, 168-200. 
Combrinck-Graham, L. (1986). Family treatment 
for childhood aes disorders. 
Family Therapy Collections, 18, 22-30. 
Conklin, C. A., & Tiffany, S. T. (2002). Applying extinction research and theory to 
cue-exposure addiction treatments. Addiction, 97, 155—167. 

REFERENCES 
351 
Conners, C. (1997). Conners’ Rating Scales: Revised Technical Manual. North 
Tonawanda, NY: Multihealth Systems. 
Consensus Development Panel (2000). National Institutes of Health Consensus 
Development Conference statement: Diagnosis and treatment of attention- 
deficit/nyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Journal of the American Academy of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 39(2), 182-193. 
Cook, J., & Razzano, 
L. (2005). Evidence-based 
practices 
in supported 
employment. In C. Stout & R. Hayes (Eds.), The evidence-based practice: 
Methods, models, and tools for mental health professionals (pp. 10-30). 
Hoboken, Nu: Wiley. 
Cooper, J., Kendall, R., Gurland, B., Sharp, L., Copeland, J., & Simon, R. (1972). 
Psychiatric diagnosis in New York and London. Maudsley Monograph Series 
No. 20. London: Oxford University Press. 
Corrigan, P. W., Salzer, M., Ralph, R. O., Sangster, Y., & Keck, L. (2004). 
Examining 
the factor 
structure 
of the Recovery Assessment 
Scale. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 30, 1035-1041. 
Costa, P. & Widiger, T. (1994). Personality disorders and the five factor model 
of personality. Washington, DC: APA. 
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). Revised NEO Personality Inventory 
(NEOPI-R) and NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) professional manual. 
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources. 
Costello, E. J., Mustillo, S., Keeler, G., & Angold, A. (2004). Prevalence of 
psychiatric disorders in childhood and adolescence. In B. L. Levin, J. Petrila, 
& K. D. Hennessy (Eds.), Mental health services: A public health perspective 
(second edition, pp. 111-128). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Crane, D. R. (2011). Does family therapy reduce health care costs for more than 
the identified patient? Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 16, 3-4. 
Crick, N., & Dodge, K. (1994). A review and reformulation of social information 
processing mechanisms 
in children’s 
social adjustment. Psychological 
Bulletin, 115, 74-101. 
Crisp, A. (1983). Anorexia nervosa. British Medical Journal, 287, 855-858. 
Crome, |., Ghodse, H., Gilvarry, E., & McArdle, P. (2004). Young people and 
substance misuse. London: Gaskell. 
Crosnoe, R., & Cavanagh, S. E. (2010). Families with children and adolescents: 
A review, critique, and future agenda. Journal of Marriage and Family, 72(3), 
594-611. 
Crow, T. (1985). The two syndrome concept: Origins and current status. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 9, 471-486. 
Cuijpers, P., Donker, T., van Straten, A., Li, J., & Andersson, G. (2010). Is guided 
self-help as effective as face-to-face psychotherapy for depression and 
anxiety disorders? A systematic review and meta-analysis of comparative 
outcome studies. Psychological Medicine, 40(12), 1943-1957. 
Cuijpers, P., Mufioz, R. F., Clarke, G. N., & Lewinsohn, P. M. (2009a). Psycho- 
educational treatment and prevention of depression: The “coping with 
depression” course thirty years later. Clinical Psychology Review, 29, 449- 
458. 
Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., Andersson, G., & van Oppen, P. (2008). Psycho- 
therapy for depression in adults: A meta-analysis of comparative outcome 
studies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76, 909-922. 
Cuijpers, P., van Straten, A., Warmerdam, L., & Andersson, G. (2009b). Psycho- 
therapy versus the combination of psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy in 
the treatment of depression: A meta-analysis. Depression and Anxiety, 26, 
279-288. 

352 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Cunningham-Owens, D., & Johnstone, E. (2009). Treatment and management 
of schizophrenia. In M. Geider et 
al. (Eds.), New Oxford textbook 
of psychiatry 
(second edition, Vol. 1, pp. 578-595). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Currin, L., Schmidt, U., Treasure, J., & Jick, H. (2005). Time trends in eating 
disorder incidence. British Journal of Psychiatry, 186, 132-135. 
Dadds, M., Heard, P., & Rapee, R. (1992). The role of family intervention in the 
treatment of child anxiety disorders: Some preliminary findings. Behaviour 
Change, 9, 171-177. 
Dakof, G. A., Godley, S. H., & Smith, J. E. (2011). The adolescent community 
reinforcement approach and multidimensional family therapy: Addressing 
relapse during treatment. In Y. Kaminer & K. C. Winters (Eds.), Clinical 
manual of adolescent substance abuse treatment (pp. 239-268). Arlington, 
VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Daley, A., Jolly, K., & MacArthur, C. (2009). The effectiveness of exercise in 
the management of post-natal depression: Systematic review and meta- 
analysis. Family Practice, 26, 154-162. 
Dare, C. (1985). The family therapy of anorexia nervosa. Journal of Psychiatric 
Research, 19, 435-453. 
Dattilio, F. (2009). Cognitive-behavioural therapy with couples and families: A 
comprehensive guide for clinicians. New York: Guilford. 
Davidson, R. J., Pizzagalli, D. A., & Nitschke, J. B. (2009). Representation 
and regulation 
of emotion 
in depression: Perspectives from affective 
neuroscience. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression 
(second edition, pp. 218-248). New York: Guilford Press. 
Dawson, G., Ashman, S. B., & Carver, L. J. (2000). The role of early experience 
in shaping behavioural and brain development and its implications for social 
policy. Development and Psychopathology, 12, 695-712. 
Deault, 
L. C. (2010). A systematic review of parenting in relation to the 
development of comorbidities and functional impairments in children with 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Child Psychiatry and Human 
Development, 41(2), 168-192. 
Degnan, K. A., Almas, A. N., & Fox, N. A. (2010). Temperament and the 
environment in the etiology of childhood anxiety. Journal of Child Psychology 
and Psychiatry, 51, 497-517. 
DeLuca, N. L., Moser, L. L., & Bond, G. R. (2008). Assertive community 
treatment. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.). Clinical handbook of schizophrenia 
(pp. 329-338). New York: Guilford Press. 
Dennis, M. (1998), Global Appraisal of Individual Needs (GAIN) manual: Adminis- 
tration, scoring and interpretation. Bloomington, IL: Lighthouse Publications. 
Dent, M. F., & Bremner, J. D. (2009). Pharmacotherapy for posttraumatic stress 
disorder and other trauma-related disorders. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein 
(Eds.), Oxford handbook of anxiety and related disorders (pp. 405-416). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
Department of Health (2007). Drug misuse and dependence: UK guidelines on 
clinical management. London: Department of Health. 
DePauw, S., & Mervielde, |. (2010). Temperament, personality and developmental 
psychopathology: A review based on the conceptual dimensions underlying 
childhood traits. Child Psychiatry and Human Development, 41, 313-329. 
De Raad, B., & Perugini, M. (2002). Big five assessment. Bern, Switzerland: 
Hogrefe & Huber. 
DeSilva, P., Rachman, S., & Seligman, M. (1977). Prepared phobias and 
obsessions: Therapeutic outcome. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 15, 
65-77. 

REFERENCES 
353 
Diamond, G. (2005). Attachment-based family therapy for depressed and 
anxious adolescents. In J. Lebow (Ed.), Handbook of clinical family therapy 
(pp. 17-41). Hoboken, Nu: Wiley. 
DiClemente, C. (2003). Addiction and change. New York: Guilford. 
DiMaggio, C., & Galea, S. (2006). The behavioural consequences of terrorism: 
A meta-analysis. Academy of Emergency Medicine, 13, 559-566. 
Dishion, T., & Dodge, K. (2005). Peer contagion in interventions for children and 
adolescents: Moving towards an understanding of the ecology and dynamics 
of change. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 33, 395-400. 
Dixon, L. B., Dickerson, F., Bellack, A. S., Bennett, M., Dickinson, D., & 
Goldberg, R. (2010). The 2009 schizophrenia PORT psychosocial treatment 
recommendations and summary statements. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36, 
48-70. 
Dodge, K. (2011). Social information processing patterns as mediators of the 
interaction between genetic factors and life experiences in the development 
of aggressive behaviour. 
In P. Shaver & M. Mikulincer (Eds.), Human 
aggression and violence: Causes, manifestations, and consequences (pp. 
165-185). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Dodge, K., Coie, J., & Lynam, D. (2006). Aggression and antisocial behaviour 
in youth. In N. Eisenberg (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology, Volume 3: 
Social, emotional and personality development (sixth edition, pp. 719-788). 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
Dodge, K. A., & Pettit, G. S. (2003). A biopsychosocial model of the development 
of chronic conduct problems in adolescence. Developmental Psychology, 
39, 349-371. 
Dolder, C. R. (2008). Side effects of antipsychotics. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste 
(Eds.), Clinical handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 168-177). New York: Guilford 
Press. 
Dougherty, L. R., Klein, D. N., Olino, T. M., & Laptook, R. S. (2008). Depression 
in children and adolescents. In J. Hunsley & E. J. Mash (Eds.), A guide to 
assessments that work (pp. 69-95). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Douglas, K. S., Webster, C. D., Hart, S. D., Eaves, D., & Ogloff, J. R. P. (Eds.) 
(2001). HCR-20: Violence risk management companion guide. Vancouver, 
Canada/Tampa, FL: Mental Health, Law, and Policy Institute, Simon Fraser 
University/Department of Mental Health Law & Policy, University of South 
Florida. 
Douglas, V. (1983). Attention and cognitive problems. In M. Rutter (Ed.), 
Developmental neuropsychiatry (pp. 280-329). New York: Guilford. 
Downar, J., & Kapur, S. (2008). Biological theories. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste 
(Eds.), Clinical handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 25-34). New York: Guilford 
Press. 
Dozier, 
M., Stovall-McClough, 
K., & Albus, 
K. (2008). Attachment and 
psychopathology in adulthood. In J. Cassidy & P. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook 
of attachment (second edition, pp. 718-744). New York: Guilford. 
Driessen, E., Cuijpers, P., de Maat, S., Abbass, A. A., de Jonghe, F. & Dekker, 
J. (2010). The efficacy of short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy for 
depression: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 25-36. 
Drummond, D., Tiffany, S., Glautier, S. & Remingron, B. (1995). Addictive 
behaviour: Cue exposure theory and practice. Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
Dugas, M. J., Buhr, K., & Ladoucer, R. (2004). The role of intolerance of 
uncertainty in etiology and maintenance. In R. Heimberg, C. Turk, & D. 
Mennin (Eds), Generalized anxiety disorder: Advances in research and 
practice (pp. 143-163). New York: Guilford Press. 

354 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Duggan, C., Huband, N., & Smailagic, N. (2008). The use of pharmacological 
treatments for people with personality disorder: A systematic review of 
randomized controlled trials. Personality and Mental Health, 2, 119-170. 
Duggan, C., Huband, N., Smailagic, N., Ferriter, M., & Adams, C. (2007). The 
use of psychological treatments for people with personality disorder: A 
systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Personality and Mental 
Health, 1, 95-125. 
Duvall, J., & Béres, L. (2011). Innovations in narrative therapy: Connecting 
practice, training, and research. New York: Norton. 
Edens, J. F., Campbell, J. S., & Weir, J. M. (2007). Youth psychopathy and 
criminal recidivism: A meta-analysis of the psychopathy checklist measures. 
Law and Human Behaviour, 31(1), 53-75. 
Edvardsen, J., Torgersen, S., Raysamb, E., Lygren, S., Skre, |., Onstad, S., et 
al. (2008). Heritability of bipolar spectrum disorders. Unity or heterogeneity? 
Journal of Affective Disorders, 106, 229-240. 
Egan, S. J., Wade, T. D., & Shafran, R. (2011). Perfectionism as a transdiagnostic 
process: A clinical review. Clinical Psychology Review, 31, 203-212. 
Egger, J., Carter, C., Graham, P., Gumley, D., & Soothill, J. (1985). Controlied trial 
of oligoantigenic treatment in the hyperkinetic syndrome. Lancet, i, 540-545. 
Ehlers, A. (2009). Post-traumatic stress disorder. In M. Gelder et al. (Eds.), New 
Oxford textbook of psychiatry (second edition, Vol. 1, pp. 700-713). Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Eisler, |. (2005). The empirical and theoretical base of family therapy and 
multiple family day therapy for adolescent anorexia nervosa. Journal of 
Family Therapy, 27, 104—113. 
Ellenberger, H. (1970). The discovery of the unconscious. New York: Basic 
Books. 
Elliott, R., Greenberg, L., & Lietaer, G. (2004). Research on experiential psy- 
chotherapies. In M. Lambert (Ed.), Bergin and Garfield’s handbook of psy- 
chotherapy and behaviour change (fifth edition, pp. 493-539). New York: Wiley. 
Elliman, L. M., & Cannon, T. D. (2008). Environmental pre- and perinatal 
influences in aetiology. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical handbook of 
schizophrenia (pp. 65-73). New York: Guilford Press. 
Emmelkamp, P. (1982). Phobic and obsessive compulsive disorder. New York: 
Plenum. 
Erikson, E. (1950). Childhood and society. New York: Norton. 
Erikson, E. (1968). /dentity, youth and crisis. New York: Norton. 
Eyler, L. T. (2008). Brain imaging. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical 
handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 35-43). New York: Guilford Press. 
Eysenck, H. (1979). The conditioning model of neurosis. Behavioural and Brain 
Sciences, 2, 155-199. 
Ezriel, H. (1952). Notes on psychoanalytic group therapy: II. Interpretation. 
Research Psychiatry, 15, 119. 
Fairburn, C. (2008). Cogntive behaviour therapy and eating disorders. London: 
Guilford. 
Fairburn, C., Cooper, Z., & O'Connor, E. (2008). The Eating Disorder Examination 
(Edition 16.0D). In C. Fairburn (Ed.), Cognitive behaviour therapy and eating 
disorders (pp. 265-308). London: Guilford. 
Falloon, |., Laporta, M., Fadden, G., & Graham-Hole, V. (1993). Managing stress 
in families. London: Routledge. 
Faraone, S., Biederman, J., & Mick, E. (2006). The age dependent decline of 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: A meta-analysis of follow-up studies. 
Psychological Medicine, 36, 159-165. 

REFERENCES 
355 
Farmer, A., & McGuffin, P. (1989). The classification of depressions: Contem- 
porary confusions revisited. British Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 437-443. 
Farrington, 
D. (1995). The twelfth 
Jack Tizard 
Memorial 
Lecture. 
The 
development of offending and antisocial behaviour from childhood: Key 
findings of the Cambridge Study of Delinquent Development. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry, 36, 929-964. 
Fatemi, S. H., & Folsom, T. D. (2009). The neurodevelopmental hypothesis of 
schizophrenia, revisited. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 35, 528-548. 
Feingold, B. (1975). Hyperkinesis and learning difficulties linked to artificial food 
flavours and colours. American Journal of Nursing, 75, 797-803. 
Ferguson, 
C. (2010). Genetic contributions 
to antisocial 
personality and 
behaviour: A meta-analytic review from an evolutionary perspective. Journal 
of Social Psychology, 150, 160-180. 
Fernandez-Alderez, H., Clarkin, J., delCarmen Salgueiro, M., & Critchfield, K. 
(2006). Participant factors in treating personality disorders. In L. Castonguay 
& L. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of therapeutic change that work (pp. 203-218). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Fett, A. J., Viechtbauer, W., Dominguez, M., Penn, D. L., van Os, J., & 
Krabbendam, 
L. (2011). The relationship between neurocognition and 
social cognition with functional outcomes in schizophrenia: A meta-analysis. 
Neuroscience and Biobehavioural Reviews, 35, 573-588. 
First, M., Spitzer, R., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. (1996). Structured Clinical 
Interview for DSM-IV Axis | Disorders, 
Clinician 
Version 
(SCID-CV). 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press. 
First, M., Spitzer, R., Gibbon M., & Williams, J. (1997). Structured Clinical 
Interview for DSM-IV Personality Disorders (SCID-II). Washington, DC: 
American Psychiatric Press. 
Fleming, |. & Steen, L. (2004). Supervision in clinical psychology: Theory, 
practice and perspectives. London: Brunner Routledge. 
Follette, W., & Greenberg, L. (2006). Technique factors in treating dysphoric 
disorders. In L. Castonguay & L. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of therapeutic 
change that work (pp. 83-110). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Fonagy, P., & Target, M. (1994). The efficacy of psychoanalysis for children 
with disruptive disorders. Journal of the American Academy for Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 33, 45-55. 
Forgatch, M.S., & Patterson, G. R. (2010). Parent management training—Oregon 
model: An intervention for antisocial behaviour in children and adolescents. 
In J. R. Weisz & A. E. Kazdin (Eds.), Evidence-based psychotherapies for 
children and adolescents (second edition, pp. 159-177). New York: Guilford 
Press. 
Fournier, J., DeRubeis, R., Hollon, S., Dimidjian, S., Amsterdam, J., & Shelton, 
R. (2010). Antidepressant drug effects and depression severity. Journal 
of the American Medical Association, 303, 47-53. 
Frank, J., & Frank, J. (1991). Persuasion and healing: A comparative study of 
psychotherapy (third edition). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Franklin, M. E., & Foa, E. B. (2007). Cognitive behavioural treatment of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder. In P. E. Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A 
guide to treatments that work (third edition, pp. 431-446). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Franko, D. L., & Keel, P. K. (2006). Suicidality in eating disorders: Occurrence, cor- 
relates, and clinical implications. Clinical Psychology Review, 26(6), 769-782. 
Freeman, A., Felgoise, S., Nezu, A., Nezu, C., & Reinecke, M. (2005). 
Encyclopaedia of cognitive behaviour therapy. New York: Plenum. 

356 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Freud, S. (1900). The interpretation of dreams (trans. J. Strachey). London: 
Hogarth Press. 
Freud, S. (1901). Psychopathology of everyday life (trans. A. Brill). London: 
Fisher Unwin. 
; 
Freud, S. (1908). Character and anal eroticism. In J. Strachey (Ed. & trans.), 
The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud 
(Vol. 9, pp. 167-175). London: Hogarth Press. 
Freud, S. (1909a). The analysis of a phobia in a five year old boy. In J. Strachey 
(Ed. & trans.). The standard edition of the complete works of Sigmund Freud 
(Vol. 10, pp. 1-147). London: Hogarth Press. 
Freud, S. (1909b). Notes upon a case of obsessional neurosis. In J. Strachey 
(Ed. & trans). The standard edition of the complete works of Sigmund Freud 
(Vol. 10, pp. 151-220). London: Hogarth Press. 
Freud, S. (1911). Psycho-analytic notes on an autobiographical account of a 
case of paranoia (dementia paranoides). In J. Strachey (Ed. & trans.), The 
standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 
12, pp. 1-82). London: Hogarth Press. 
Freud, S. (1917). Mourning and melancholia. 
In J. Strachey (Ed & trans.). 
The standard edition of the complete works of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 14, 
pp. 237-258). London: Hogarth Press. 
Frewen, P. A., Dozois, D. J. A., & Lanius, R. A. (2008a). Neuroimaging studies 
of psychological interventions for mood and anxiety disorders: Empirical and 
methodological review. Clinical Psychology Review, 28, 228-246. 
Frewen, P. A., Dozois, D. A., Neufeld, R. W. J., & Lanius, R. A. (2008b). Meta- 
analysis of alexithymia in posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Trauma 
and Stress, 21, 243-246. 
Frichter, M., & Pirke, K. (1995). Starvation models and eating disorders. In G. 
Szmukler, C. Dare, & J. Treasure (Eds.), Handbook of eating disorders (pp. 
83-108). Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
Friedman, M. J. (2009). Phenomenology of posttraumatic stress disorder and 
acute stress disorder. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook 
of anxiety and related disorders (pp. 65-72). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Frischer, M., McArdle, P., & Crome, |. (2004). The epidemiology of substance 
misuse in young people. In |. Crome et al. (Eds.}, Young people and 
substance misuse (pp. 31-50). London: Gaskell. 
Furr, J. M., Tiwari, S., Suveg, C., & Kendall, P. C. (2009). Anxiety disorders 
in children and adolescents. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford 
handbook of anxiety and related disorders (pp. 636-656). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Gabbard, G. O., Lazar, S. G., Hornberger, J., & Spiegel, D. (1997). The economic 
impact of psychotherapy: A review. American Journal of Psychiatry, 154, 
147-155. 
Garber, J. (2010). Vulnerability to depression in childhood and adolescence. 
In R. Ingram and J. Price 
(Eds.), 
Vulnerability to psychopathology: 
Risk across the lifespan (second edition, pp. 189-247). New York: Guilford 
Press. 
Gardner, M., Barajas, R. G., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (2010). Neighborhood influences 
on substance use etiology: Is where you live important? In L. Scheier (Ed.), 
Handbook of drug use etiology: Theory, methods, and empirical findings (pp. 
423-441). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Garner, D. (2005). Eating Disorder Inventory, third edition (EDI-3). Odessa, FL: 
Psychological Assessment Resources. 
—_

REFERENCES 
357 
Gelernter, J., & Stein, M. B. (2009). Heritability and genetics of anxiety disorders. 
In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook of anxiety and related 
disorders (pp. 87-96). New York:-Oxford University Press. 
Gillham, J. E., Brunwasser, S. M., Freres, D. R., Abela, J. R. Z., & Hankin, B. 
L. (2008). Preventing depression in early adolescence: The Penn Resiliency 
Program. In J. Abela & B. Hankin (eds.), Handbook of depression in children 
and adolescents (pp. 309-322). New York: Guilford. 
Gitlin, M. (2009). Pharmcotherapy and other somatic treatments for depression. 
In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (second edition, 
pp. 554—585). New York: Guilford Press. 
Glass, V. (1976). Primary, secondary and meta-analysis of research. Educational 
Researcher, 5, 3-8. 
Glassman, A. H., & Miller, G. E. (2007). Where there is depression, there is 
inflammation... sometimes! Biological Psychiatry, 62, 280-281. 
Glatt, S. J. (2008). Genetics. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical handbook 
of schizophrenia (pp. 55-64). New York: Guilford Press. 
Godley, S. H., Meyers, R. J., Smith, J. E., Karvinen, T., Titus, J. C., Godley, 
M. D., et al. (2006). The adolescent community reinforcement approach 
for adolescent cannabis users. Cannabis Youth Treatment Series, Vol. 4. 
Rockville, MD: Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, Substance Abuse 
and Mental Health Services Administration. 
Golden, T., Gaynes, B., Ekstrom, D., Hamer, R., Jacobsen, F., Suppes, T., et 
al. (2005). The efficacy of light therapy in the treatment of mood disorders: A 
review and meta-analysis of the evidence. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
162, 656-662. 
Goodman, R. (2001). Psychometric properties of the Strengths and Difficulties 
Questionnaire (SDQ). Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 40, 1337-1345. 
Goodman, R., Ford, T., Richards, H., Gatward, R., & Meltzer, H. (2000). The 
Development and Well-Being Assessment: Description and initial validation 
of an integrated assessment of child and adolescent psychopathology. 
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 41, 645-655. 
Goodman, S. H., & Brand, S. R. (2009). Depression and early adverse 
experiences. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression 
(second edition, pp. 249-274). New York: Guilford Press. 
Gotlib, H., & Hammen, C. (2009). Handbook of depression (second edition). 
New York: Guilford Press. 
Gottdiener, W. (2006). Individual psychodynamic psychotherapy of schizo- 
phrenia: Empirical evidence for the practicing clinician. Psychoanalytic 
Psychology, 23, 583-589. 
Gregory, R. J., Schwer Canning, S., Lee, T. W., & Wise, J. C. (2004). Cognitive 
bibliotherapy for depression: A meta-analysis. Professional Psychology: 
Research and Practice, 35, 275-280. 
Griffin, K. 
W. (2010). The epidemiology of substance use among adolescents and 
young adults: A developmental perspective. In L. Scheier (Ed.), Handbook 
of drug use etiology: Theory, methods, and empirical findings (pp. 73-92). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Griffin, K. W., & Botvin, G. J. (2010). Evidence-based interventions for preventing 
substance use disorders in adolescents. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric 
Clinics of North America, 19(3), 505-526. 
Grilo, C. M., & McGlashan, T. H. (2009). Course and outcome. In J. Oldham, A. 
Skodol, & D. Bender (Eds.), Essentials of personality disorders (pp. 63-82). 
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 

358 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
Grissom, R. (1996). The magical number. 7 + .2: Meta-meta-analysis of the 
probability of superior outcome in comparisons involving therapy, placebo, 
and control. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 973-982. 
Groth-Marnat, G., & Edkins, G. (1996). Professional psychologists in general 
health care settings: A review of financial efficacy of direct treatment inter- 
ventions. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 27, 161-174. 
Grunberg, N. E., Berger, S. S., & Hamilton, K. R. (2011). Stress and drug use. In 
R. J. Contrada & A. Baum (Eds.), The handbook of stress science: Biology, 
psychology, and health (pp. 287-300). New York: Springer. 
Gull, W. (1874). Anorexia nervosa (apesia hysterica, anorexia hysterica). 
Transactions of the Clinical Society of London, 7, 22-28. 
Gunn, M., & Wheat, K. (2009). General principles of law relating to people with 
mental disorder. In M. Gelder et al. (Eds.), New Oxford textbook of psychiatry 
(second edition, Vol. 2, pp. 1895—1908). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Gunter, T. D., Vaughn, M. G., & Philibert, R. A. (2010). Behavioural genetics 
in antisocial spectrum disorders and psychopathy: A review of the recent 
literature. Behavioural Sciences & the Law, 28, 148-173. 
Guzzetta, F., & di Girolamo, G. (2009). Epidemiology of personality disorders. In 
M. Gelder et al. (Eds.), New Oxford textbook of psychiatry (second edition, 
Vol. 1, pp. 881-886). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Haaga, D., Hall, S., & Haas, A. (2006). Participant factors in treating substance 
use disorders. In L. Castonguay & L. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of therapeutic 
change that work (pp. 275-292). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Haeffel, G., Gibb, B., Metalsky, G., Alloy, L., Abramson, L., & Hankin, B. (2008). 
Measuring cognitive vulnerability to depression: Development and validation 
of the cognitive style questionnaire. Clinical Psychology Review, 28(5), 824— 
836. 
Hafner, H., & an der Heiden, W. (2008). Course and outcome. In K. Mueser & D. 
Jeste (Eds.), Clinical handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 100-116). New York: 
Guilford Press. 
Hall, J., & Llewelyn, S. (2006). What is clinical psychology? (fourth edition). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Hall, J., Olabi, B., Lawrie, S. M., & Mcintosh, A. M. (2010). Hippocampal and 
amygdala volumes in borderline personality disorder: A meta-analysis of mag- 
netic resonance imaging studies. Personality and Mental Health, 4, 172-179. 
Halmi, K. A. (2010). Psychological comorbidity of eating disorders. In W. S. 
Agras (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of eating disorders (pp. 292-303). New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
Hamilton, J. P., Furman, D. J., & Gotlib, |. H. (2011). The neural foundations of 
major depression: Classical approaches and new frontiers. In F. F. Lopez- 
Munoz & C. Alamo (Eds.), Neurobiology of depression. Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press. 
Hamilton, M. (1967). Development of a rating scale for primary depressive 
illness. British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 6, 278-296. 
Hammen, C. (2009). Children of depressed parents. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen 
(Eds.), Handbook of depression (second edition, pp. 275-297). New York: 
Guilford Press. 
Hammen, C., Bistricky, S., & Ingram, R. (2010). Vulnerability to depression in 
adulthood. In R. Ingram and J. Price (Eds.), Vulnerability to psychopathology: 
Risk across the lifespan (second edition, pp. 248-281). New York: Guilford 
Press. 
Hankin, B., & Abele, J. (2005). Developmental psychopathology: A vulnerability— 
stress perspective. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

REFERENCES 
359 
Hansen, N., Lambert, M., & Forman, E. (2002). The psychotherapy dose— 
response effect and its implications for treatment delivery services. Clinical 
Psychology Science and Practice, 9, 329-343. 
Hare, R. D. (2003). Manual for the Revised Psychopathy Checklist (second 
edition). Toronto, Canada: Multi-Health Systems. 
Hargrove, D. S. (2009). Psychotherapy based on Bowen family systems theory. 
In J. Bray & M. Stanton (Eds.), The Wiley—Blackwell handbook of family 
psychology (pp. 286-299). Chichester, UK: Wiley—Blackwell. 
Harkness, K. L., & Lumley, M. N. (2008). Child abuse and neglect and the 
development of depression in children and adolescents. In J. Abela & B. 
Hankin (Eds.), Handbook of depression in children and adolescents (pp. 
466-488). New York: Guilford Press. 
Harrington, R., Campbell, F., Shoebridge, P., & Whittaker, J. (1998). Meta- 
analysis of CBT for depression in adolescents. Journal of the American 
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 37, 1005-1006. 
Harrison, P. (2009). The neurobiology of schizophrenia. In M. Gelder et al. 
(Eds.), New Oxford textbook of psychiatry (Vol. 1, second edition, pp. 561— 
568). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
: 
Hasin, D. S., & Katz, H. (2010). Genetic and environmental factors in substance 
use, abuse, and dependence. In L. Scheier (Ed.), Handbook of drug use 
etiology: Theory, methods, and empirical findings (pp. 247-267). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. 
Hauser, P., Zametkin, A., Martinez, P., Vitietllo, B., Matochik, J., Mixon, A. et 
al. (1993). Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in people with generalized 
resistance to thyroid hormone. New England Journal of Medicine, 328, 997- 
1001. 
Hawton, K., & Fortune, S. (2008). Suicidal behaviour and deliberate self-harm. In 
M. Rutter et al. (Eds.), Rutter’s child and adolescent psychiatry (fifth edition, 
pp. 648-669). London: Blackwell. 
Hawton, K. & Taylor, T. (2009). Treatment of suicide attempters and prevention 
of suicide and attempted suicide. In M. Gelder et al. (Eds.), New Oxford 
textbook of psychiatry (second edition, Vol. 1, pp. 669-679). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Hay, P. J., & Claudino, A. de M. (2010). Evidence-based treatment for the eating 
disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of eating disorders 
(pp. 452-479). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Hazlett-Stevens, 
H., Pruitt, L. D., & Collins, A. (2009). Phenomenology of 
generalized anxiety disorder. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford 
handbook of anxiety and related disorders (pp. 47-55). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Head, L., & Gross, A. (2008). Systematic desensitization. In W. O’Donohue & 
J. Fisher (Eds.), Cognitive behaviour therapy: Applying empirically supported 
techniques in your practice (second edition, pp. 542-549). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
Heath, A., Lynskey, M., & Waldron, M. (2008). Substance use and substance 
use disorders. In M. Rutter et al. (Eds.), Ruftter’s child and adolescent 
psychiatry (fifth edition, pp. 565-586). London: Blackwell. 
Heisel, M. J. (2008). Suicide. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical handbook 
of schizophrenia (pp. 491-506). New York: Guilford Press. 
Helzer, J., Kraemer, H., Krueger, R., Wittchen, H., Sirovatka, P., & Regier, 
D. (2008). Dimensional approaches to diagnostic classification: A critical 
appraisal. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association. 
Hemmeter, U., Hemmeter-Spernal, J., & Krieg, J. (2010). Sleep deprivation in 
depression. Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics, 10, 1101-1115. 

360 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Hemmings, R., & Simpson, J. (2008). Investigating the predictive validity of 
the Lancaster DClinPsy written shortlisting test on subsequent trainee 
performance. Final Report to the Clearing House. Retrieved 24 January 
2011 from www.lancs.ac.uk/shm/dhr/courses/dclinpsy/admissions/selection 
ProcessReport. 
pdf 
Henggeler, S. W., & Schaeffer, C. (2010). Treating serious antisocial behaviour 
using multisystemic therapy. In J. R. Weisz & A. E. Kazdin (Eds.), Evidence- 
based psychotherapies for children and adolescents (second edition, pp. 
259-276). New York: Guilford Press. 
Henggeler, S. W., Sheidow, A. J., & Lee, T. (2009). Multisystemic therapy 
(MST). In J. Bray & M. Stanton (Eds.), The Wiley—Blackwell handbook of 
family psychology 
(pp. 370-387). Chichester, UK: Wiley—Blackwell. 
Hettema, J. M., Neale, M. C., & Kendler, K. S. (2001). A review and meta- 
analysis of the genetic epidemiology of anxiety disorders. American Journal 
of Psychiatry, 158, 1568-1578. 
Hinshaw, S. (1994). Attention deficits and hyperactivity in children. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Hinshaw, 
S., Klein, 
R. & Abikoff, 
H. (2007). Childhood 
attention-deficit 
hyperactivity disorder: Nonpharmacological treatments and their combination 
with medication. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments that 
work (third edition, pp. 3-28). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Hoek, H. W. (2006). Incidence, prevalence and mortality of anorexia nervosa 
and other eating disorders. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 19, 389-394. 
Hofmann, S. G., Alpers, G. W., & Pauli, P. (2009). Phenomenology of panic and 
phobic disorders. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook of 
anxiety and related disorders (pp. 34-46). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Hollis, C. (2008). Schizophrenia and allied disorders. In M. Rutter et al. (Eds.), 
Rutter’s child and adolescent psychiatry (fifth edition, pp. 737—758). London: 
Blackwell. 
Hollon, S., Stewart, M., & Strunk, D. (2006). Enduring effects for cognitive 
behaviour therapy in the treatment of depression and anxiety. Annual Review 
of Psychology, 57, 285-315. 
Hoogenhout, E., van der Elst, W., de Groot, R., van Boxtel, M., & Jolles, J. 
(2010). The neurovegetative complaints questionnaire in the Maastricht 
aging study: Psychometric properties and normative data. Aging & Mental 
Health, 14, 613-623. 
Hooley, J. (2007). Expressed emotion and relapse of psychopathology. Annual 
Review of Clinical Psychology, 3, 329-352. 
Hooley, J. M., & Parker, H. A. (2006). Measuring expressed emotion: An 
evaluation of the shortcuts. Journal of Family Psychology, 20(3), 386-396. 
Hérz, S., Zanarini, M. C., Frankenburg, F. R., Reich, D. B., & Fitzmaurice, G. 
(2010). Ten-year use of mental health services by patients with borderline 
personality disorder and with other axis || disorders. Psychiatric Services, 
61, 612-616. 
Houts, A. (2010). Behavioural treatment for enuresis. In J. Weisz & A. Kazdin 
(Eds.), Evidence-based psychotherapies 
for children and adolescents 
(second edition, pp. 359-374). New York: Guilford Press. 
Hubble, M., Duncan, B., & Miller, S. (1999). The heart and soul of change: What 
works in therapy. Washington, DC: The American Psychological Association. 
Hudson, J. L., & Rapee, R. M. (2009). Familial and social environments in the 
etiology and maintenance of anxiety disorders. In A. Martin & M. Stein (Eds.), 
Handbook of anxiety and anxiety disorders (pp. 173-189). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
—

REFERENCES 
361 
Hughes, A., & Byrne, A. (2011). Clinical psychology trainee perceptions of what 
facilitates a good placement start. Clinical Psychology Forum, 226 (October), 
42-47. 
Hughes, 
J., & Youngson, 
S. (2009). Personal development and clinical 
psychology. Oxford: BPS-Blackwell. 
Huizink, A. C., Mulder, E. J. H., & Buitelaar, J. K. (2004). Prenatal stress and risk 
for psychopathology: Specific effects or induction of general susceptibility. 
Psychological Bulletin, 130, 115-142. 
Hunsley, J., & Lee, C. (2009). Introduction to clinical psychology (second 
edition). Mississauga, CA: Wiley. 
Hunsley, J., & Mash, E. (2008). A guide to assessments that work. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Huppert, 
J. D. (2009). Anxiety disorders and depression comorbidity, 
In 
M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook of anxiety and related 
disorders (pp. 576-586). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Hutchison, K. E. (2010). Substance use disorders: Realizing the promise of 
pharmacogenomics and personalized medicine. Annual Review of Clinical 
Psychology, 6, 577-589. 
! 
In-Albon, T., & Schneider, S. (2007). Psychotherapy of childhood anxiety disorders: 
A meta-analysis. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 76(1), 15-24. 
International 
Society for the Study of Trauma and Dissociation. 
(2011). 
Guidelines for treating dissociative identity disorder in adults, third revision. 
Journal of Trauma & Dissociation, 12, 115-187. 
Jablensky, A. (2009). Course and outcome of schizophrenia and their prediction. 
In M. Gelder et al. (Eds.), New Oxford textbook of psychiatry (second edition, 
Vol. 1, pp. 568-578). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Jacobi, C., & Fittig, E. (2010). Psychosocial risk factors for eating disorders. In 
W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of eating disorders (pp. 123-136). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
Jacobi, C., Hayward, C., de Zwaan, M., Kraemer, H. C., & Agras, W. S. (2004). 
Coming to terms with risk factors for eating disorders: Application of risk 
terminology and suggestions for a general taxonomy. Psychological Bulletin, 
130, 19-65. 
Jacobson, M., & Schardt, D. (1999). Diet, ADHD and behaviour: A quarter 
century review. Washington, DC: Centre for Science in the Public Interest. 
Jaffe, S. L., & Kelly, J. F. (2011). Twelve-step mutual-help programs for adoles- 
cents. In Y. Kaminer & K. C. Winters (Eds.), Clinical manual of adolescent 
substance 
abuse 
treatment 
(pp. 269-282). 
Arlington, 
VA: American 
Psychiatric Publishing. 
Javitt, D., Spencer, S., Thaker, G., Winterer, G., & Hajos, M. (2008). Neuro- 
physiological biomarkers for drug development in schizophrenia. Nature 
Reviews Drug Discovery, 7, 1-17. 
Jessor, 
R., & Jessor, 
S. (1977). Problem behaviour and psychosocial 
development. New York: Academic Press. 
Jobe, T. H., & Harrow, M. (2010). Schizophrenia course, long-term outcome, 
recovery, and prognosis. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 19, 
220-225. 
Jochman, K. A., & Fromme, K. (2010). Maturing out of substance use: The other 
side of etiology. In L. Scheier (Ed.), Handbook of drug use etiology: Theory, 
methods, and empirical findings (pp. 565-578). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association. 
John, O., Naumann, L. P., & Soto, C. J. (2008). Paradigm shift to the integrative 
big-five trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and conceptual issues. In 

362 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: 
Theory and research (third edition, pp. 114-158). New York: Guilford Press. 
Johnson, J. G., Bromley, E., & McGeoch, P. G. (2009). Childhood experiences 
and development of maladaptive and adaptive personality traits. 
In J. 
Oldham, A. Skodol, & D. Bender (Eds.), Essentials of personality disorders 
(pp. 143-160). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Johnson, S., & Bradley, B. (2009). Emotionally focused couple therapy: Creating 
loving relationships. \n J. Bray & M. Stanton (Eds.), The Wiley—Blackwell 
handbook of family psychology (pp. 402-415). Chichester, UK: Wiley— 
Blackwell. 
Johnston, C., & Mash, E. (2001). Families of children with attention-deficit/ 
hyperactivity disorder: review and recommendations for future research. 
Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 4(3), 183-207. 
Johnstone, L. (1999). Adverse psychological effects of ECT. Journal of Mental 
Health, 8, 69-85. 
Joiner, 
T., & Coyne, 
J. (1999). 
The interactional nature of depression. 
Washington, DC: APA. 
Joiner, T., & Timmons, K. A. (2009). Depression in its interpersonal context. In 
H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (second edition, pp. 
322-339). New York: Guilford Press. 
Jones, K., & Vischi, T. (1979). The impact of alcohol, drug abuse, and mental 
health treatment on medical care utilization: A review of the research 
literature. Medical Care, 17 (Suppl. 12), 43-131. 
Jones, M. (1952). A study of therapeutic communities. London: Tavistock. 
Joormann, J. (2009). Cognitive aspects of depression. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen 
(Eds.), Handbook of depression (second edition, pp. 298-321). New York: 
Guilford Press. 
Kagan, J. (2010). The temperament thread. New York: Dana Press. 
Kaminer, Y., Ford, J. D., & Clark, D. (2011a). Assessment and treatment of 
internalizing disorders: Depression, anxiety disorders, and posttraumatic 
stress disorder. In Y. Kaminer & K. C. Winters (Eds.), Clinical manual of 
adolescent substance abuse treatment 
(pp. 307-347). 
Arlington, VA: 
American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Kaminer, Y., & Marsch, L. A. (2011). Pharmacotherapy of adolescent substance 
use disorders. In Y. Kaminer & K. C. Winters (Eds.), Clinical manual of 
adolescent substance abuse treatment 
(pp. 163-186). 
Arlington, VA: 
American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Kaminer, Y., Spirito, A., & Lewander, W. (2011b). Brief motivational interventions, 
cognitive-behavioural therapy, and contingency management for youth 
substance use disorders. In Y. Kaminer & K. C. Winters (Eds.), Clinical 
manual of adolescent substance abuse treatment (pp. 213-237). Arlington, 
VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Kaminer, Y., & Winters, K. (2011). Clinical manual of adolescent substance 
abuse treatment. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Kampman, O., & Poutanen, O. (2011). Can onset and recovery in depression be 
predicted by temperament? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal 
of Affective Disorders, 135, 20-27. 
Kaplan (2010a). Kaplan GRE subject test: Psychology (fifth edition). New York: 
Kaplan. 
Kaplan (2010b). Kaplan GRE 2011 premier with CD-ROM. New York: Kaplan. 
Karasu, T. B. (1986). The specificity versus nonspecificity dilemma: Toward 
identifying therapeutic change agents. American Journal of Psychiatry, 143, 
687-695. 

REFERENCES 
363 
Karg, K., Burmeister, 
K., Shedden, 
K., & Sen, S. (2011). The serotonin 
transporter promoter variant (5-HTTLPR), stress, and depression meta- 
analysis revisited: Evidence of genetic moderation. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 68, 444-454, 
Kaslow, N. J., Broth, M. R., Arnette, N. C., & Collins, M. H. (2009). Family-based 
treatment for adolescent depression. In S. Nolen-Hoeksema & L. Hilt (Eds.), 
Handbook of depression in adolescents (pp. 531-570). New York: Routledge. 
Katzman, D. K., Kanbur, N. O., & Steinegger, C. M. (2010). Medical screening 
and management of eating disorders in adolescents. In W. S. Agras (Ede) 
The Oxford handbook of eating disorders (pp. 267-291). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Kavanagh, D. J. (2008). Management of co-occurring substance use disorders. 
In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 459- 
470). New York: Guilford Press. 
Kay, S. R., Opler, L. A., & Fiszbein, A. (1987). The Positive and Negative 
Syndrome Scale (PANSS) for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 13, 
261-276. 
Kaye, W. (2008). Neurobiology of anorexia and bulimia nervosa. Physiology & 
Behaviour, 94(1), 121-135. 
Kazdin, A. (1995). Conduct disorders in childhood and adolescence (second 
edition). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Kazdin, A. (2004). Psychotherapy for children and adolescents. In M. Lambert 
(Ed.), Bergin and Garfield’s handbook of psychotherapy and behaviour 
change (fifth edition, pp. 543-589). New York: Wiley. 
Kazdin, A. (2010). Problem-solving skills training and parent management 
training for oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder. In J. R. Weisz 
& A. E. Kazdin (Eds.), Evidence-based psychotherapies for children and 
adolescents (second edition, pp. 211-226). New York: Guilford Press. 
Kazdin, A., Bass, D., Ayers, W., & Rodgers, A. (1990). Empirical and clinical 
focus of child and adolescent psychotherapy research. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 58, 729-740. 
Keel, P. K. (2010). Epidemiology and course of eating disorders. In W. S. Agras 
(Ed.), The Oxford handbook of eating disorders (pp. 25-32). New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Kendell, R. (1976). The classification of depressions: A review of contemporary 
confusion. British Journal of Psychiatry, 129, 15-88. 
Kendler, K., Aggen, S., Czajkowski, N., Raysamb, E., Tambs, K., & Torgersen, S. 
(2008). The structure of genetic and environmental risk factors for personality 
disorders: A multivariate twin study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 65, 
1438-1446. 
Kern, R. S., Glynn, S. M., Horan, W. P., & Marder, S. R. (2009). Psychosocial 
treatments to promote functional recovery in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia 
Bulletin, 35, 347-361. 
. 
Kernberg, O. (1975). Borderline conditions and pathological narcissism. New 
York: Jason Aronson. 
Kernberg, O. F., & Caligor, E. (2005). A psychoanalytic theory of personality 
disorders. In J. Clarkin & M. Lenzenweger (Eds.), Major theories of personality 
disorder (second edition, pp. 114-156). New York: Guilford. 
Kernberg, 
P., & Chazan, S. (1991). Children 
with conduct disorders: A 
psychotherapy manual. New York: Basic Books. 
Keshavan, M. S., Tandon, R., Boutros, N. N., & Nasrallah, H. A. (2008). 
Schizophrenia, “just the facts”: What we know in 2008: Part 3: Neurobiology. 
Schizophrenia Research, 106, 89-107. 

364 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Kessler, R., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K., & Walters, 
E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM- 
IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 62, 593-602. 
ji 
Kessler, R., Ruscio, A. M., Shear, K., & Wittchen, H. (2009). Epidemiology of 
anxiety disorders. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook 
of anxiety and related disorders (pp. 19-33). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
: 
Kessler, R., & Wang, P. S. (2009). Epidemiology of depression. In H. Gotlib & C. 
Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (second edition, pp. 5-22). New 
York: Guilford Press. 
Khan, S., King, A. P., Abelson, J. L., & Liberzon, |. (2009). Neuroendocrinology 
of anxiety disorders. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook 
of anxiety and related disorders (pp. 111-122). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Khantzian, E. J. (2003). The self-medication hypothesis revisited: The dually 
diagnosed patient. Primary Psychiatry, 10, 47-48, 53-54. 
Kim-Cohen, J., Caspi, A., Taylor, A., Williams, B., Newcombe, R. & Craig, |. W. 
(2006). MAOA, maltreatment, and gene—environment interaction predicting 
children’s mental health: New evidence and a meta-analysis. Molecular 
Psychiatry, 11, 903-913. 
Kim, S., Thibodeau, R., & Jorgensen, R. S. (2011). Shame, guilt, and depressive 
symptoms: A meta-analytic review. Psychological Bulletin, 137, 68-96. 
Klein, D. N., Durbin, C. E., & Shankman, S. A. (2009). Personality and mood 
disorders. 
In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression 
(second edition, pp. 93-112). New York: Guilford Press. 
Kliem, S., Kroger, C., & Kosfelder, J. (2010). Dialectical behaviour therapy 
for borderline personality disorder: A meta-analysis using mixed-effects 
modelling. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78, 936-951. 
Kliewer, W. (2010). Family processes in drug use etiology. In L. Scheier (Ed.), 
Handbook of drug use etiology: Theory, methods, and empirical findings (pp. 
365-381). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Klump, K. L., Bulik, C. M., Kaye, W. H., Treasure, J., & Tyson, E. (2009). 
Academy for eating disorders position paper: Eating disorders are serious 
mental illnesses. /nternational Journal of Eating Disorders, 42, 97-103. 
Knight, A. (2002). How to become a clinical psychologist: Getting a foot in the 
door. London: Routledge. 
Kohut, H. (1968). The psychoanalytic treatment of narcissistic personality 
disorders: Outline of a systematic approach. Psychoanalytic Study of the 
Child, 23, 86-113. 
Kolvin, |., Oustend, C., Humphrey, M., & McNay, A. (1971). Studies of childhood 
psychoses. II. Phenomenology of childhood psychoses. British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 118, 385-394. 
Kotov, R., Gamez, W., Schmidt, F. & Watson, D. (2010). Linking “big” personality 
traits to anxiety, depressive, and substance use disorders: A meta-analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin, 136(5), 768-821. 
Kraepelin, E. (1899). Psychiatrie (sixth edition). Leipzig, Germany: Barth. 
Kraepelin, E. (1913). Hysterical insanity. In E. Kraepelin (Ed.), Lectures on clinical 
psychiatry (trans. T. Johnstone, pp. 249-258). New York: William Wood. 
Kraepelin, 
E. (1921). Manic-depressive. insanity and paranoia. Edinburgh: 
Livingstone. 
Kretchmer, E. (1936). Physique and character. London: Kegan Paul, Trench & 
Trubner. 

REFERENCES 
365 
Krueger, R. F., & Johnson, W. (2008). Behavioural genetics and personality. In 
L. A. Pervin, O. P. John, & R. W. Robins (Eds.), Handbook of personality: 
Theory and research (third edition, pp. 287-31 0). New York: Guilford. 
Kuipers, E., Leff, J., & Lam, D. (2002). Family work for schizophrenia (second 
edition). London: Gaskell. 
Kurtz, M. M. (2011). Neurocognition as a predictor of response to evidence- 
based psychosocial interventions in schizophrenia: What is the state of the 
evidence? Clinical Psychology Review, 31, 663-672. 
Kurtz, M. M., & Mueser, K. T. (2008). A meta-analysis of controlled research 
on social skills training for schizophrenia. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 76(3), 491-504. 
Kutcher, S., Aman, M., & Brooks, S. (2004). International consensus statement 
on attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and disruptive behaviour 
disorders (DBDs): Clinical implications and treatment practice suggestions. 
European Neuropsychopharmacology, 14(1), 11-28. 
Kutchins, H. & Kirk, S. (1999). Making us crazy: DSM — The psychiatric bible and 
the creation of mental disorders. New York: Constable. 
Kutscher, E. C. (2008). Antipsychotics. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical 
handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 159-167). New York: Guilford Press. 
Laing, R. D. (2009). Selected works of R. D. Laing, Volumes 1-7. (Vol. 1. The 
divided self. Vol. 2. Self and others. Vol. 3. Reason and violence. Vol 4. 
Sanity and madness in the family. Vol. 5. The politics of the family. Vol. 6. 
Interpersonal perception. Vol. 7. Knots.) London: Routledge. 
Lambert, 
M. (1992). 
Psychotherapy 
outcome 
research: 
Implications 
for 
integrative and eclectic therapists. In J. Norcross & M. Goldfried (Eds.), 
Handbook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 94-129). New York: Basic. 
Lambert, M. (2005). Early response in psychotherapy: Further evidence for 
the importance of common factors rather than “placebo effects”. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 61, 855-869. 
Lambert, M., & Barley, D. (2002). Research summary on the therapeutic 
relationship and psychotherapy outcome. In J. Norcross (Ed.), Relationships 
that work (pp. 17-36). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Lambert, M., & Ogles, B. (1997). The effectiveness of psychotherapy supervision. 
In C. E. Watkins Jr. (Ed.), Handbook of psychotherapy supervision (pp. 421— 
446). New York: Wiley. 
Lambert, M., & Ogles, B. (2004). The efficacy and effectiveness of psychotherapy. 
In M, J. Lambert (Ed.), Bergin and Garfield’s handbook of psychotherapy and 
behaviour change (fifth edition, pp. 139-193). New York: Wiley. 
Lambert, M., Whipple, J., & Hawkins, E. (2003). Is it time for clinicians to routinely 
track patient outcome? A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology: Science and 
Practice, 10, 288-301. 
Laségue, E. (1873). De l’anorexie hysterique. Archives Generales de Medicine, 
21, 385-403. 
Lebow, J. L., & Uliaszek, A. A. (2010). Couples and family therapy for personality 
disorders. In J. J. Magnavita (Ed.), Evidence-based treatment of personality 
dysfunction: Principles, methods, and processes (pp. 193-221). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. 
Lees, 
J., Manning, 
N., & Rawlings, 
B. (1999). 
Therapeutic community 
effectiveness: A systematic international review of therapeutic community 
treatment for people with personality disorders and mentally disordered 
offenders. York, UK: University of York, NHS Centre for Reviews and 
Dissemination. 
Leff, 
J., & Vaughn, C. (1985). Expressed emotion in families. New York: Guilford. 

366 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Leff, J., Vearnals, S., Brewin, C., Wolff, G., Alexander, B., Asen, E., et al. (2000). 
The London Depression Intervention Trial: Randomised controlled trial of 
antidepressants versus couple therapy in the treatment and maintenance 
of people with depression living with a partner: Clinical outcomes and costs. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 177, 95-100. 
le Grange, D. & Rienecke Hoste, R. (2010). Family therapy. In W. S. Agras 
(Ed.), The Oxford handbook of eating disorders (pp. 373-385). New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Lehman, A., & Steinwachs, D. (1998). At issue: Translating research into 
practice: The Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT) 
treatment recommendations. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24, 1-10. 
Leichsenring, 
F. (2009). Applications of psychodynamic psychotherapy to 
specific disorders: Efficacy and indications. In G. O. Gabbard (Ed.), Textbook 
of psychotherapeutic treatments (pp. 97-132). Arlington, VA: American 
Psychiatric Publishing. 
Leichsenring, 
F. (2010). 
Evidence 
for psychodynamic 
psychotherapy 
in 
personality disorders: A review. In J. Clarkin, O. Fonagy, & G. Gabbard 
(Eds.), Psychodynamic psychotherapy for personality disorders: A clinical 
handbook (pp. 421-438). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Leichsenring, F., & Leibing, E. (2003). The effectiveness of psychodynamic 
therapy and cognitive behaviour therapy in the treatment of personality 
disorders: A meta-analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
160, 1223-1232. 
Leichsenring, F., & Rabung, S. (2008). Effectiveness of long-term psycho- 
dynamic psychotherapy: A meta-analysis. Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 300, 1551-1565. 
Leichsenring, F., & Rabung, S. (2011). Long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy 
in complex mental disorders: A meta-analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
199, 15-22. 
Leichsenring, F., Rabung, S., & Leibing, E. (2004). The efficacy of short-term 
psychodynamic psychotherapy in specific psychiatric disorders: A meta- 
analysis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 61, 1208-1216. 
Leichsenring, F., Salzer, S., Jaeger, U., Kachele, H., Kreische, R., & Leweke, F. 
(2009). Short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy and cognitive-behavioural 
therapy in generalized anxiety disorder: A randomized, controlled trial. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 875-881. 
Lemma, A., Roth, A., & Pilling, S. (2008). The competences required to deliver 
effective 
psychoanalytic/psychodynamic 
therapy. 
London: 
Centre 
for 
Outcomes Research & Effectiveness. 
Lemma, A., Target, M., & Fonagy, P. (2010). The development of a brief 
psychodynamic protocol for depression: Dynamic interpersonal therapy 
(DIT). Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy, 24, 329-346. 
Lemma, A., Target, M., & Fonagy, P. (2011). Brief dynamic interpersonal 
therapy: A clinician’s guide. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Lenzenweger, M. (2010). Schizotypy and schizophrenia. New York: Guilford. 
Lenzenweger, M. F., & Clarkin, J. F. (2005). The personality disorders: History, 
classification, and research issues. In J. Clarkin & M. Lenzenweger (Eds.), 
Major theories of personality disorder (second edition, pp. 1-42). New York: 
Guilford. 
Lenzenweger, M., Lane, M., Loranger, A., & Kessler, R. (2007). DSM IV 
personality disorders in the national comorbidity survey replication. Biological 
Psychiatry, 62, 533-564. 
Leshner, A. (2008). By now, “harm reduction” harms both science and the public 
health. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 83(4), 513-514. 

REFERENCES 
367 
Leucht, C., Heres, S., Kane, J. M., Kissling, W., Davis, J. M., & Leucht, S. 
(2011). Oral versus depot antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia—A critical 
systematic 
review and meta-analysis 
of randomised 
long-term 
trials. 
Schizophrenia Research, 127, 83-92. 
Levine, M. P., & Murnen, S. K. (2009). “Everybody knows that mass media are/ 
are not a cause of eating disorders”: A critical review of evidence for a causal 
link between media, negative body image, and disordered eating in females. 
Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 28, 9-42. 
Levine, M. P., & Smolak, L. (2010). Cultural influences on body image and 
the eating disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of eating 
disorders (pp. 223-246). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Levinson, D. F. (2009). Genetics of major depression. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen 
(Eds.), Handbook of depression (second edition, pp. 165-186). New York: 
Guilford Press. 
Lewinsohn, 
P., & Gotlib, 
|. (1995). Behavioural theory and treatment of 
depression. 
In E. Becker & W. Leber (Eds.), Handbook of depression 
(pp. 352-375). New York: Guilford. 
Lezak, M., Howieson, D., & Loring, D. (2004). Neuropsychological assessment 
(fourth edition). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Liddle, H. A. (2010). Treating adolescent substance abuse using multidimensional 
family therapy. In J. R. Weisz & A. E. Kazdin (Eds.), Evidence-based 
psychotherapies for children and adolescents (second edition, pp. 416-432). 
New York: Guilford Press. 
Lilienfeld, S. (2007). Psychological treatments that cause harm. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 2, 53-70. 
Lin, C., Lane, H., & Tsai, G. E. (2011). Glutamate signaling in the pathophysiology 
and therapy of schizophrenia. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behaviour. 
Advance oinline publication. doi:10.1016/j.pbb.2011.03.023 
Linde, K., Berner, M., & Egger, M. (2005). St John’s wort for depression — 
Meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
86, 99-107. 
Linehan, M., Davison, G., Lynch, T., & Sanderson, G. (2006). Technique factors in 
treating personality disorders. In L. Castonguay & L. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of 
therapeutic change that work (pp. 239-252). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Links, P. S., & Kolla, N. (2009). Assessing and managing suicide risk. In J. 
Oldham, A. Skodol, & D. Bender (Eds.), Essentials of personality disorders 
(pp. 343-360). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Linscott, R. J., & van Os, J. (2010). Systematic reviews of categorical versus 
continuum models in psychosis: Evidence for discontinuous subpopulations 
underlying a psychometric continuum: Implications for DSM-V, DSM-VI, and 
DSM-VII. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 6, 391-419. 
Lipsey, M. W. (2009). The primary factors that characterize effective interventions 
with juvenile offenders: A meta-analytic overview. Victims & Offenders, 4(2), 
124-147. 
Liu, R. T., & Alloy, L. B. (2010). Stress generation in depression: A systematic 
review of the empirical literature and recommendations for future study. 
Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 582-593. 
Lochman, J. E., Boxmeyer, C. L., Powell, N. P., Barry, T. D., & Pardini, D. A. 
(2010). Anger control training for aggressive youths. In J. R. Weisz & A. E. 
Kazdin (Eds.), 
Evidence-based psychotherapies for children and adolescents 
(second edition, pp. 227-242). New York: Guilford Press. 
Lock, J., Le Grange, D., Agras, W., & Dare, C. (2001). Treatment manual for 
anorexia nervosa: A family based approach. New York: Guilford. 

368 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Lopez, S., & Snyder, C. (2009). Oxford handbook of positive psychology (second 
edition). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Loranger, A. W. (1999). International Personality Disorder Examination. Odessa, 
FL: Psychological Assessment Resources. 
Lorber, M. F. (2004). The psychophysiology of aggression, psychopathy, and 
conduct problems: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 531-552. 
Losel, 
F., & Beelmann, 
A. (2005). Social problem-solving programs for 
preventing antisocial behaviour in children and youth. In M. McMurran & J. 
McGuire (Eds.), Social problem solving and offending: Evidence, evaluation 
and evolution (pp. 127-143). Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
Lubman, D., & Yucel, M. (2008). Drugs, mental health and the adolescent 
brain: Implications for early intervention. Early Intervention in Psychiatry, 2, 
63-66. 
Luborsky, 
L. (1962). Clinicians’ judgements of mental health. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 7, 407-417. 
Lucas, R. (2009). Psychotic wavelength: A psychoanalytic perspective for 
psychiatry. London: Routledge. 
Lukoff, D., Nuechterlein, K., & Ventura, J. (1986). Manual for expanded Brief 
Psychiatric Rating Scale (BRS). Schizophrenia Bulletin, 12, 594-602. 
Lunt, |. (2008). Psychologist qualifications in Europe: Common standard for 
quality and mobility. Australian Psychologist, 43(4), 222-230. 
Luty, J., Fekadu, D., & Dnandayudham, A. (2006). Understanding of the term 
‘schizophrenia’ by the British public. Psychiatric Bulletin, 30, 435-435. 
Luyten, P., Corveleyn, J., & Blatt, S. J. (2005). The convergence among 
psychodynamic and cognitive-behavioural theories of depression: A critical 
overview of empirical research. In J. Corveleyn, P. Luyten, & S. J. Blatt (Eds.), 
The theory and treatment of depression: Towards a dynamic interactionism 
model (pp. 107-147). Leuven, Belgium/Mahwah, NJ: Leuven University 
Press/Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Maag, J. W., Swearer, S. M., & Toland, M. D. (2009). Cognitive-behavioural 
interventions for depression in children and adolescents: Meta-analysis, 
promising programs, and implications for school personnel. In M. J. Mayer, 
J. E. Lochman, & R. Van Acker (Eds.), Cognitive-behavioural interventions 
for emotional and behavioural disorders: School-based practice (pp. 235— 
265). New York: Guilford Press. 
Macgowan, M. J., & Engle, B. (2010). Evidence for optimism: Behavior therapies 
and motivational interviewing in adolescent substance abuse treatment. 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 19, 527-545. 
Magnavita, J. J. (2009). Psychodynamic family psychotherapy: Toward unified 
relational systematics. In J. Bray & M. Stanton (Eds.). The Wiley—Blackwell 
handbook of family psychology (pp. 240-257). Chichester, UK: Wiley- 
Blackwell. 
' 
Maine, M. & Bunnell, D. (2010). A perfect biopsychosocial storm: Gender, 
culture, and eating disorders. In M. Maine, B. McGilley, & D. Bunnell (Eds.), 
Treatment of eating disorders: Bridging the research—-practice gap (pp. 
3-16). San Diego, CA: Elsevier. 
Makris, N., Biederman, J., Monuteaux, M. C., & Seidman, L. J. (2009). Towards 
conceptualizing 
a neural systems-based 
anatomy 
of attention-deficit/ 
hyperactivity disorder. Developmental Neuroscience, 31, 36-49. 
Malan, D. (1995). Individual psychotherapy and the science of psychodynamics 
(second edition). London: Butterworth-Heinemann. 
Mamah, D., & Barch, D. (2011). Diagnosis and classification of the schizophrenia 
spectrum disorders. In M. Ritsner (Ed.), Handbook of schizophrenia spectrum 
—

REFERENCES 
369 
disorders, Volume |: Conceptual issues and neurobiological advances (pp. 
45-83). New York: Springer. 
Marlatt, G. A., & Witkiewitz, K. (2010). Update on harm-reduction policy and 
intervention research. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 6, 591-606. 
Maron, E., Hettema, J. M., & Shlik, J. (2010). Advances in molecular genetics of 
panic disorder. Molecular Psychiatry, 15(7), 681-701. 
Martin, D., Graske, J., & Davis, M. (2000). Relation of the therapeutic alliance 
with outcome and other variables: A meta-analytic review. Journal of 
Consulting & Clinical Psychology, 68, 438-450. 
Martin, E. |., Ressler, K. J., Binder, E., & Nemeroff, C. B. (2009). The neurobiology 
of anxiety disorders: Brain imaging, genetics, and psychoneuroendocrinology. 
Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 32(3), 549-575. 
Mason, M. J. (2010). Mental health, school problems, and social networks: 
Modeling urban adolescent substance use. Journal of Primary Prevention, 
31, 321-331. 
Masson, J. (1984). Freud’s suppression of seduction theory. New York: Farrar, 
Straus, & Giroux. 
Mathew, S. J., & Hoffman, E. J. (2009). Pharmacotherapy for generalized 
anxiety disorder. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook of 
anxiety and related disorders (pp. 350-363). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Mathews, C. A. (2009). Phenomenology of obsessive-compulsive disorder. In 
M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook of anxiety and related 
disorders (pp. 56-64). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Matthews, K., & Christmas, D. (2009). Neurosurgery for psychiatric disorders. In 
M. Gelder, et al. (Eds.), New Oxford textbook of psychiatry (second edition, 
Vol. 2, pp. 1266-1272). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Mazzeo, S. E., & Bulik, C. M. (2009). Environmental and genetic risk factors for 
eating disorders: What the clinician needs to know. Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 18(1), 67-82. 
Mazzucchelli, T., Kane, R., & Rees, C. (2009). Behavioural activation treatments 
for depression in adults: 
A meta-analysis and review. Clinical Psychology: 
Science and Practice, 16, 383-411. 
McCart, M., Priester, P., Davies, W., & Azen, R. (2006). Differential effectiveness 
of cognitive-behavioural 
therapy 
and 
behavioural 
parent-training 
for 
antisocial youth: A meta-analysis. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 
34(4), 527-543. 
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (2008). The five-factor theory of personality. 
In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: 
Theory and research (third edition, pp. 159-181). New York: Guilford Press. 
McCullough-Vaillant, 
L. (1997). 
Changing 
character: 
Short-term 
anxiety 
regulating psychotherapy for restructuring defences, affects and attachments. 
New York: Basic Books. 
McDermott, L. M., & Ebmeier, K. P. (2009). A meta-analysis of depression 
severity and cognitive function. Journal of Affective Disorders, 119, 1-8. 
McDermott, R., Tingley, D., Cowden, J., Frazzetto, G., & Johnson, D. D. P. 
(2009). Monoamine oxidase A gene (MAOA) predicts behavioural aggression 
following provocation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America, 106, 2118-2123. 
McElroy, S. L., Guerdjikova, A. |., O’Melia, A. M., Mori, N., Keck, P. E., Jr. (2010). 
Pharmacotherapy of the eating disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford 
Handbook of eating disorders (pp. 417-451). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

370 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
McFall, R. M. (2006). Doctoral training in clinical psychology. Annual Review of 
Clinical Psychology, 2, 21-49. 
McFarlane, W. (2004). Multifamily groups in the treatment of severe psychiatric 
disorders. New York: Guilford. 
McFarlane, W. R. (2005). Psychoeducational multifamily groups for families with 
persons with severe mental illness. In J. Lebow (Ed.), Handbook of clinical 
family therapy (pp. 195-227). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
McGlashen, T., & Hoffman, R. (2000). Schizophrenia as a disorder of develop- 
mentally reduced synaptic connectivity. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57, 
637-648. 
McGrath, J., Saha, S., Welham, J., Saadi, O., MacCauley, C., & Chant, D. (2004). 
A systematic review of the incidence of schizophrenia: The distribution of 
rates and the influence of sex, urbanicity, migrant status and methodology. 
BMC Medicine, 2, 13. 
McLaughlin, K. A., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2011). Rumination as a transdiag- 
nostic factor in depression and anxiety. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
49, 186-193. 
McLeod, B. D., Weisz, J. R., & Wood, J. J. (2007). Examining the association 
between parenting and childhood depression: A meta-analysis. 
Clinical 
Psychology Review, 27, 986-1003. 
McMahon, R. J., Witkiewitz, K., Kotler, J. S., & The Conduct Problems Prevention 
Research Group. (2010). Predictive validity of callous—unemotional traits 
measured in early adolescence with respect to multiple antisocial outcomes. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 119(4), 752-763. 
McNally, R. F. & Reese, H. E. (2009). Information-processing approaches 
to understanding anxiety disorders. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), 
Oxford handbook of anxiety and related disorders (pp. 136-152). New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Medalia, 
A., & Choi, 
J. (2009). Cognitive remediation 
in schizophrenia. 
Neuropsychology Review, 19, 353-364. 
Meltzer, H., Gatward, R., Goodman, R., & Ford, T. (2000). The Mental Health 
of Children and Adolescents in Great Britain: The report of a survey carried 
out in 1999 by Social Survey Division of the Office for National Statistics on 
behalf of the Department of Health, the Scottish Health Executive and the 
National Assembly for Wales. London: The Stationery Office. 
Menninger, K. (1958). Theory of psychoanalytic technique. London: Imago. 
Meyer, B., Ajchenbrenner, M., & Bowles, D. P. (2005). Sensory sensitivity, at- 
tachment experiences, and rejection responses among adults with border- 
line and avoidant features. Journal of Personality Disorders, 19, 641-658. 
Miller, S., Duncan, B., Sorrell, R., & Brown, G. (2005). The partners for change 
outcome management system. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 61, 199— 
208. 
Miller, W., & Rolinick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing. Preparing people for 
change (second edition). New York: Guilford. 
Millon, T. (2009). Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory-IIl manual (fourth edition). 
Minneapolis, MN: National Computer Systems. 
Milne, D. (2009). Evidence-based clinical supervision: Principles and practice. 
Oxford: BPS-Blackwell. 
Milrod, B., Leon, A., Busch, F., Rudden, M., Schwalberg, M., Clarkin J., et al. 
(2007). 
Arandomized controlled clinical trial of psychoanalytic psychotherapy 
for panic disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 265-272. 
Mindus, P., Rasmussen, S. A., Lindquist, C., & Noren, G. (2001). Neurosurgical 
treatment for refractory obsessive-compulsive disorder: Implications for 

REFERENCES 
371 
understanding frontal lobe function. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric 
Publishing. 
Minuchin, S., Rosman, B., & Baker, L. (1978). Psychosomatic families: Anorexia 
nervosa in context. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Mitchell, J. E., & Crow, S. J. (2010). Medical comorbidities of eating disorders. In 
W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of eating disorders (pp. 259-266). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
Moffitt, T. (2005). The new look of behavioural genetics in developmental 
psychopathology: Gene-environment 
interplay in antisocial behaviours. 
Psychological Bulletin, 131, 533-554. 
Moffitt, T., & Scott, S. (2008). Disorders of attention and activity. In M. Rutter 
et al. (Eds.), Rutter’s child and adolescent psychiatry (fifth edition, pp. 543- 
564). London: Blackwell. 
Mohr, D. (1995). Negative outcome in psychotherapy: A critical review. Clinical 
Psychology: Science and Practice, 2, 1-27. 
Mojtabai, R., Nicholson, R., & Carpenter, B. (1998). Role of psychosocial 
treatments in management of schizophrenia: A meta-analysis review of 
controlled outcome studies. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24, 569-587. 
Monroe, S., & Harkness, K. (2005). Life stress, the “kindling” hypothesis, and 
the recurrence of depression: Considerations from a life stress perspective. 
Psychological Review, 112, 417-445. 
Monroe, S., Slavich, G. M., & Georgiades, K. (2009). The social environment 
and life stress in depression. In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of 
depression (second edition, pp. 340-360). New York: Guilford Press. 
Montafiés, F., & de Lucas Taracena, M. T. (2006). Evolutionary aspects 
of affective disorders, critical review and proposal of a new model. Actas 
Espafolas De Psiquiatria, 34, 264-276. 
Monteleone, P., Martiadis, V., & Maj, M. (2010). Circadian rhythms and treatment 
implications 
in depression. 
Progress 
in Neuropsychopharmacology 
& 
Biological Psychiatry, 35, 1569-1574. 
Morgan, T. B., & Crane, D. R. (2010). Cost-effectiveness of family-based sub- 
stance abuse treatment. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 36, 486-498. 
Moscovitch, D. A., Antony, M. M., & Swinson, R. P. (2009). Exposure-based 
treatments for anxiety disorders: Theory and process. In M. M. Antony & 
M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook of anxiety and related disorders 
(pp. 461-475). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Moss, E. S., Nicole, C. C., Dubois-Comtois, K., Mazzarello, T., & Berthiaume, C. 
(2006). Attachment and behaviour problems in middle childhood as reported 
by adult and child informants. Development and Psychopathology, 18(2), 
425-444. 
Mowrer, O. (1939). A stimulus response analysis of anxiety and its role as a 
reinforcing agent. Psychological Review, 46, 553-565. 
Mueser, K. & Duva, S. (2011). Schizophrenia. In D. Barlow (Ed.), The Oxford 
handbook of clinical psychology (pp. 469-503). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Mueser, K., & Jeste, D. (2008). Clinical handbook of schizophrenia. New York: 
Guilford Press. 
Mumford, E., Schlesinger, H., Glass, G., Patrick, C., & Cuerdon, T. (1984). A 
new look at evidence about reduced cost of medical utilization following 
mental health treatment. American Journal of Psychiatry, 141, 1145-1158. 
Murray, C., & Lopez, A. (1996). The global burden of disease: A comprehensive 
assessment of mortality and disability from diseases, injuries and risk factors 
in 1990 and projected to 2020. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

372 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
Murray, R., & Castle, D. (2009). Genetic and environmental risk factors for 
schizophrenia. In M. Gelder et al. (Eds.), New Oxford textbook of psychiatry 
(second edition, Vol. 1, pp. 553-561). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Murray, R., & Lewis, S. (1987). Is schizophrenia a neurodevelopmental disorder? 
British Medical Journal, 295, 681-682. 
Murray, R., & Van Os, J. (1998). Predictors of outcome in schizophrenia. Journal 
of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 18, 25—45. 
Najavits, L. M. (2007). Psychosocial treatments for posttraumatic stress disorder. 
In P. E. Nathan & J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments that work (third 
edition, pp. 513-530). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Naragon-Gainey, K. (2010). Meta-analysis of the relations of anxiety sensitivity 
to the depressive and anxiety disorders. Psychological Bulletin, 136(1), 
128-150. 
Narcotics Anonymous (2008). Narcotics Anonymous (sixth edition). Chatsworth, 
CA: Narcotics Anonymous World Services. 
Nasser, M., & Katzman, N. (2003). Sociocultural theories of eating disorders. In 
J. Treasure, U. Schmidt, & E. van Furth (Eds.), Handbook of eating disorders 
(second edition, pp. 139-150). Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
Nathan, P., & Gorman, J. (2007), A guide to treatments that work (third edition). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
National Advisory Committee on Drugs and the Drug and Alcohol Information 
and Research 
Unit (2004). Drug use in Ireland and Northern Ireland 
2003/2003 Drug Prevalence Survey. Dublin, Ireland and Belfast, UK: Health 
Board (Ireland) and Social Service Board (Northern Ireland). 
National Centre for Social Research and the National Foundation for Educational 
Research (2002). Drug use, smoking and drinking among young people in 
England in 2001. London: NCSR and NFER. 
National Institute of Mental Health in England (2003). Personality disorder: 
No longer a diagnosis of exclusion. Leeds, UK: National Institute of Mental 
Health in England. 
Nestler, E., & Charney, D. (2008). Neurobiology of mental iliness (third edition). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Newman, M., Crits-Christoph, P., Connoly Gibbons, M., & Erickson, T. (2006a). 
Participant factors in treating anxiety disorders. In L. Castonguay & L. Beutler 
(Eds.), Principles of therapeutic change that work (pp. 121-154). Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Newman, M., Stiles, W., Woody, S. & Janeck, A. (2006b). Integration of 
therapeutic factors in anxiety disorders. In L. Castonguay & L. Beutler (Eds.), 
Principles of therapeutic change that work (pp. 187-202). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Newton-Howes, G., Tyrer, P., & Johnson, T. (2006). Personality disorder and the 
outcome of depression: Meta-analysis of published studies. British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 188, 13-20. 
NICE (2004a). Eating disorders: Core interventions in the treatment and 
management of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and related disorders. 
London: National Institute for Clinical Excellence. 
NICE 
(2004b). 
Self-harm: 
The 
short-term 
physical 
and psychological 
management and secondary prevention 
of self-harm 
in primary and 
secondary care (Clinical guideline 16). London: National Institute of Clinical 
Excellence. 
NICE (2005a). Post-traumatic stress disorder: The management of PTSD in 
adults and children in primary and secondary care (Clinical guideline 26). 
London: National Institute of Clinical Excellence. 

REFERENCES 
373 
NICE 
(2005b). 
Obsessive 
compulsive 
disorder: 
Core 
interventions 
in 
the treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic 
disorder (Clinical guideline 31). London: 
National 
Institute for Clinical 
Excellence. 
NICE (2005c). Depression in children and young people: Identification and 
management in primary, community and secondary care (Clinical guideline 
28). London: National Institute of Clinical Excellence. 
NICE (2006a). Parent-trainingleducation programmes in the management of 
children with conduct disorders. NICE technology appraisal guidance 102. 
London: National Institute of Clinical Excellence. 
NICE (2006b). Computerized cognitive behaviour therapy for depression and 
anxiety (Technology appraisal 97). London: NICE. 
NICE 
(2008a). 
Attention 
deficit 
hyperactivity 
disorder. 
Diagnosis 
and 
management of ADHD in children, young people and adults. NICE guideline 
72, London: National Institute of Clinical Excellence. 
NICE (2008b). Drug misuse: Psychosocial interventions. 
National clinical 
practice guideline 51. London: British Psychological Society and the Royal 
College of Psychiatrists. 
; 
NICE (2009a). Depression: The treatment and management of depression in 
adults (update) (Clinical guideline 90). London: National Institute of Clinical 
Excellence. 
NICE (2009b). Core interventions in the treatment and management of 
schizophrenia in primary and secondary care (update). (Clinical guideline 
82). London: National Institute of Clinical Excellence. 
NICE (2009c). Antisocial personality disorder: Treatment, management and 
prevention (Clinical guideline 77). London: National Institute of Clinical 
Excellence. 
NICE (2009d). Borderline personality disorder: Treatment and management 
(Clinical guideline 78). London: National Institute of Clinical Excellence. 
NICE (2011). Generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder, with and without 
agoraphobia. Management in primary, secondary and community care 
(Clinical guideline 113). London: National Institute of Clinical Excellence. 
Nigg, J. (2001). Is ADHD an inhibitory disorder. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 
571-596. 
Nigg, J. (2005). Neuropsychologic theory and findings in attention-deficit/ 
hyperactivity disorder: The state of the field and salient challenges for the 
coming decade. Biological Psychiatry, 57, 1424-1435. 
Nigg, J., & Huang-Pollock, C. L. (2003). An early onset model of the role of 
executive functions and intelligence in conduct disorder/delinquency. 
In 
B. B. Lahey, T. Moffitt, & A. Caspi (Eds.), The causes of conduct disorder and 
serious juvenile delinquency (pp. 227-253). New York: Guilford. 
Nolen-Hoeksema, 
S., & Hilt, L. M. (2009a). Handbook of depression in 
adolescents. New York: Routledge. 
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Hilt, L. M. (2009b). Gender differences in depression. 
In H. Gotlib & C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (second edition, 
pp. 386-404). New York: Guilford Press. 
Norcross, J. (2002). Psychotherapy relationships that work. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Norcross, J. (2005). The psychotherapist’s own psychotherapy: Educating and 
developing psychologists. American Psychologist, 60(8), 840-850. 
Norcross, J., Beutler, L., & Levant, R. (2006). Evidence-based practices in mental 
health: Debate and dialogue on the fundamental questions. Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association. 

374 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
Norcross, J. C., Ellis, J. L., & Sayette, M. A. (2010). Getting in and getting 
money: A comparative analysis of admission standards, acceptance rates, 
and financial assistance across the research—practice continuum in clinical 
psychology programs. Training and Education in Professional Psychology, 
4(2), 99-104. 
Norcross, 
J., & Goldfried, M. (Eds.) (2003). Handbook of psychotherapy 
integration (second edition). New York: Basic Books. 
Norton, P., & Price, E. (2007). A meta-analytic review of adult cognitive- 
behavioural treatment outcome across the anxiety disorders. Journal of 
Nervous and Mental Disease, 195(6), 521-531. 
Nunez-Smith, M., Wolf, E., Huang, H. M., Chen, P. G., Lee, L., Emanuel, E. J., 
et al. (2010). Media exposure and tobacco, illicit drugs, and alcohol use 
among children and adolescents: A systematic review. Substance Abuse, 
31, 174-192. 
O’Brien, C., Childress, A., McLellan, A., & Ehrman, R. (1992). A learning model 
of addiction. Research Publication of the Association of Research on Nervous 
and Mental Diseases, 70, 157-177. 
Olatunji, B. O., Cisler, J. M., & Deacon, B. J. (2010). Efficacy of cognitive 
behavioural therapy for anxiety disorders: A review of meta-analytic findings. 
Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 33(3), 557-577. 
Orlinsky, D., Tonnestad, M., & Willutzki, U. (2004). Fifty years of psychotherapy 
process—outcome research: Continuity and change. In M. Lambert (Ed.), 
Bergin and Garfield’s handbook of psychotherapy and behaviour change 
(fifth edition, pp. 307-389). New York: Wiley. 
Orth, U., Robins, R. W., & Roberts, B. W. (2008). Low self-esteem prospectively 
predicts depression 
in adolescence and young adulthood. 
Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 695—708. 
O’Shea, G., & Byrne, M. (2010). In pursuit of clinical training. /rish Psychologist, 
36(4), 79-81. 
O’Shea, G., & Byrne, M. (2011a). A profile of entrants to Irish clinical training 
programmes. /rish Psychologist, 37(5), 118-123. 
O’Shea, G., & Byrne, M. (2011b). Entrants’ experiences of the clinical psychology 
programme selection process. /rish Psychologist, 37(6), 150-157. 
Ozer, E., Best, S., Lipsey, T., & Weiss, D. (2003). Predictors of posttraumatic 
stress disorder and symptoms in adults: A meta-analysis. Psychological 
Bulletin, 129, 52-73. 
Pachana, N., O’Donovan, A., & Helmes, E. (2006). Australian clinical psychology 
training program directors survey. Australian Psychologist, 41(3), 168-178. 
Pachana, N., Sofronoff, K., & O’Brien, M. (2008). Focus on clinical psychology 
postgraduate training: Taking the curriculum into the next decade. Australian 
Psychologist, 43(4), 219-221. 
Page, A. & Stritzke, W. (2006). Clinical psychology for trainees. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Palmer, B. W., Dawes, S. E., & Heaton, R. K. (2009). What do we know about 
neuropsychological aspects of schizophrenia? Neuropsychology Review, 
19, 365-384. 
Papworth, M. (2004). Getting on clinical psychology training courses: Responses 
to frequently asked questions. Clinical Psychology, 42, 32-36. 
Papworth, M. (2007). Getting on clinical psychology training courses: Responses 
to frequently asked questions (part 2). Clinical Psychology Forum, 177, 
37-41. 
Pardini, D. A., Frick, P. J., & Moffitt, T. E. (2010). Building an evidence base 
for DSM-V conceptualizations of oppositional defiant disorder and conduct 

REFERENCES 
375 
disorder: Introduction to the special section. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
119(4), 683-688. 
Paris, J. (1996). Social factors in the personality disorders: A biopsychosocial 
approach to etiology and treatment. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Parker, G. (2009). Diagnosis, classification and differential diagnosis of the 
mood disorders. In M. Gelder et al. (Eds.) New Oxford textbook of psychiatry 
(second edition, Vol. 1, pp. 637-645). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Patterson, G. (1982). Coercive family process. Eugene, OR: Castalia. 
Paykel, E., & Scott, J. (2009). Treatment of mood disorders. In M. Gelder 
et al. (Eds.), New Oxford textbook of psychiatry (second edition, Vol. 1, 
pp. 6669-6680). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Paykina, N., Greenhill, L., & Gorman, J. (2007). Pharmacological treatments 
for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. In P. Nathan & J. Gorman (Eds.), 
A guide to treatments that work (third edition, pp. 29-70). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Peckham, A. D., McHugh, R. K., & Otto, M. W. (2010). A meta-analysis of the 
magnitude of biased attention in depression. Depression and Anxiety, 27, 
1135-1142. 
' 
Perlmutter, R. (1996). A family approach to psychiatric disorders. Washington, 
DC: American Psychiatric Press. 
Persons, J. B., & Fresco, D. M. (2008). Adult depression. In J. Hunsley & E. J. 
Mash (Eds.), A guide to assessments that work (pp. 96—120). New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Peterson, 
C., & Villanova, 
P. (1988). An expanded 
Attributional 
Style 
Questionnaire. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 97, 87-89. 
Pfammatter, M., Junghan, U., & Brenner, H. (2006). Efficacy of psychological 
therapy in schizophrenia: Conclusions from meta-analyses. Schizophrenia 
Bulletin, 32(Suppl. 1), S64—S80. 
Phillips, A., Hatton, C., & Gray, |. (2001). Which selection methods do clinical 
psychology courses use? Clinical Psychology, 8, 19-23. 
Phillips, A., Hatton, C., & Gray, |. (2004). Factors predicting the short-listing 
and selection of trainee clinical psychologists: A prospective national cohort 
study. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 11, 111-125. 
Phillips, L. J., Francey, S. M., Edwards, J., & McMurray, N. (2007). Stress and 
psychosis: Towards the development of new models of investigation. Clinical 
Psychology Review, 27, 307-317. 
Phillips, P., McKeown, O., & Sandford, T. (2010). Dual diagnosis: Practice in 
context. Oxford: Wiley—Blackwell. 
Phillips, W. J., Hine, D. W., & Thorsteinsson, E. B. (2010). Implicit cognition and 
depression: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 691-709. 
Pine, D. & Klein, R. (2008). Anxiety disorders. In M. Rutter et al. (Eds.), 
Rutter’s child and adolescent psychiatry (fifth edition, pp. 628-647). London: 
Blackwell. 
Plante, T. (2009). Contemporary clinical psychology (third edition). Hoboken, 
NJ: Wiley. 
Pliszka, S. R. (2007). Pharmacologic treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder: Efficacy, safety and mechanisms of action. Neuropsychology 
Review, 17(1), 61-72. 
Polanski, E., & Mokros, H. (1999). Children’s Depression Rating Scale — 
Revised. Los Angeles: Western Psychological Services. 
Pollack, M. H., & Simon, N. M. (2009). Pharmacotherapy for panic disorder and 
agoraphobia. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook of anxiety 
and related disorders (pp. 295-307). New York: Oxford University Press. 

376 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Princeton Review (2010a). Cracking the GRE 2011 edition. Framingham, MA: 
Princeton Review. 
Princeton Review (2010b). Cracking the GRE psychology subject test (eighth 
edition). Framingham, MA: Princeton Review. 
— 
Prochaska, J., DiClemente, C., & Norcross, J. (1992). In search of how people 
change: Applications to addictive behaviours. American Psychologist, 47, 
1102-1114. 
Raine, A. (1996). Autonomic nervous system activity and violence. In D. M. Stoff 
& R. B. Cairns (Eds.), Aggression and violence: Genetic, neurobiological 
and biological perspectives (pp. 145-168). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
Raine, A., & Yang, Y. (2006). Neural foundations to moral reasoning and antisocial 
behaviour. Social, Cognitive, and Affective Neuroscience, 1, 203-213. 
Rapee, R. M., Schniering, C. A., & Hudson, J. L. (2009). Anxiety disorders 
during childhood and adolescence: Origins and treatment. Annual Review of 
Clinical Psychology, 5, 311-341. 
Rapoport, J., & Shaw, P. (2008). Obsessive compulsive disorders. In M. Rutter 
et al. (Eds.), Rutter’s child and adolescent psychiatry (fifth edition, pp. 698— 
718). London: Blackwell. 
Rapp, C., & Goscha, R. (2006). The strengths model: Case management 
with people with psychiatric disabilities (second edition). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Rapp, C., & Goscha, R. (2008). Strengths-based case management. In K. 
Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 319-328). 
New York: Guilford Press. 
Rapport, M. & Moffitt, C. (2002). Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and 
methylphenidate: A review of height/weight, cardiovascular, and somatic 
complaint side effects. Clinical Psychology Review, 22, 1107-1131. 
Read, J., & Bentall, R. (2010). The effectiveness of electroconvulsive therapy: A 
literature review. Epidemiologia e Psichiatria Sociale, 19, 333-347. 
Reichborn-Kjennerud, 
T. (2010). The genetic epidemiology of personality 
disorders. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 12, 103-114. 
Retz, W., Retz-Junginger, P., Supprian, T., Thome, J., & Rosler, M. (2004). 
Association of serotonin transporter promoter gene polymorphism with 
violence: Relation with personality disorders, impulsivity and childhood 
ADHD psychopathology. Behavioural Sciences and the Law, 22, 415-425. 
Rholes, S., & Simpson, J. (2004). Adult attachment: Theory, research, and 
clinical implications. New York: Guilford. 
Rietkerk, T., Boks, M. P. M., Sommer, |. E., Liddle, P. F., Ophoff, R. A., & Kahn, 
R. S. (2008). The genetics of symptom dimensions of schizophrenia: Review 
and meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 102, 197-205. 
Ritsner, M., & Gottesman, |. (2011). The schizophrenia construct after 100 years 
of challenges. In M. Ritsner (Ed.), Handbook of schizophrenia spectrum 
disorders, Volume 
|; Conceptual issues and neurobiological advances 
(pp. 1-44). New York: Springer. 
Robbins, M. S., Horigian, V., Szapocznik, J., & Ucha, J. (2010). Treating 
Hispanic youths using brief strategic family therapy. In J. R. Weisz & A. E. 
Kazdin (Eds.), 
Evidence-based psychotherapies for children and adolescents 
(second edition, pp. 375-390). New York: Guilford Press. 
Robbins, M. S., Szapocznik, J., & Horigian, V. E. (2009). Brief strategic family 
therapy for adolescents with behaviour problems. \n J. Bray & M. Stanton 
(Eds.), The Wiley—Blackwell handbook of family psychology (pp. 416-430). 
Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. 

REFERENCES 
9377 
Robins, L. (1966). Deviant children growing up. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins. 
Roe, D., & Davidson, L. (2008). Recovery. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), 
Clinical handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 566-574). New York: Guilford Press. 
Rosenhan, D. (1973). On being sane in insane places. Science, 179, 250-258. 
Rosenthal, N. E. (2009). Issues for DSM-V: Seasonal affective disorder and 
seasonality. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 852-853. 
Rosenthal, R. (1994). Parametric measures of effect size. In H. Cooper and 
L. Hedges (Eds.), The handbook of research synthesis (pp. 231-260). 
_New York: Sage. 
Rosenthal., R., & Rubin, D. (1982). A simple, general purpose display of 
magnitude of experimental effect. Journal of Educational Psychology, 74, 
166-196. 
Rosenzweig, S. (1936). Some implicit common factors in diverse methods of 
psychotherapy: “At last the Dodo bird said, ‘Everybody has won and all must 
have prizes.”” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 6, 412-415. 
Roth, G., & Buchheim, A. (2010). Neurobiology of personality disorders. In J. 
Clarkin, O. Fonagy, & G. Gabbard (Eds.). Psychodynamic psychotherapy 
for personality disorders: A clinical handbook (pp. 89-124). Arlington, VA: 
American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Roth, T. (1998). Getting on clinical training courses. The Psychologist, 11(12), 
589-592. 
Roth, T. & Fonagy, P. (2005). What works for whom? A critical review of 
psychotherapy research (second edition). London: Guilford. 
Roth, T., & Leiper, R. (1995). Selecting for clinical training. The Psychologist, 
8(1), 25-28. 
Rothbart, M. K., & Bates, J. E. (2006). Temperament. In W. Damon & R. M. 
Lerner (Series Eds.) & N. Eisenberg (Volume Ed.), Handbook of child 
psychology, Volume 3: Social, emotional, and personality development (sixth 
edition, pp. 99-166). New York: Wiley. 
Rowe, D. L., Robinson, P. A., Lazzaro, |. L., Powles, R. C., Gordon, E., & 
Williams, L. M. (2005). Biophysical modeling of tonic cortical electrical 
activity in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. International Journal of 
Neuroscience, 115(9), 1273-1305. 
Royal College of Psychiatrists (2005). The ECT handbook (second edition): The 
third report of the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ Special Committee on 
ECT 
(Council Report CR128). London: Royal College of Psychiatrists. 
Rudd, D. N., Cordero, L., & Bryan, C. J. (2009). What every psychologist should 
know about the Food and Drug Administration’s black box warning label 
for antidepressants. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 40, 
321-326. 
Russell, G. (1979). Bulimia nervosa: An ominous variant of anorexia nervosa? 
Psychological Medicine, 9, 429-448. 
Sackett, D., Rosenberg, W., Gray, J., Haynes, R., & Richardson, W. (1996). 
Evidence-based medicine: What it is and what it isn’t. British Medical Journal, 
312, 71-72. 
Sackett, D., Straus, S., Richardson, W., Rosenberg, W., & Haynes, R. (2000). 
Evidence based medicine: How to practice and teach EBM (second edition). 
London: Churchill Livingstone. 
Saha, S., Chant, D., Welham, J., & McGrath, J. (2005). A systematic review of 
the prevalence of schizophrenia. PLoS Medicine, 2, 413-433. 
Sajatovic, M., Madhusoodanan, S., & Fuller, M. A. (2008). Clozapine. In K. 
Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 178-185). 
New York: Guilford Press. 

378 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
" 
Salloum, A. (2010). Minimal therapist-assisted cognitive-behavioural therapy 
interventions in stepped care for childhood anxiety. Professional Psychology: 
Research and Practice, 41(1), 41-47. 
Sammons, 
M., Paige, R., & Levant, R. (2003). Prescriptive authority for 
psychologists: A history and guide. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 
Samuel, D. B., & Widiger, T. A. (2008). A meta-analytic review of the relationships 
between the five-factor model and personality disorders: A facet level 
analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 28, 1326-1342. 
Savla, G. N., Moore, D. J., & Palmer, B. W. (2008). Cognitive functioning. In K. 
Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 91-99). 
New York: Guilford Press. 
Sayette, M., Mayne, T., & Norcross,. J. (2010). Insider's guide to graduate 
programs in clinical and counseling psychology: 2010/2011 
(seventh edition). 
New York: Guilford. 
Scaife, J. (2010). Supervising the reflective practitioner: An essential guide to 
theory and practice. London: Brunner-Routledge. 
Schachar, R. (1991). Childhood hyperactivity. Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 32, 155-191. 
Scheier, L. (2010). Handbook of drug use etiology: Theory, methods, and 
empirical findings. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Schennach-Wolff, R., Seemuller, F., Musil, R., Spellmann, |. Holler, H., & Riedel, 
M. (2011). Suicidality and the outcome of schizophrenia. In M. Ritsner (Ed.), 
Handbook of schizophrenia spectrum disorders, Volume Ill: Therapeutic 
approaches, comorbidity and outcome (pp. 365-382). New York: Springer. 
Scherag, S., Hebebrand, 
J., & Hinney, A. (2010). Eating disorders: The 
current status of molecular genetic research. European Child & Adolescent 
Psychiatry, 19, 211-226. 
Schmahl, C., & Bremner, J. D. (2006). Neuroimaging in borderline personality 
disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 40, 419-427. 
Schneider, K. (1923). Die Psychopathischen Persénlichkeiten. Berlin: Springer. 
Schuckit, M. (1994). Low level of response to alcohol as a predictor of future 
alcoholism. American Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 184—189. 
Schulteis, G., & Koob, G. (1996). Reinforcement processes in opiate addiction: 
A homeostatic model. Neurochemical Research, 21, 1437-1454. 
Schultz, D., & Schultz, S. (2008). Theories of personality (ninth edition). Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth. 
Schwartz, S. J., Forthun, L. F., Ravert, R. D., Zamboanga, B. L., Umafia-Taylor, 
A. J., & Filton, B. J. (2010). Identity consolidation and health risk behaviours 
in college students. American Journal of Health Behaviour, 34, 214-224. 
Scior, K., Gray, J., Halsey, R., & Roth, A. (2007). Selection for clinical 
psychology training: Is there evidence of any bias against applicants from 
ethnic minorities? Clinical Psychology Forum, 175, 7-11. 
Scott, C. L., & Resnick, P. J. (2006). Violence risk assessment in persons with 
mental illness. Aggression and Violent Behaviour, 11, 598-611. 
Scott, S. (2009). Conduct disorders in childhood and adolescence. In M. Gelder 
et al. (Eds.), New Oxford textbook of psychiatry (second edition, Vol. 2, 
pp. 1654-1664). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Seeman, P. (2011). All roads to schizophrenia lead to dopamine supersensitivity 
and elevated dopamine D2 receptors. CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics, 
17, 118-132. 
Segal, L. (1991). Brief therapy: The MRI approach. In A. Gurman & D. Kniskern 
(Eds.), Handbook of family therapy (Vol. 2, pp. 17-199). New York: Brunner/ 
Mazel. 

REFERENCES 
379 
Selvini Palazzoli, S. (1988). The work of Mara Selvini Palazzoli. New York: 
Jason Aronson 
Semkovska, M., & McLoughlin, D. M. (2010). Objective cognitive performance 
associated with electroconvulsive therapy for depression: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Biological Psychiatry, 68, 568-577. 
Serpell, L., & Troup, N. (2003). Sociocultural theories of eating disorders. In J. 
Treasure, U. Schmidt, & E. van Furth (Eds.), Handbook of eating disorders 
(second edition, pp. 151-167). Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
Sexton, T. L. (2009). Functional family therapy: Traditional theory to evidence- 
based practice. In J. Bray & M. Stanton (Eds.), The Wiley—Blackwell handbook 
of family psychology (pp. 327-340). Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Sexton, T., & Alexander, J. (2003). Functional family therapy: A mature clinical 
model for working with at-risk adolescents and their families. In T. Sexton, G. 
Weeks, & M. Robbins (Eds.), Handbook of family therapy (third edition, pp. 
323-350). New York: Brunner-Routledge. 
Shadish, W., & Baldwin, S. (2003). Meta-analysis of MFT interventions. Journal 
of Marital and Family Therapy, 29, 547-570. 
Shadish, W., Matt, G., Navarro, A., Siegle, G., Crits-Cristoph, P., Hazelrigg, 
H., et al. (1997). Evidence that therapy works in clinically representative 
conditions. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 65, 355-365. 
Shaham, Y., & Hope, B. (2005). The role of neuroadaptations in relapse to drug 
seeking. Nature Neuroscience, 8, 1437-1439. 
Shapiro, D. A., & Shapiro, D. (1982). Meta-analysis of comparative therapy 
outcome studies: A replication and refinement. Psychological Bulletin, 92, 
581-604. 
Shaw, P. (2010). The shape of things to come in attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167(4), 363-365. 
Shedler, J. (2010). The efficacy of psychodynamic psychotherapy. American 
Psychologist, 65, 98-109. 
Sherlin, L., Arns, M., Lubar, J., & Sokhadze, E. (2010). A position paper on 
neurofeedback for the treatment of ADHD. Journal of Neurotherapy, 14(2), 
66-78. 
Shevlin, M., Houston, J. E., Dorahy, M. J., & Adamson, G. (2008). Cumulative 
traumas and psychosis: An analysis of the national comorbidity survey and 
the British psychiatric morbidity survey. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34, 193-199. 
Shibley-Hyde, J., Mezulis, A., & Abramson, L. (2008). The ABCs of depression: 
Integrating 
affective, 
biological, 
and cognitive models 
to explain the 
emergence of the gender difference in depression. Psychological Review, 
115, 291-313 
Shirk, S., & Karver, M. (2003). Prediction of treatment outcome from relationship 
variables in child and adolescent therapy: A meta-analytic review. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71, 452-464. 
Shyn, S. |., & Hamilton, S. P. (2010). The genetics of major depression: Moving 
beyond the monoamine hypothesis. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 33, 
125-140. 
Siegel, A. B. (2010). Dream interpretation in clinical practice: A century after 
Freud. Sleep Medicine Clinics, 5(2), 299-313. 
Siever, L., & Davis, L. (1991). A psychobiological perspective on the personality 
disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 148, 1647-1658. 
Silverman, W. K., & Albano, A. M. (1996). The Anxiety Disorder Interview 
Schedule for Children—1V—Child and Parent Version. Boulder, CO: Graywind. 
Silvia, P. J., & Kaufman, J. C. (2010). Creativity and mental illness. In J. Kaufman 
& R. Sternberg (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of creativity (pp. 381-394). 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 

380 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Singh, A. (2002). Recent and conceptualized basic research activities for eating 
disorder: A review and future directions. International Medical Journal, 9, 
83-85. 
Skelton, R. (2006). The Edinburgh international encyclopaedia of psychoanalysis. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
Skodol, A. E., Gunderson, J. G., Shea, M. T., McGlashan, T. H., Morey, L. C., 
Sanislow, C. A., et al. (2005). The Collaborative Longitudinal Personality 
Disorders Study (CLPS). Journal of Personality Disorders, 19, 487-504. 
Slade, M. (2009). Personal recovery and mental illness: A guide for mental 
health professional. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Slade, M., Loftus, L., Phelan, M., Thornicroft, G., & Wykes, T. (1999). The 
Camberwell Assessment of Need. London: Gaskell. 
Smith, D. K., & Chamberlain, P. (2010). Multidimensional treatment foster care 
for adolescents: Processes and outcomes. In J. R. Weisz & A. E. Kazdin 
(Eds.), Evidence-based psychotherapies 
for children and adolescents 
(second edition, pp. 243-258). New York: Guilford Press. 
Smith, L., Gates, S., & Foxcroft, D. (2006). Therapeutic communities for substance 
related disorder. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, \ssue 1, Art. No. 
CD005338. Published inline. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD005338.pub2 
Smith, M., & Glass, G. (1977). Meta-analysis of psychotherapy outcome studies. 
American Psychologist, 32, 752-760. 
Snyder, L. B., & Nadorff, P. G. (2010). Youth substance use and the media. 
In L. Scheier (Ed.), Handbook of drug use etiology: Theory, methods, and 
empirical findings (pp. 475-491). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 
Soeteman, D., Hakkaart-van Roijen, L., Verheul, R., & Busschbach, J. (2008). 
The economic burden of personality disorders in mental health care. Journal 
of Clinical Psychiatry, 69, 259-265. 
Solanto, M. (1998). Neuropsychopharmacological mechanisms of stimulant drug 
action in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A review and integration. 
Behavioural Brain Research, 94, 127-152. 
Spoont, M. R. (1992). Modulatory role of serotonin in neural information 
processing: Implications for human psychopathology. Psychological Bulletin, 
112, 330-350. 
Sprenkle, D., & Blow, A. (2004). Common factors and our sacred models. 
Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 30, 
113-130. 
Stampfl, T. G., & Levis, D. J. (1968). Implosive therapy—A behavioural therapy. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 6, 31-36. 
Stanley, B., & Brodsky, B. S. (2009). Dialectical behaviour therapy. In J. Oldham, 
A. Skodol, & D. Bender (Eds.), Essentials of personality disorders (pp. 235- 
252). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Starcevic, V., & Berle, D. (2006). Cognitive specificity of anxiety disorders: A 
review of selected key constructs. Depression and Anxiety, 23, 51-61. 
Steer, R., Beck, J., Beck, A., & Jolly, J. (2005). Beck Youth Inventories for 
Children and Adolescents (second edition) (BYI-II). San Antonio, TX: 
Psychological Corporation. 
Stein, D., & Lambert, M. (1995). Graduate training in psychotherapy: Are 
therapy outcomes enhanced? Journal of Consulting & Clinical Psychology, 
63, 182-196. 
Steinhausen, J. (2002). The outcome of anorexia nervosa in the 20th century. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 1284-1293. 
Stern, A. (1938). Psychoanalytic investigation of and therapy in the borderline 
group of neuroses. Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 7, 467-489. 

REFERENCES 
381 
Stevenson, J. (2010). Recent research on food additives: Implications for 
CAMH. Child and Adolescent Mental Health, 15(3), 130-133. 
Stewart, D. G., & Davis, K. L. (2008). Neuropathology. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste 
(Eds.), Clinical handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 44-54). New York: Guilford 
Press. 
Stewart, S. E., Jenike, E., & Jenike, M. A. (2009). Biological treatment for 
obsessive-compulsive disorder. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford 
handbook of anxiety and related disorders (pp. 375-390). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Stice, E. (2002). Risk and maintenance factors for eating pathology: A meta- 
analytic review. Psychological Bulletin, 825-848. 
Stice, E., Agras, S., & Hammer, L. (1999). Risk factors for the development of 
childhood eating disturbances: A five year prospective study. /nternational 
Journal of Eating Disorders, 25, 375-387. 
Stiles, W., & Wolfe, B. (2006). Relationship factors in treating anxiety disorders. 
In L. Castonguay & L. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of therapeutic change that 
work (pp. 155-166). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Still, G. (1902). The Coulstonian lectures on some abnormal physical conditions 
in children, Lancet i, 1008-1012, 1077-1082, 1163-1169. 
Strack, 
S. (2010). 
Evidence-based 
assessment 
and 
instrumentation 
for 
personality disorders. In J. J. Magnavita (Ed.), Evidence-based treatment 
of personality dysfunction: Principles, methods, and processes (pp. 19-48). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Strauss, A. & Lehtinen, L. (1947). Psychopathology and education of the brain- 
injured child. New York: Grune & Stratton. 
Striegel-Moore, R. H., & Bulik, C. M. (2007). Risk factors for eating disorders. 
American Psychologist (Special Issue: Eating Disorders), 62(3), 181-198. 
Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal theory of psychiatry. New York: Norton. 
Sullivan, P., Kendler, K., & Neale, M. (2003). Schizophrenia as a complex 
trait—Evidence from a meta-analysis of twin studies. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 60, 
1187-1192. 
Sullivan, P., Neale, M., & Kendler, K. (2000). Genetic epidemiology of major 
depression: Review and meta-analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 
1552-1562. 
Sumner, J. A., Griffith, J., & Mineka, S. (2010). Overgeneral autobiographical 
memory as a predictor of the course of depression: A meta-analysis. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48, 614-625. 
Susman, E. J. (2006). Psychobiology of persistent antisocial behaviour: Stress, 
early vulnerabilities and the attenuation hypothesis. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioural Reviews, 30, 376-389. 
Svartberg, M., & McCullough, 
L. (2010). Cluster C personality disorders: 
Prevalence, phenomenology, treatment effects, and principles of treatment. 
InJ. Clarkin, O. Fonagy, & G. Gabbard (Eds.), Psychodynamic psychotherapy 
for personality disorders: A clinical handbook (pp. 337-368). Arlington, VA: 
American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Swanson, J. M., & Volkow, N. D. (2009). Psychopharmacology: Concepts and 
opinions about the use of stimulant medications. Journal of Child Psychology 
and Psychiatry, 50(1-2), 180-193. 
Szasz, T. (2010). Psychiatry, anti-psychiatry, critical psychiatry: What do these 
terms mean? Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology, 17, 229-232. 
Taft, C. T., Watkins, L. E., Stafford, J., Street, A. E., & Monson, C. M. (2011). 
Posttraumatic stress disorder and intimate relationship problems: A meta- 
analysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 79, 22-33. 

382 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
Tai, S., & Turkington, D. (2009). The evolution of cognitive behaviour therapy 
for schizophrenia: Current practice and recent developments. Schizophrenia 
Bulletin, 35, 865-873. 
. 
Tammenmaa, |. A., Sailas, E., McGrath, J. J., Soares-Weiser, K., & Wahlbeck, 
K. (2004). Systematic review of cholinergic drugs for neuroleptic-induced 
tardive dyskinesia: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Progress 
in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 28(7), 1099-1107. 
Tandon, R., Keshavan, M. S., & Nasrallah, H.-A. (2008a). Schizophrenia, 
“just the facts”: What we know in 2008. Part 1: Overview. Schizophrenia 
Research, 100, 4—19. 
Tandon, R., Keshavan, M. S., & Nasrallah, H. A. (2008b). Schizophrenia, “just 
the facts”: What we know in 2008. Part 2: Epidemiology and aetiology. 
Schizophrenia Research, 102, 1-18. 
Tandon, R., Nasrallah, H. A., & Keshavan, M. S. (2009). Schizophrenia, “just the 
facts” 4. Clinical features and conceptualization. Schizophrenia Research, 
110, 1-23. 
Tandon, R., Nasrallah, H. A., & Keshavan, M. S. (2010). Schizophrenia, “just the 
facts” 5. Treatment and prevention past, present and future. Schizophrenia 
Research, 122, 1-23. 
Tanofsky-Kraff, M., & Wilfley, D. E. (2010). Interpersonal psychotherapy for the 
treatment of eating disorders. In W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of 
eating disorders (pp. 348-372). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Taylor, E. (2008). Disorders of attention and activity. In M. Rutter et al. (Eds.), 
Rutter’s child and adolescent psychiatry (fifth edition, pp. 521-542). London: 
Blackwell. 
Taylor, E., & Rogers, J. W. (2005). Practitioner review: Early adversity and 
developmental disorders. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 46(5), 
451-467. 
Teichner, G., & Golden, C. J. (2000). The relationship of neuropsychological 
impairment to conduct disorder in adolescence: A conceptual review. 
Aggression and Violent Behaviour, 5, 509-528. 
Tenhula, W. N., & Bellack, A. S. (2008). Social skills training. In K. Mueser & 
D. Jeste (Eds.), Clinical handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 240-248). New 
York: Guilford Press. 
Tevyaw, T., & Monti, P. (2004). Motivational enhancement and other brief 
interventions for adolescent substance abuse: Foundations, applications and 
evaluations. Addiction, 99, 63-75. 
Thapar, A., & Scourfield, J. (2002). Childhood disorders. In P. McGuffin, M. 
Owen, & |. Gottesman (Eds.), Psychiatric genetics and genomics (pp. 147— 
180). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Thapar, A., & Stergiakouli, E. (2008). An overview on the genetics of ADHD. 
Acta Psychologica Sinica (Special Issue: Behavioural Genetics), 40(10), 
1088-1098. 
Thase, M. (2009). Neurobiological aspects of depression. 
In H. Gotlib & 
C. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (second edition, pp. 187-217). 
New York: Guilford Press. 
Thase, M., & Jindal, R. (2004). Combining psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy 
for treatment of mental disorders. In M. Lambert (Ed.), Bergin and Garfield’s 
handbook of psychotherapy and behaviour change (fifth edition, pp. 743- 
766). New York: Wiley. 
Thompson, P., Vidal, C., Giedd, J., Gochman, P. Blumenthal, J., Nicolson, R., 
et al. (2001). Mapping adolescent brain change reveals dynamic wave of 
accelerated gray matter loss in very early-onset schizophrenia. Proceedings 

REFERENCES 
383 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 98, 
11650-11655. 
Thompson-Brenner, H., Glass, S., & Westen, D. (2003). A multidimensional 
meta-analysis of psychotherapy for bulimia nervosa. Clinical Psychology: 
Science and Practice, 10, 268-287. 
Thompson-Brenner, H., Weingeroff, J., & Westen, D. (2009). Empirical support 
for psychodynamic psychotherapy for eating disorders. In R. A. Levy & J. S. 
Ablon (Eds.), Handbook of evidence-based psychodynamic psychotherapy: 
Bridging the gap between science and practice (pp. 67-92). Totowa, NJ: 
Humana Press. 
Tomas, P., Fuentes, |., Roder, V., & Ruiz, J. (2010). Cognitive rehabilitation 
programs in schizophrenia: Current status and perspectives international. 
Journal of Psychology and Psychological Therapy, 10, 191-204. 
Toplak, M. E., Connors, L., Shuster, J., Knezevic, B., & Parks, S. (2008). Review 
of cognitive, 
cognitive-behavioural, 
and neural-based 
interventions 
for 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Clinical Psychology Review, 
28(5), 801-823. 
Torgersen, S, (2009). Prevalence, sociodemographics, and functional impair- 
ment. In J. Oldham, A. Skodol, & D. Bender (Eds.), Essentials of personality 
disorders (pp. 83-102). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Toumbourou, J. W., Stockwell, T., Neighbors, C., Marlatt, G. A., Sturge, J., & 
Rehm, J. (2007). Interventions to reduce harm associated with adolescent 
substance use. The Lancet, 369(9570), 1391-1401. 
Trauer, T., Tobias, G., & Slade, M. (2008). Development and evaluation of a 
patient-rated version of the Camberwell Assessment of Need Short Appraisal 
Schedule (CANSAS-P). Community Mental Health Journal, 44, 113-124. 
Turner, E. H., Matthews, A. M., Linardatos, E., Tell, R. A., & Rosenthal, R. 
(2008). Selective publication of antidepressant trials and its influence on 
apparent efficacy. New England Journal of Medicine, 358, 252-260. 
Udechuku, A., Nguyen, T., Hill, R., & Szego, K. (2010). Antidepressants in 
pregnancy: A systematic review. Australian and New Zealand Journal of 
Psychiatry, 44, 978-996. 
US-UK Team (1974). The diagnosis and psychopathology of schizophrenia in 
New York and London. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 1, 80-102. 
Vahia, |. V., & Cohen, C. |. (2008). Psychopathology. In K. Mueser & D. Jeste (Eds.), 
Clinical handbook of schizophrenia (pp. 82-90). New York: Guilford Press. 
Van Ameringen, M., Mancini, C., & Patterson, B. (2009). Pharmacotherapy for 
social anxiety disorder and specific phobia. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein 
(Eds.), Oxford handbook of anxiety and related disorders (pp. 321-333). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
van Goozen, S. H. M., Fairchild, G., & Harold, G. T. (2008). The role of 
neurobiological deficits in childhood antisocial behaviour. Current Directions 
in Psychological Science, 17(3), 224—228. 
van Goozen, S. H. M., Fairchild, G., Snoek, H., & Harold, G. T. (2007). The 
evidence for a neurobiological model of childhood antisocial behaviour. 
Psychological Bulletin, 
133(1), 149-182. 
Vittengl, J., Clark, L., Dunn, T., & Jarrett, R. (2007). Reducing relapse and 
recurrence in unipolar depression: A comparative meta-analysis of cognitive- 
behavioural therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 75, 475— 
488. 
Vogele, C., & Gibson, E. L. (2010). Mood, emotions, and eating disorders. In 
W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of eating disorders (pp. 180-205). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 

384 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
Wade, T. D. (2010). Genetic influences on eating and the eating disorders. In 
W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of eating disorders (pp. 103-122). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
Waldron, H. B., & Brody, J. L. (2010). Functional family therapy for adolescent 
substance use disorders. In J. R. Weisz & A. E. Kazdin (Eds.), Evidence- 
based psychotherapies 
for children and adolescents (second 
edition, 
pp. 401-415). New York: Guilford Press. 
Waldron, H. B., & Turner, C. W. (2008). Evidence-based psychosocial treatments 
for adolescent substance abuse. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent 
Psychology (Special Issue: Evidence-Based Psychosocial Treatments for 
Children and Adolescents: A Ten Year Update), 37, 238-261. 
Walker, E., Kestler, L. & Bollini, A. (2004). Schizophrenia: Aetiology and course. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 401-430. 
Walker, E., Mittal, V., & Tessner, K. (2008). Stress and the hypothalamic pituitary 
adrenal axis in the developmental course of schizophrenia. Annual Review of 
Clinical Psychology, 4, 189-216. 
Walton, K. E., Ormel, J., & Krueger, R. F. (2011). The dimensional nature of 
externalizing behaviours in adolescence: Evidence from a direct comparison 
of categorical, dimensional, and hybrid models. Journal of Abnormal Child 
Psychology, 39, 553-561. 
Wampold, B. (2001). The great psychotherapy debate: Models, methods, and 
findings. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Watson, D. (2009). Differentiating the mood and anxiety disorders: A quadripartite 
model. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 5, 221-247. 
Watson, H. J., & Rees, C. S. (2008). Meta-analysis of randomized, controlled 
treatment trials for pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry, 49(5), 489-498. 
Webster-Stratton, C., & Reid, M. J. (2010). The Incredible Years parents, 
teachers, and children training series: A multifaceted treatment approach for 
young children with conduct disorders. In J. R. Weisz & A. E. Kazdin (Eds.), 
Evidence-based psychotherapies for children and adolescents (second 
edition, pp. 194-210). New York: Guilford Press. 
Wechsler, D. (2004a). Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children. Fourth Edition 
UK (WISC-IV“). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. 
Wechsler, D. (2004b). Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence—Il! 
UK (WPPSI-I/I+*). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. 
Wechsler, D. (2005). Wechsler Individual Achievement Test-Il UK (WIAT-IIX. 
San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. 
Wechsler, D. (2009). Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale—Fourth Edition UK 
(WAIS-IV*). San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. 
Weeks, J. W., Heimberg, R. G., Fresco, D. M., Hart, T. A., Turk, C. L., Schnieier, 
F. R., et al. (2005). Empirical validation and psychometric evaluation of 
the Brief Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale in patients with social anxiety 
disorder. Psychological Assessment, 17, 179-190. 
Weinberg, W., Harper, C., & Brumback, 
R. (2002). Substance use and 
abuse: Epidemiology, pharmacological considerations, 
identification and 
suggestions towards management. In M. Rutter & E. Taylor (Eds.), Child 
and adolescent psychiatry (fourth edition, pp. 437-454). Oxford: Blackwell. 
Weissman, A., & Beck, A. (1978). Development and validation of the Dysfunc- 
tional Attitudes Scale. Paper presented at AABT, Chicago. Scale is on pp. 
100-104 of Williams, M. (1992). The Psychological treatment of depression 
(second edition). London: Routledge. 

REFERENCES 
385 
Weisz, 
J., Weiss, 
B., Alicke, 
M., & Klotz, 
M. (1987). 
Effectiveness 
of 
psychotherapy with children and adolescents: A meta-analysis for clinicians. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 55, 542-549. 
Weisz, J., Weiss, B., Han, S. & Granger, D. (1995). Effects of psychotherapy with 
children and adolescents revisited: A meta-analysis of treatment outcome 
studies. Psychological Bulletin, 
117, 450-468. 
West, R. (2006). Theory of addiction. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Wetchler, J., & Piercy, F. (1996). Experiential family therapies. In F. Piercy et al. 
(Eds.), Family therapy sourcebook (second edition, pp. 79-105). New York: 
Guilford. 
Widiger, T. A. (2008). Personality disorders. In J. Hunsley & E. J. Mash (Eds.), A 
guide to assessments that work (pp. 413-435). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Widiger, T. A., & Mullins-Sweatt, S. N. (2010). Clinical utility of a dimensional 
model of personality disorder. Professional Psychology: Research and 
Practice, 41, 488-494. 
Wieder, H. & Kaplan, E. (1969). Drug use in adolescents: Psychodynamic mean- 
ing and pharmacological effect. Psychoanalytic Study of the Child, 24, 399. 
Wierzbicki, M., & Pekarik, G. (1993). A meta-analysis of psychotherapy dropout. 
Professional Psychology: Research & Practice, 24, 190-195. 
Wikler, 
A. (1973). Dynamics 
of drug dependence. Archives 
of General 
Psychiatry, 28, 611-616. 
Williams, R. & Chang, S. (2000). 
A comprehensive and comparative review 
of adolescent substance abuse treatment outcome. Clinical Psychology: 
Science and Practice, 7, 138-166. 
Williams, W. (2001). Relevant experience. The Psychologist, 14(4), 188-189. 
Wills, T. A., & Ainette, M. G. (2010). Temperament, self-control, and adolescent 
substance use: A two-factor model of etiological processes. In L. Scheier 
(Ed.), Handbook of drug use etiology: Theory, methods, and empirical findings 
(pp. 127-146). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Wilson, G. (2010). Cognitive behavioural therapy for eating disorders. 
In 
W. S. Agras (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of eating disorders (pp. 331-347). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
Wilson, G., & Fairburn, C. (2007). Treatments for eating disorders. In P. Nathan 
& J. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments that work (third edition, pp. 579— 
609). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Winkelmann, 
K., Stefini, A., Hartmann, M., Geiser-Elze, A., Kromiller, A., 
Schenkenbach, C., et al. (2005). Efficacy of psychodynamic short-term 
psychotherapy for children and adolescents with behavioural disorders. 
Praxis der Kinderpsychologie und Kinderpsychiatrie, 54, 598-614. 
Winter, D., & Viney, L. (2005). Personal construct psychotherapy: Advances in 
theory, practice and research. London: Whurr. 
Winters, K. (1991). Personal Experience Screening Questionnaire. Los Angeles: 
Western Psychological Services. 
Winters, K., & Henly, G. (1989). Personal Experience Inventory. Los Angeles: 
Western Psychological Services. 
Winters, K. C., Stinchfield, R. D., Opland, E., Weller, C., & Latimer, W. W. 
(2000). The effectiveness of the Minnesota Model approach in the treatment 
of adolescent drug abusers. Addiction, 95, 601-612. 
Witkiewitz, K., & Marlatt, G. A. (2004). Relapse prevention for alcohol and drug 
problems: That was zen, this is tao. American Psychologist, 59, 224-235. 
Wolpe, J. (1969). The practice of behaviour therapy. New York: Pergamon 
Press. 

386 CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTRODUCTION 
Woods, R., & Clare, L. (2008). Handbook of the clinical psychology of ageing 
(second edition). Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
Woody, S., & Ollendick, T. (2006). Technique factors in treating anxiety 
disorders. In L. Castonguay & L. Beutler (Eds.), Principles of therapeutic 
change that work (pp. 167-186). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
World Health Organization (1992). The iCD-10 Classification of Mental and 
Behavioural Disorders. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO. 
Xie, P., Kranzler, H., Poling, J., Stein, M., Anton, 
R., Brady, K., et al. (2009). 
Interactive effect of stressful 
life events and the serotonin transporter 
5-HTTLPR 
genotype 
on 
posttraumatic 
stress 
disorder 
diagnosis 
in 
2 independent populations. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66, 1201-1209. 
Yeomans, F. E., & Diamond, D. (2010). Transference-focused psychotherapy 
and borderline personality disorder. In J. Clarkin, O. Fonagy, & G. Gabbard 
(Eds.), Psychodynamic psychotherapy for personality disorders: A clinical 
handbook (pp. 209-238). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Young, 
S., & Amarasinghe, 
J. 
M. 
(2010). 
Practitioner 
review: 
Non- 
pharmacological treatments for ADHD: A lifespan approach. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry, 51(2), 
116-133. 
Zahradnik, M., & Stewart, S. H. (2009). Anxiety disorders and substance use 
disorder comorbidity. In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook 
of anxiety and related disorders (pp. 565-575). New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Zajecka, J., & Goldstein, C. (2009). Combining medications to achieve remission. 
In T. L. Schwartz & T. J. Petersen (Eds.), Depression: Treatment strategies 
and management (second edition, pp. 54-100). London: Inform Healthcare. 
Zgierska, A., Rabago, D., Chawla, N., Kushner, K., Koehler, R., & Marlatt, A. 
(2009). Mindfulness meditation for substance use disorders: A systematic 
review. Substance Abuse, 30, 266-294. 
Ziguras, S., & Stuart, G. (2000). A meta-analysis of the effectiveness of mental 
health case management over 20 years. Psychiatric Services, 51, 1410—- 
1421. 
Zimmerman, M., Chelminski, |., & Young, D. (2008). The frequency of personality 
disorders in psychiatric patients. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 31, 
405-420. 
Zohar, J., Fostick, 
L. & Juven-Wetzler, 
E. (2009). Obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. In M. Geider et al. (Eds.), New Oxford textbook of psychiatry 
(second edition, Vol. 1, pp. 765-774). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Zubin, J., & Spring, B. (1977). Vulnerability: A new view of schizophrenia. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 86, 103-126. 
Zuckerman, M. (2007). Sensation seeking and risky behaviour. Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. 

Index 
A-CRA 113 
abstinence violation effect 
114 
addictive personality 
110 
ADHD 36-49, 105, 297; 
assessment 47-8; 
case example 36-8; 
Clinical features 39; 
cognitive behavioural 
approaches 44—5; 
Connors Rating Scale 
47; controversies 
68-9; DAWBA 47; 
diagnostic criteria 40; 
diet 43; drug misuse 
105; epidemiology 
39-41; executive 
function 45; formulation 
38, 48; genetics 
41-2; hypo-arousal 
44; methylphenidate 
43, 49; MTA 43; 
neurofeedback 49; 
neurotransmitter 
dysregulation 43; 
organic deficits 42—3; 
parent training 49; 
systemic theory 
46-7; theories 41-47; 
treatment 48-9 
ADIS 159 
adult mental health 7 
alcohol misuse, adolescent 
95-125 
alogia 208. 
anakastic personality 
disorder 250 
anorexia nervosa 73-94; 
assessment 90; case 
study 75-9; clinical 
features 80-2; 
cognitive behavioural 
theories 85-7; 
controversies 92; 
course 79; diagnostic 
criteria 74; DSM IV 
74; EDE 90; EDI 90; 
epidemiology 79; 
family therapy 88-89; 
formulation 78, 91; 
genetics 83; ICD 10 74; 
interpersonal therapy 
90; intervention 91-2; 
mood dysregulation 84; 
psychoanalytic theories 
84—5; risk factors 
79-80; SSRI 84; 
starvation 84; stress 
88; systemic theories 
87-90; TCA 84 
antidepressants 84, 149, 
161, 181, 201 
antipsychotic medication 
227 
antisocial personality 
disorder 254-6; case 
example 255-6; 
clinical features 
254—5; neurobiology 
267-8 
anxiety disorders 126-166; 
ADIS 159; assessment 
159-60; attentional 
bias 150; clinical 
features 140-5; 
cognitive behavioural 
theories 153-6; coping 
strategies 151; course 
145-6; DSM IV 127; 
epidemiology 145-6; 
family systems theory 
157-8; family therapy 
158; formulation 
12971327135, 139; 
160; GABA 148-9; 
generalized anxiety 
disorder 131-3; 
genetics 147; HPA 
axis 147; ICD 10 127; 
neurobiology 148-9; 
obsessive compulsive 
disorder (OCD) 
137-40; panic disorder 
133-6; personality 
traits 150; phobias 
130-1; posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) 
136-7; psychoanalytic 
theories 151-3; PTSD 
136-7; risk factors 
145-6; separation 
anxiety disorder 
127-30; SSRI 149, 
161; stepped care 
160-1; systematic 
desensitization 130; 
temperament 149-50; 
treatment 160-2; 
triangles of conflict 
and person 153 
anxious avoidant 
personality disorder 
250 

388 INDEX 
ASEBA 65 
assertive community 
treatment 236 
assessment, ADHD 47-8; 
anxiety disorders 
159-60; conduct 
disorder 65-6; 
depression 196; 
drug misuse 119-20; 
eating disorders 90; 
personality disorders 
280; schizophrenia 
237-8 
attachment theory, 
conduct disorder 60-1; 
depression 185 
attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder 
36—49; assessment 
47-8; case 
example 36-8; 
Clinical features 39; 
cognitive behavioural 
approaches 44—5; 
Connors Rating Scale 
47; controversies 
68-9; DAWBA 47; 
diagnostic criteria 40; 
diet 43; drug. misuse 
105; epidemiology 
39-41; executive 
function 45; formulation 
38, 48; genetics 
41-2; hypo-arousal 
44; methylphenidate 
43, 49; MTA 43; 
neurofeedback 49; 
neurotransmitter 
dysregulation 43; 
organic deficits 42-3; 
parent training 49; 
systemic theory 46-7; 
treatment 48-9 
attentional bias 150 
attributional style 
questionnaire 193 
avoidant personality 
disorder, case example 
260; clinical features 
260 
avolition 208 
BDI 196 
behavioural theory of 
depression 190 
biological model 292-8; 
achievements 292-5; 
assumptions 292; 
limitations 295-8 
bipolar disorder 168, 176—7 
Bleuler’s theory of 
schizophrenia 221, 233 
borderline personality 
disorder 256-7; case 
example 257; clinical 
features 256-7; 
dialectical behaviour 
therapy 276-7; 
mentalization based 
psychotherapy 274-5; 
neurobiology 266-7; 
transference focused 
psychotherapy 269-74 
BPRS 237 
brief strategic family 
therapy 115 
bulimia nervosa 73-94; 
assessment 90; 
case study 75-9; 
Clinical features 
80-2; cognitive 
behavioural theories 
85-7; controversies 92; 
course 79; diagnostic 
criteria 74; drug 
misuse 105; DSM 
IV 74; EDE 90; EDI 
90; epidemiology 79; 
family therapy 88-89; 
formulation 78, 91; 
genetics 83; ICD 10 74; 
interpersonal therapy 
90; intervention 91-2; 
mood dysregulation 84; 
psychoanalytic 
theories 84—5; risk 
factors 79-80; SSRI 
84; starvation 84; 
. Stress 88; systemic 
theories 87-90; 
TCA 84 
BYI 196 
CAN 237 
cannabis 110 
case example, ADHD 
36-8; conduct disorder 
49-54; depression 
169-72; drug misuse 
96-9; eating disorders 
75-79; generalized 
anxiety disorder 131-3; 
OCD 137-40; panic 
disorder 133-6; PTSD 
136-7; schizophrenia 
208-13; separation 
anxiety disorder 
127-30; personality 
disorders 248-263 
case series 313 
case studies 311-2 
catatonic behaviour 208, 
2139216 
catatonic schizophrenia 217 
CFI 238 
child abuse 300; conduct 
disorder 64; drug 
misuse 111; multiple 
personality disorder 
241; personality 
disorders 268 
child and adolescent mental 
health 6 
childhood disorders 35—71 
circadian rhythms 182 
classical conditioning, drug 
misuse 113 
Classification 294: 
depression 176-7; 
drug misuse 99-101; 
schizophrenia 217 
client-centred humanistic 
psychotherapy 305, 
318 

INDEX 
389 
Clinical features, ADHD 39; 
cognitive remediation 
contamination, behaviour 
anxiety disorders 
in schizophrenia 
problems 68 
140-5; conduct 
233 
continuing professional 
disorder 54-6; 
cognitive theory of 
development 5 
depression 172-6; 
depression 190-3 
controversies, ADHD 68-9; 
drug misuse 101-5; 
common factors 322-7 
Clinical psychololgy 
eating disorders 80-2; 
conduct disorder 49-68; 
29-31; conduct 
personality disorders 
antisocial personality 
disorder 68-9; 
248-63; schizophrenia 
disorder 255; ASEBA 
depression 200-3; 
213 
65; assessment 65-6; 
drug misuse 121-2; 
clinical psychology 1-33; 
attachment theory 
eating disorders 92; 
adult mental health 7; 
60-1; case example 
personality disorders 
child and adolescent 
49-54; child abuse 
281-8; schizophrenia 
mental health 6; 
64; clinical features 
239-44 
Clinical psychology 
54-6; coercive family 
coping, anxiety disorders 
training 9-27; 
process 62-3; cognitive 
151; depression 185 
continuing professional 
behavioural theory 
COPT 216 
development 5; 
61-63; controversies 
cue exposure treatment 
controversies 29-31; 
68-9; diagnostic criteria 
113 
intellectual disability 
50-1; drug misuse 
cyclothymia 176 
7-8; neuropsychology 
105; executive function 
8; older adults 7; related 
59-60; formulation 
DAWBA 47, 196 
professions 27-9; roles 
54, 66; genetics 
defence mechanisms 
3—9; the discipline 
56; hypoarousal 
271-2 
2; the profession 2; 
58-9; intervention 
delusions 207-8, 213-15, 
training 9-27 
66—8; modelling 
231-2 
coercive family process 
62; multisystemic 
dementia praecox 221 
62-3 
ecological theory 64—5; 
dependent personality 
cognitive behavioural 
multisystemic therapy 
disorder 260—1; case 
model 300-303; 
65; neuroanatomical 
example 261; clinical 
achievements 301-2; 
abnormalities 57; 
features 260-1 
assumptions 300-1; 
neuropsychological 
depression 167-206; 
limitations 302-3 
deficits 59-60; 
antidepressants 181, 
cognitive behaviour therapy 
neurotransmitter 
201; assessment 
(CBT) 61-63; 300-3; 
dysregulation 57-8; 
196; attachment 185; 
318-9; ADHD 44-5; 
psychoanalysis 60; 
BDI 196; behavioural 
anxiety disorders 
psychodynamic 
theory 190; case 
153-6; conduct 
theories 60-1; SDQ 
example 169-72; 
disorder 61-63; 
65; social information 
circadian rhythms 182; 
depression 189-94; 
processing 61-2; 
classification 176-7; 
drug misuse 112-14; 
social skills 62; 
Clinical features 172-6; 
eating disorders 85-7; 
sociological theory 64; 
cognitive behavioural 
personality disorders 
systems theory 63-4; 
theories 189-94; 
276-8; schizophrenia 
temperament 59 
~ cognitive bias 185; 
230-2 
Connors Rating Scale 
cognitive theory 190-3; 
cognitive bias, anxiety 
47 
controversies 200-3; 
disorders 150; 
constructivist 
coping 185; course 
depression 185 
psychotherapy 305-6 
177-8; cyclothymia 

390 INDEX 
176; diagnostic criteria 
168; DSM IV 168; 
dysthymia 176; ECT 
201-2; endogenous 
depression 177; 
epidemiology 177-8; 
executive function 185; 
expressed emotion 
186; family therapy 
195; formulation 172, 
197; gender 202-3; 
genetics 179-80; 
HPA axis 181-2; 
HRS 196; ICD 10 
168; interpersonal 
style 185-6; learned 
helplessness 193-4; 
MAOI 181; masked 
depression 177; 
meloncholia1 72-3; 
mentalizing 189; 
mindfulness 200; 
neurobiology 180; 
neurotic depression 
177; neurotransmitters 
180-1; Penn Resiliency 
Programme 193; 
personality traits 
184-5; psychoanalytic 
theory 186-9; psychotic 
depression 173, 177; 
reactive depression 
177; risk assessment 
196-9; risk factors 
177-8; SCID 196; 
seasonal affective 
disorder 168, 182; 
self-harm 176; sleep 
182; social skills 
186; sociotropy 184, 
186; SSRI 181, 201; 
stepped care 200; 
stress 182-3; suicide 
176, 196-9; system 
theory 194-5; TCA 
181, 201; temperament 
183-4; treatment 
199-200; triangles 
of conflict and person 
189 
derailment 215 
deterioration 321 
diagnostic criteria, ADHD, 
40; conduct disorder, 
50-1; depression 
168; drug misuse 
100; eating disorders 
74; oppositional 
defiant disorder 50-1; 
schizophrenia 209 
dialectical behaviour 
therapy for borderline 
personality disorder 
276-7 
diathesis stress theory 
292, 296; personality 
disorders 263; 
schizophrenia 219, 
227-8 
diet, ADHD 43-4 
dimensional approaches 
296; childhood 
disorders 68-9; 
personality disorders 
281-3; schizophrenia 
221, 240-1 
disease model 292; drug 
misuse 106 
disorganized schizophrenia 
217 
dissocial personality 
disorder 250 
dissociative identity 
disorder 241-2 
dopamine hypothesis of 
schizophrenia 224—5 
dopamine-2 antagonists 
drop-out from 
psychotherapy 321 
drug misuse 95-125; 
A-CRA 113; abstinence 
violation effect 114; 
addictive personality 
110; ADHD 105; 
assessment 119-20; 
case study 96-9; 
classical conditioning 
113; classification 
. 99-101; clinical 
features 101-5; 
cognitive behavioural 
theories 
112-14; 
controversies 121-2; 
cue exposure treatment 
113; dependence 
syndrome 100; 
diagnostic criteria 
100; disease model 
106; DSM IV 100; 
dual diagnosis 105; 
epidemiology 99-101; 
family therapy 115; 
formulation 97, 120; 
functional family 
therapy 115; GAIN 
119; genetics 107; ICD 
10 100; identity 112; 
learning difficulties 
111-12; methadone 
110; motivational 
interviewing 114; 
multidimensional 
family therapy 115; 
multisystemic therapy 
115; Narcotics 
Anonymous 106, 
121; neurobiology 
108-10; norms 117; 
operant conditioning 
112-13; peer group 
116; PRIME 118-19; 
risk factors 99-102; 
schizophrenia 219-20; 
self-medication 111; 
sexual abuse 111; 
social disadvantage 
116; stages of change 
117; stress 111; 
substance dependence 
100; systemic theories 
114-117; temperament 
107-8; treatment 
119; twelve steps of 
Narcotics Anonymous 

106; wilderness therapy 
108 
DSM IV 294; ADHD 40; 
anxiety disorders 127; 
conduct disorder, 
50-1; depression 
168; drug misuse 
100; eating disorder 
74; multiaxial system 
248; oppositional 
defiant disorder 50-1; 
schizophrenia 209 
dual diagnosis 105 
dysthymia 176 
eating disorders 73-94; 
assessment 90; case 
study 75-9; clinical 
features 80-2; cognitive 
behavioural theories 
85-7; controversies 92: 
course 79; diagnostic 
criteria 74; DSM IV 
74; EDE 90; EDI 90; 
epidemiology 79; 
family therapy 88-9; 
formulation 78, 91; 
genetics 83; ICD 10 74; 
interpersonal therapy 
90; intervention 91-2; 
mood dysregulation 84; 
psychoanalytic theories 
84—5; risk factors 79— 
80; SSRI 84; starvation 
84; stress 88; systemic 
theories 87-90; TCA 84 
ECT 201-2, 297 
EDE 90 
EDI 90 
EEG 224 
effectiveness studies 316—7 
efficacy studies 316-7 
endogenous depression 
We 
epidemiology, ADHD 
39-41; anxiety 
disorders 145-6; 
conduct disorder 56; 
depression 177-8; 
drug misuse 99-101; 
eating disorders 79; 
oppositional defiant 
disorder 56; personality 
disorders 263-4; 
schizophrenia 218 
evidence-based practice 
311 
executive function 59-60; 
ADHD 45; conduct 
disorder 59-60; 
depression 185; 
schizophrenia 215, 
224 
expressed emotion, 
depression 186; 
schizophrenia 212, 
220, 228, 238 
eye movements 224 
family systems model 
303-5; achievements 
304—5; assumptions 
303-4; limitations 
305 
family therapy 303-5, 319; 
anxiety disorders 158; 
conduct disorders 67; 
depression 195; drug 
misuse 115; eating 
disorders 88-89; 
schizophrenia 229-30 
formulation, ADHD 38, 48; 
anxiety disorders 129, 
132, 135, 139, 160; 
conduct disorder 54, 
66; depression 172, 
197; drug misuse 97, 
120; eating disorders 
78, 91; generalized 
anxiety disorder 
132; OCD 139; 
panic disorder 135; 
psychoanalytic 153; 
schizophrenia 212, 
238; separation anxiety 
disorder 129 
INDEX 
391 
foster care 67 
functional family therapy 
672115 
GABA 148-9 
GAF 237 
GAIN 119 
generalized anxiety 
disorder (GAD) 131-3 
genetics, ADHD 41-2; 
anxiety disorders 147; 
conduct disorder 56; 
depression 179-80; 
drug misuse 107; 
eating disorders 83; 
personality disorders 
265-6; schizophrenia 
222-3 
glutamate hypothesis 
of schizophrenia 
224-6 
hallucinations 207-8, 
213-14, 231 
HCR-20 279 
hebephrenic schizophrenia 
216-17 
histrionic personality 
disorder, case example 
258; clinical features 
257-8 
HIV/AIDS 216 
HPA axis 181-2; anxiety 
disorders 147; 
schizophrenia 220, 
228, 230 
HRS 196 
hypoarousal 44, 58-9 
ICD 10 204; ADHD 40; 
anxiety disorders 127; 
conduct disorder, 
50-1; depression 
168; drug misuse 
100; eating disorders 
74; oppositional 
defiant disorder 50-1; 
schizophrenia 209 

392 INDEX 
identity 112 
intellectual disability 7-8 
interpersonal style 185-6 
interpersonal therapy 90 
IPDE 280 
Kraepelin’s theory of 
schizophrenia 221, 233 
learned helplessness 
193-4 
learning difficulties 
111-12 
LSD.110 
MAO! 181 
marital therapy 278, 319 
masked depression 177 
MCMI 279 
MDMA 110 
medical cost offset 
321-2 
medical model 292 
melancholia 172-3 
mentalizing, depression 
189; borderline 
personality disorder 
274-5 
meta-analysis 314-16 
methadone 110 
methylphenidate 43 
mindfulness 200 
MMPI 279 
modelling 62 
models of clinical 
psychology 291-309; 
biological model 
292-8; client-centred 
humanistic model 
305; cognitive 
behavioural model 
300-3; constructivist 
psychotherapy 305-6; 
disease model 292; 
family systems model 
303-5; medical model 
292; neurobiological 
model 292; positive 
psychology 306; 
psychoanalytic model 
298-300 
motivational interviewing 
114 
MTA trail 43 
multiaxial system 248 
multidimensional family 
therapy 115 
multimodal treatment 310; 
ADHD 48; depression 
200; schizophrenia 
228-9 
multiple personality 
disorder 241-2, 250 
multisystemic therapy 
(MST) 65, 115 
narcissistic personality 
disorder, case example 
259; clinical features 
258-9 
Narcotics Anonymous 106, 
121 
negative symptoms of 
schizophrenia 207-8, 
2477232 
NEO-PI 280 
. neologisms 215 
neurobiological model 292 
neurobiology, ADHD 42-3; 
anxiety disorders 
148-9; conduct 
disorder 57; drug use 
108-10; depression 
180; eating disorders 
84; personality 
disorders 266-8; 
schizophrenia 224 
neurodevelopmental 
hypothesis of 
schizophrenia 219, 223 
neurofeedback 49 
neuropsychology 8, 
conduct disorder 59-60 
neurotic depression 177 
neurotransmitter 
dysregulation, ADHD 
43; anxiety disorders 
148-9; conduct 
disorder 57-8; 
depression 180-1; 
eating disorders 84; 
personality disorders 
266-8; schizophrenia 
224 
obsessive compulsive 
disorder (OCD) 
137-40, 287 
obsessive compulsive 
personality disorder, 
case example 26-32; 
clinical features 261-2; 
genetics 268 
obstetric complications 223 
older adults 7 
operant conditioning, drug 
misuse 112-13 
oppositional defiant 
disorder 49-68 
panic disorder 133-6 
PANSS 237 
paranoid personality 
disorder 217, 250-2; 
case example 250-2: 
Clinical features 250 
paranoid schizophrenia 217 
parent training, ADHD 49; 
oppositional defiant 
disorder 67 
PCL 279 
peer group, drug misuse 
116 
PE! 119 
Penn Resiliency 
Programme 193 
personality disorders 
247-90; anakastic 
personality disorder 
250; antisocial 
personality disorder 
254-6; anxious 
avoidant personality 
disorder 250; 
assessment 280; 

avoidant personality 
disorder 260; borderline 
personality disorder 
256-7; case examples 
248-263; child abuse 
268; clinical features 
248-63; cluster A, odd 
eccentric 250-4; cluster 
B, dramatic, emotional, 
erratic 254—9; cluster 
C, anxious, fearful 
259-63; cognitive 
behaviour therapy 
277-8; conduct 
disorder and antisocial 
personality disorder 
255; controversies 
281-8; defence 
mechanisms 271-2; 
dependent personality 
disorder 260-1; 
dialectical behaviour 
therapy for borderline 
personality disorder 
276-7; diathesis stress 
theory 263; dimensional 
approaches 281-3; 
dissocial personality 
disorder 250; DSM 
IV multiaxial system 
248; epidemiology 
263-4; genetics 265-6; 
HCR-20 279; histrionic 
personality disorder 
257-8; IPDE 280; 
marital therapy 278; 
MCMI 279; medication 
269; mentalization 
based psychotherapy 
for borderline 
personality disorder 
274-5; MMPI 279; 
multiaxial system 248; 
multiple personality 
disorder 241, 250; 
narcissistic personality 
disorder 258-9; NEO- 
PI 280; neurobiology 
266-8; obsessive 
compulsive personality 
disorder 261-3; 
paranoid personality 
disorder 250-2; PCL 
279; personality traits 
281-3; psychotherapy 
269-78, 80-1; 
risk assessment, 
violence 278; schizoid 
personality disorder 
252-3; schizotypal 
personality disorder 
253-4; SCID II 280; 
SNAP 279; stress 
268; temperament 
265; therapeutic 
communities 287; 
transference focused 
psychotherapy for 
borderline personality 
disorder 269-74; 
triangles of conflict and 
person 275-6 
personality traits, anxiety 
disorders 150; 
depression 184-5; 
personality disorders 
281-3; schizophrenia 
240 
PESQ 119 
phobias 130-1 
placebo 323 
positive psychology 306 
positive symptoms of 
schizophrenia 207-8, 
217 
posttraumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) 136-7 
PRIME 118-19 
prodromal phase, 
schizophrenia 215 
psychoanalytic/ 
psychodynamic 
model 60-1, 243-4, 
298-300; achievements 
299-300; anxiety 
disorders 151-3; 
INDEX 
393 
assumptions 298-9; 
conduct disorder 
60-1; depression 
186-9; eating disorders 
84—5; limitations 
300; personality 
disorders 269-76; 
psychotherapy, 14, 
28, 152-3, 161,188-9, 
199-200, 243-4, 
269-76, 298-300, 305, 
310-29; schizophrenia 
243-4 
psychosis 207-46 
psychotherapy, 14, 28, 
152-3, 161,188-9, 
199-200, 243-4, 
269-76, 299-300, 305, 
310-29 
psychotic depression 173, 
177 
PTSD 111, 136-7 
randomized controlled trials 
313-4 
reactive depression 177 
recovery model 234—5, 238 
reward system 108-9 
risk assessment, 
suicide196—9; violence 
278 
risk factors, anxiety 
disorders 145-6; 
depression 177-8; 
drug misuse 99-102; 
eating disorders 79-80; 
schizophrenia 218-20 
schizoaffective disorder 217 
schizoid personality 
disorder 217, 252-3; 
case example 253; 
_ Clinical features 252-3 
schizophrenia 217, 207-46, 
283, 296; alogia 
208; antipsychotic 
medication 227; 
assertive community 

394 INDEX 
treatment 236; 
assessment 237-8; 
avolition 208; Bleuler’s 
theory 221, 233; case 
example 208-13; 
catatonic behaviour 
208, 213, 216; 
catatonic schizophrenia 
217; classification 
217; clinical features 
213; cognitive 
behaviour therapy 
230-2; cognitive 
remediation 233; 
controversies 239-44; 
course 218; delusions 
207-8, 213-15, 231-2; 
dementia praecox 
221; derailment 215; 
diagnostic criteria 
209; diathesis- 
stress theory 219, 
227-8; dimensional 
approach 221, 240-1; 
disorganization 207-8, 
217; disorganized 
schizophrenia 217; 
dissociative identity 
disorder 241-2; 
dopamine hypothesis 
224-5; dopamine-2 
antagonists; DSM IV 
209; epidemiology 
218; executive 
function 215, 224; 
expressed emotion 
212, 220, 228, 238; 
eye movements 224; 
family therapy 229-30; 
formulation 212, 
238; genetics 222-3; 
glutamate hypothesis 
224-6; hallucinations 
207-8, 213-14, 
231; hebephrenic 
schizophrenia 216-17; 
HIV/AIDS 216; HPA 
axis 220, 228, 230; 
ICD 10 209; Kraepelin’s 
theory 221, 233; 
multimodal intervention 
228-9; negative 
symptoms 207-8, 
217, 232; neologisms 
215; neuroanatomical 
abnormalities 224; 
neurodevelopmental 
hypothesis 219, 223; 
neurotransmitters 224; 
obstetric complications 
223; paranoid 
schizophrenia 217; 
positive symptoms 
207-8, 217; 
prodromal phase 215; 
psychoanalysis 243-4; 
recovery model 234-5, 
238; risk factors 218— 
20; sleep 224; social 
skills training 233; 
strengths based case 
management 235-6; 
stress 227-8; stress 
vulnerability theory 
227-8; substance use 
219-20; treatment 
239; two syndrome 
hypothesis 226, 233; 
vocational rehabilitation 
234 
schizophrenia spectrum 
disorders 217 
schizophreniform disorder 
217 
schizotypal personality 
disorder 217, 253-4; 
case example 253-4; 
Clinical features 253; 
neurobiology 266 
schizotypy 240 
SCID 196 
SCID 237 
SCID II 280 
SDQ 65 
seasonal affective disorder 
168, 182 
self-harm 176 
self-medication 111 
separation anxiety disorder 
127-30, 286 
sexual abuse 111, 300 
sleep, depression 182; 
schizophrenia 224 
SNAP 279 
social disadvantage 116 
social information 
processing 61-2 
social skills, conduct 
disorder 62; depression 
186; schizophrenia 233 
sociotropy 184, 186 
split-personality 241-2 
SSRI 84, 149, 161, 181, 
201 
stages of change 117 
starvation 84 
stepped care, anxiety 
disorders 160-1; 
depression 200 
strengths based case 
management 235-6 
stress 297; depression 
182-3; drug misuse 
111; eating disorders 
88; personality 
disorders 268; 
schizophrenia 227-8 
stress vulnerability theory 
227-8, 292 
substance use 95-125; 
A-CRA 113; abstinence 
violation effect 114; 
addictive personality 
110; ADHD 105; 
assessment 119-20; 
case study 96-9; 
classical conditioning 
113; classification 
99-101; 
clinical 
features 101—5; 
cognitive behavioural 
theories 
112-14; 
controversies 121-2; 
cue exposure treatment 

113; dependence 
syndrome 100; 
diagnostic criteria 
100; disease model 
106; DSM IV 100; 
dual diagnosis 105; 
epidemiology 99-101; 
family therapy 115; 
formulation 97, 120; 
functional family 
therapy 115; GAIN 
119; genetics 107; 
ICD 10 100; identity 
112; learning difficulties 
111-12; methadone 
110; motivational 
interviewing 114; 
multidimensional 
family therapy 115; 
multisystemic therapy 
115; Narcotics 
Anonymous 106, 
121; neurobiology 
108-10; norms 117; 
operant conditioning 
112-13; peer group 
116; PRIME 118-19; 
risk factors 99-102; 
schizophrenia 219-20; 
self-medication 111; 
sexual abuse 111; 
social disadvantage 
116; stages of change 
117; stress 111; 
substance dependence 
100; systemic theories 
114-117; temperament 
107-8; treatment 
119; twelve steps of 
Narcotics Anonymous 
106; wilderness 
therapy 108 
suicide 176, 196-9, 294 
system theory 303-5, 
319; ADHD 46-7; 
conduct disorder 63-4, 
depression 194—5; 
drug misuse 114-117; 
eating disorders 87-90 
systematic desensitization 
130 
talking cure 300 
TCA 84, 181, 201 
temperament 59; anxiety 
disorders 149-50; 
conduct disorder 59; 
depression 183-4; 
drug misuse 107-8; 
personality disorders 
265 
therapeutic communities 
287 
transference 298-9 
transference focused 
psychotherapy for 
INDEX 
395 
borderline personality 
disorder 269-74 
treatment, ADHD 48-9; 
anxiety disorders 
160-2; conduct 
disorder 66-8; 
depression 199-200; 
drug misuse 119; 
eating disorders 91-2; 
personality disorders 
280-1; schizophrenia 
239 
triangles of conflict and 
person, anxiety 
disorders 153; 
depression 189; 
personality disorders 
275-6 
twelve steps of Narcotics 
Anonymous 106 
two syndrome hypothesis 
of schizophrenia 
226, 233 
unconscious 298—9 
violence 278 
vocational rehabilitation 234 
WIAT-II47 
wilderness therapy 108 
WISC-IV 47 
WPPSI-IIl 47 

yer 
, Wirstrod 
bee 
=@Carab 
3h GMCS .pueniset 
poaeeN) 
ett te. 
hueanes 
wer 
@a-@2° rafeeoy jot 
Beat oe... 
Att avowelegeiise 
i) ( septe 
Sher = 
beta pad) Se cw 
reeset priehey r xor 
'regiteieynpeaeds tel 
Maumisat S-"Or 
Dp 
= aps ortenay 
et hh 
cubs no 
ernest 
eeertinling 
BOT 
= 102 ect 
solatriaget ffi 
“ath 
06) eriphaye 
he weeseant (OOF 
O08 Mi Meee 
~ 
+ BOY Bergh a 
iar aiypauiretige 
- 
et 
yqeceil yilte) 
~ OR) 52 ene 
+ eae ahotaras 
WATS 
(ep hyomerd) 
<< PShetwerap atl 
qth) (ror aot" 
ey. Neghercesy 
eat 
prises! 
-06 | 
Geen 
ye* See GES 
Wr gute fe asticy <7 
_ 32S,2-OaF SLi aive 
Neha 
am te eee DEP. 
vanes Sate tee > 


Clinical Psychology: An Introduction is for students studying clinical psychology as partofan 
sv 
bate l-)a-ae-Yolbt-lncmopcelcse-Leabent-wbeW ol-y\col 
ele) lola iam 
albua-ybelcsmcroles(e)(oloatmoy acreoret-Vm-veleMol-Jel-\alelube-lEsfela sec 
Undergraduate students who wish to know if postgraduate study in clinical psychology would be 
of interest to them will find this book particularly useful. 
; 
The book will inform students about 
— 
e the profession of clinical psychology 
We elon mco-cimoyelcol-Wolbbevlar-tBorcyicolevo)lofcaimolelsiecae-lelbt-tc-mea-vteveetsmocoleaactecteets 
* the way clinical psychologists work with children, adolescents and adults with common. 
psychological problems 
* the main models of practice used by clinical psychologists, and 
¢ the scientific evidence for the effectiveness of psychological interventions. 
There is a focus on both clinical case studies and relevant research, and the book includes 
summaries, revision questions, advice on further reading and a glossary of key terms, all of 
piideblel stb 
eck-1 <-Blat-bel->.cole(elam-jable(obcoea(elelbimteracolelbleialeyemcol-tel-> ca-jole(eyet-Vibvmbelevectcereteaoa0) 
Alan Carr is director of clinical psychology training at University College Dublin and has a 
clinical practice at the Clanwilliam Institute, Dublin. ‘He has produced over 20 volumes and 
200 papers and presentations in the areas of clinical psychology, family therapy and positiv 
psychology. His books include the Handbook of Child and Adolescent Clinical Psychology, the Han 
of Adult Clinical Psychology, the Handbook of Intellectual Disability and Clinical Psychology Practice 
and What Works with Children, Adolescents and Adults? A Review of Research on the Effectiveness o 
Psychotherapy, and Positive Psychology. He has worked in the fields of clinical psychology and f 
id 
olase-oymebomd e\-mO) Gm ba-)t-bele-telel @-et-lel-w 
.— 
Cover design: Andrew 
Wara 
Clinical Psychology www.clinicalpsychologyarena.com 
SS 
ISBN 978-0-415-68397-5 
tek d 80415"683975 
ee 
ae os 
ee 
an informa business 
a, 
. 
AS 
Le 
LvolUla(crele l= 
Taylor & Francis Group 

