Closing and opening an existing fireplace 
sponsored by: 
 
  Closing:  
A fireplace, which is not used anymore, can be successfully closed to allow 
more wall space…  
 The insertion of an air-brick is required in the closing of the fireplace to allow 
air to circulate between the room and the top of the chimney, via the flue and 
fireplace. This will stop moisture collecting in the soot and smoke deposits 
within them and forming damp areas.  
It is also advisable to cap the chimney with a  ventilated cowl, which will 
allow air in and out, but not water. We are working with 
www.chimneycap.co.uk who produce just such a vent. The advantage of 
C-cap is that it will not leak,  and it can be fitted in seconds. Your 
chimney is protected from the elements and from nesting 
birds...Chimney Caps ventilated cowls will not leak and blend in with the 
pots to maintain the traditional appearance of the stack.  
 
 First measure the opening in square metres and multiply by 60. This will tell 
you how many bricks you will need. (An average fireplace will measure 
approx 400mm x 550mm or 0.4m x 0.55m…. Equalling 0.22 sq. m. x 60 = 13 
bricks) you will need one 9 inch x 3 inch air- brick. Common bricks can be 
used for building, as they are the cheapest.  
Sand and cement is obviously needed and this should be mixed at 4 sand to 1 
cement for building the brickwork…The same mortar can be used for the 
render to cover the bricks with later, but you will have to wet it down a little to 
apply it.  
For an average fireplace you will also need 2  “frame cramps” which are 
normally fixed to a door or window frame and built into the brickwork joints. 

These 2 however, will be plugged and screwed to the inside of the fireplace 
and be built into brickwork you are building.   (See diagram)    
                  
   
The brickwork can now be built into the opening; it should be set back half an 
inch from the existing face of the plasterwork surrounding the fireplace. The 
air-brick however should be built out a little so that its face is flush with the 
existing plaster.   You can check this by placing a spirit level across the 
opening. It should touch both sides of the fireplace, and the air-brick.  
   
The air-brick should be in the middle of the new brickwork and as low as you 
can get it without any of it being masked by new skirting 
board.
  
       
A & B represent the positions of the frame cramps.  

 When the brickwork is built, “rake” out the joints by about 10mm. This will 
give a good key for the render you will apply when the brickwork is firm 
enough to withstand the pressure of applying it.  
 To render, spread the sand and cement as evenly as you can over the 
brickwork; preferably using a plasterers trowel, but it is possible to use the 
back of the trowel you used to lay the bricks with.  When you think you have 
enough on, use the spirit level, laid across the opening as before, and 
“dragged” upward. This will pull off all render that is “proud” of the existing 
plasterwork. You may have to apply a bit more to any depressions, but by 
repeating the process you will finish with a rendered section, which is flush 
with the existing plaster.  The air-brick of course will already be at this level.  
 You must now use a wooden or plastic “float” to rub over this surface. Do not 
do this immediately after you have finished the render. Allow the render to dry 
out for a while. This is ready to “rub in” when you can move the float on the 
surface of the render without the render moving, but all pin-holes fill up with 
the deposits of render left on the trowel. Rub in a circular motion, with steady, 
not firm, pressure and you will be left with a nice flat surface, which should be 
2 or 3mm below the level of the existing plaster.  
 This new surface must now be “scratched”. Use a nail and put light scratches 
all over it. This is to give a good key for the final coat of plaster called “skim”.  
 When you are buying skim, most merchants will know what you mean, but its 
real name is multi purpose top coat plaster. This must be mixed to a very 
creamy consistency (runny custard) and applied using a plasterer’s trowel.  
 When you have covered the area, leave for a minute or two and trowel up 
again. Repeat this 2 or 3 times (more if necessary) and the trowel marks will 
disappear, as the plaster gets harder.  Timing is the essence of this type of 
plastering and you will not have time to go shopping when this stuff is on the 
wall.  
 Your surface is now complete and you can fix the skirting boards in place.  
 Finally you will need a grill to cover the air-brick. These can be found at 
Builders merchants and diy stores. They are either plastic or brass effect and 
can be screwed or glued in place.   
Don't forget you now need to cap the top of the pot or flue. See 
www.chimneycap.co.uk  
  
   
  OPENING A FIREPLACE. 

In most situations the above operations will be done in reverse. It is unlikely that any 
structural alteration will have been done to your fireplace when it was bricked up, but 
you must still proceed with caution. Do not attempt to make the opening any larger 
than it was originally. Fire openings are quite an exact science. Altering their 
shape and size will affect the efficiency of the fire and possibly lead to a 
“blowback” of smoke etc.   
Determine the centre of the section to be removed and make a hole at floor level, this 
hole can then be widened and raised until you meet the sides and top of the original 
opening. Clean off any jagged bits of brick and plaster etc and remove all debris from 
inside the opening. You should be able to reach up at least an arms length without 
obstruction. Do not attempt to look up until you have done this arm test.   
It is at this stage you will need to check the builders have not capped off the chimney. 
Call in a Corgi registered plumber to test the flue. Please do not assume that because 
it looks clear it is suitable for a fire that has any kind of exhaust fumes. At worst, your 
flue may have to be lined.   
You can now make good any areas of brickwork and plaster that have been damaged. 
This should be done using lime mortar, which is less susceptible to cracking in the 
heat. The mix for this will be 4 parts soft sand, 2 parts lime and 1 part cement. All of 
the materials mentioned in these help sheets are available from builders merchants.   
The area you are making good needs to be free from soot and any flaking material.   
Corners can be reinstated by tacking a piece of timber to the face of the existing wall 
and rendering up to it. The timber can be removed the following day leaving a straight 
edge. If top coat plaster (skim) is required to the 
surface, some scratch marks should be placed in 
the render to give a key, i.e. allow a stronger 
bond between the two surfaces. (see closing a 
fireplace). 
   
   
A. Hearth formed as you wish, 
generally stone slabs, 
quarry tiles or bricks.  
B. Concrete base.  
C. Throat lintel, this will be 
an integral part of the 
existing fireplace.  
D. Plaster/render (containing 
lime)  
E. Timber tacked on to form 
straight edge to D & C if 
necessary  
F. Flue. Must be checked by 
corgi-registered fitter.  
   
   
   

 
If a hearth is required this can be formed in front of the opening either by paving 
slabs, or a bed of sharp sand and cement with quarry tiles laid over. The bed for the 
slabs or quarry tiles should be 4 parts sharp sand and 1 part cement. The gap between 
the back edge of your new hearth and the back of the fireplace opening can be filled 
with either concrete or the same mix of sharp sand and cement.  Please check for any 
cowl or cap that is on top of your existing chimney. If it is, it must now be removed 
 

