
Code and the City
Software has become essential to the functioning of cities. It is deeply embed-
ded into the systems and infrastructure of the built environment and is 
entrenched in the management and governance of urban societies. Software-
enabled technologies and services enhance the ways in which we understand 
and plan cities. They have a profound effect on how we manage urban ser-
vices and utilities.
Code and the City explores the extent and depth of the ways in which soft-
ware mediates how people work, consume, communicate, travel and play. 
The reach of these systems is set to become even more pervasive through 
efforts to create smart cities: cities that employ ICT to underpin and drive 
their economy and governance. Yet, despite the roll-out of software-enabled 
systems across all aspects of city life, the relationship between code and the 
city has barely been explored from a critical social science perspective. This 
collection of essays seeks to fill that gap, and offers an interdisciplinary exam-
ination of the relationship between software and contemporary urbanism.
This book will be of interest to those researching or studying smart cities 
and urban infrastructure.
Rob Kitchin is Professor and ERC Advanced Investigator in the National 
Institute for Regional and Spatial Analysis at the National University of 
Ireland, Maynooth.
Sung-Yueh Perng is a postdoctoral researcher on the Programmable City 
project at the National University of Ireland, Maynooth.

Regions and Cities
Series Editor in Chief:
Susan M. Christopherson, Cornell University, USA
Editors
Maryann Feldman, University of Georgia, USA
Gernot Grabher, HafenCity University Hamburg, Germany
Ron Martin, University of Cambridge, UK
Martin Perry, Massey University, New Zealand
Kieran P. Donaghy, Cornell University, USA
In today’s globalised, knowledge-driven and networked world, regions and 
cities have assumed heightened significance as the interconnected nodes of 
economic, social and cultural production, and as sites of new modes of eco-
nomic and territorial governance and policy experimentation. This book 
series brings together incisive and critically engaged international and inter-
disciplinary research on this resurgence of regions and cities, and should be 
of interest to geographers, economists, sociologists, political scientists and 
cultural scholars, as well as to policy-makers involved in regional and urban 
development.
For more information on the Regional Studies Association visit 
www.regionalstudies.org.
There is a 30% discount available to RSA members on books in the Regions 
and Cities series, and other subject related Taylor and Francis books and 
e-books including Routledge titles. To order just e-mail alex.robinson@
tandf.co.uk, or phone on +44 (0) 20 7017 6924 and declare your RSA mem-
bership. You can also visit www.routledge.com and use the discount code: 
RSA0901
97	 Code and the City
Edited by Rob Kitchin and  
Sung-Yueh Perng
96	 The UK Regional (and National) 
Economic Problem
Philip McCann

95	 Skills and Cities
Edited by Sako Musterd, Marco 
Bontje and Jan Rouwendal
94	 Higher Education and the Creative 
Economy 
Beyond the campus
Edited by Roberta Comunian and 
Abigail Gilmore
93	 Making Cultural Cities in Asia
Mobility, assemblage, and the 
politics of aspirational urbanism
Edited by Jun Wang, Tim Oakes and 
Yang Yang
92	 Leadership and the City 
Power, strategy and networks in the 
making of knowledge cities
Markku Sotarauta
91	 Evolutionary Economic Geography
Theoretical and empirical progress
Edited by Dieter Kogler
90	 Cities in Crisis
Socio-spatial impacts of the 
economic crisis in Southern 
European cities
Edited by Jörg Knieling and Frank 
Othengrafen
89	 Socio-Economic Segregation 
in European Capital Cities
East meets West
Edited by Tiit Tammaru, Szymon 
Marcińczak, Maarten van Ham and 
Sako Musterd
88	 People, Places and Policy
Knowing contemporary Wales 
through new localities
Edited by Martin Jones, Scott Orford 
and Victoria Macfarlane
87	 The London Olympics and Urban 
Development
The mega-event city
Edited by Gavin Poynter, Valerie 
Viehoff and Yang Li
86	 Making 21st Century Knowledge 
Complexes
Technopoles of the world revisited
Edited by Julie Tian Miao, Paul 
Benneworth and Nicholas A. Phelps
85	 Soft Spaces in Europe
Re-negotiating governance, 
boundaries and borders
Edited by Philip Allmendinger, 
Graham Haughton, Jörg Knieling and 
Frank Othengrafen
84	 Regional Worlds: Advancing 
the Geography of Regions
Edited by Martin Jones and Anssi 
Paasi
83	 Place-making and Urban 
Development
New challenges for contemporary 
­planning and design
Pier Carlo Palermo and Davide 
Ponzini
82	 Knowledge, Networks and Policy
Regional studies in postwar Britain 
and beyond
James Hopkins
81	 Dynamics of Economic Spaces 
in the Global Knowledge-based 
Economy
Theory and East Asian cases
Sam Ock Park
80	 Urban Competitiveness
Theory and practice
Peter Karl Kresl and Daniele Letri
79	 Smart Specialisation
Opportunities and challenges for 
regional innovation policy
Dominique Foray
78	 The Age of Intelligent Cities
Smart environments and innovation-
for-all strategies
Nicos Komninos

77	 Space and Place in Central and 
Eastern Europe
Historical trends and perspectives
Gyula Horváth
76	 Territorial Cohesion in Rural Europe
The relational turn in rural 
development
Edited by Andrew K. Copus and 
Philomena de Lima
75	 The Global Competitiveness of 
Regions
Robert Huggins, Hiro Izushi, Daniel 
Prokop and Piers Thompson
74	 The Social Dynamics of Innovation 
Networks
Edited by Roel Rutten, Paul 
Benneworth, Dessy Irawati and Frans 
Boekema
73	 The European Territory
From historical roots to global 
challenges
Jacques Robert
72	 Urban Innovation Systems
What makes them tick?
Willem van Winden, Erik Braun, 
Alexander Otgaar and Jan-Jelle 
Witte
71	 Shrinking Cities
A global perspective
Edited by Harry W. Richardson and 
Chang Woon Nam
70	 Cities, State and Globalization
City-regional governance in Europe 
and North America
Tassilo Herrschel
69	 The Creative Class Goes Global
Edited by Charlotta Mellander, 
Richard Florida, Bjørn T. Asheim and 
Meric Gertler
68	 Entrepreneurial Knowledge, 
Technology and the Transformation 
of Regions
Edited by Charlie Karlsson, Börje 
Johansson and Roger Stough
67	 The Economic Geography of the IT 
Industry in the Asia Pacific Region
Edited by Philip Cooke, Glen Searle 
and Kevin O’Connor
66	 Working Regions
Reconnecting innovation and 
­production in the knowledge 
economy
Jennifer Clark
65	 Europe’s Changing Geography
The impact of inter-regional 
networks
Edited by Nicola Bellini and Ulrich 
Hilpert
64	 The Value of Arts and Culture 
for Regional Development
A Scandinavian perspective
Edited by Lisbeth Lindeborg and Lars 
Lindkvist
63	 The University and the City
John Goddard and Paul Vallance
62	 Re-framing Regional Development
Evolution, innovation and  
transition
Edited by Philip Cooke
61	 Networking Regionalised Innovative 
Labour Markets
Edited by Ulrich Hilpert and Helen 
Lawton Smith
60	 Leadership and Change in Sustainable 
Regional Development
Edited by Markku Sotarauta, 
Lummina Horlings and Joyce  
Liddle

59	 Regional Development Agencies: 
The Next Generation?
Networking, knowledge and regional 
policies
Edited by Nicola Bellini, Mike 
Danson and Henrik Halkier
58	 Community-based Entrepreneurship 
and Rural Development
Creating favourable conditions for 
small businesses in Central Europe
Matthias Fink, Stephan Loidl and 
Richard Lang
57	 Creative Industries and Innovation 
in Europe
Concepts, measures and comparative 
case studies
Edited by Luciana Lazzeretti
56	 Innovation Governance in an Open 
Economy
Shaping regional nodes in a 
globalized world
Edited by Annika Rickne, Staffan 
Laestadius and Henry Etzkowitz
55	 Complex Adaptive Innovation 
Systems
Relatedness and transversality 
in the evolving region
Philip Cooke
54	 Creating Knowledge Locations in 
Cities
Innovation and integration 
challenges
Willem van Winden, Luis de 
Carvalho, Erwin van Tujil, Jeroen van 
Haaren and Leo van den Berg
53	 Regional Development in Northern 
Europe
Peripherality, marginality and 
border issues
Edited by Mike Danson and Peter De 
Souza
52	 Promoting Silicon Valleys in Latin 
America
Luciano Ciravegna
51	 Industrial Policy Beyond the Crisis
Regional, national and international 
perspectives
Edited by David Bailey, Helena 
Lenihan and Josep-Maria 
Arauzo-Carod
50	 Just Growth
Inclusion and prosperity in 
America’s metropolitan regions
Chris Benner and Manuel Pastor
49	 Cultural Political Economy of Small 
Cities
Edited by Anne Lorentzen and Bas 
van Heur
48	 The Recession and Beyond
Local and regional responses to the 
downturn
Edited by David Bailey and Caroline 
Chapain
47	 Beyond Territory
Dynamic geographies of 
knowledge creation, diffusion and 
innovation
Edited by Harald Bathelt, Maryann 
Feldman and Dieter F. Kogler
46	 Leadership and Place
Edited by Chris Collinge, John 
Gibney and Chris Mabey
45	 Migration in the 21st Century
Rights, outcomes, and policy
Edited by Thomas N. Maloney and 
Kim Korinek
44	 The Futures of the City Region
Edited by Michael Neuman and 
Angela Hull

43	 The Impacts of Automotive Plant 
Closure
A tale of two cities
Edited by Andrew Beer and Holli 
Evans
42	 Manufacturing in the New Urban 
Economy
Willem van Winden, Leo van den 
Berg, Luis Carvalho and Erwin van 
Tuijl
41	 Globalizing Regional Development 
in East Asia
Production networks, clusters, and 
entrepreneurship
Edited by Henry Wai-chung Yeung
40	 China and Europe
The implications of the rise of China 
for European space
Edited by Klaus R. Kunzmann, 
Willy A Schmid and Martina 
Koll-Schretzenmayr
39	 Business Networks in Clusters and 
Industrial Districts
The governance of the global value 
chain
Edited by Fiorenza Belussi and 
Alessia Sammarra
38	 Whither Regional Studies?
Edited by Andy Pike
37	 Intelligent Cities and Globalisation 
of Innovation Networks
Nicos Komninos
36	 Devolution, Regionalism and Regional 
Development
The UK experience
Edited by Jonathan Bradbury
35	 Creative Regions
Technology, culture and knowledge 
entrepreneurship
Edited by Philip Cooke and Dafna 
Schwartz
34	 European Cohesion Policy
Willem Molle
33	 Geographies of the New Economy
Critical reflections
Edited by Peter W. Daniels, Andrew 
Leyshon, Michael J. Bradshaw and 
Jonathan Beaverstock
32	 The Rise of the English Regions?
Edited by Irene Hardill, Paul 
Benneworth, Mark Baker and Leslie 
Budd
31	 Regional Development in the 
Knowledge Economy
Edited by Philip Cooke and Andrea 
Piccaluga
30	 Regional Competitiveness
Edited by Ron Martin, Michael 
Kitson and Peter Tyler
29	 Clusters and Regional Development
Critical reflections and explorations
Edited by Bjørn Asheim, Philip Cooke 
and Ron Martin
28	 Regions, Spatial Strategies and 
Sustainable Development
Graham Haughton and David 
Counsell
27	 Sustainable Cities
Graham Haughton and Colin  
Hunter
26	 Geographies of Labour Market 
Inequality
Edited by Ron Martin and Philip S. 
Morrison
25	 Regional Innovation Strategies
The challenge for less-favoured 
regions
Edited by Kevin Morgan and Claire 
Nauwelaers

24	 Out of the Ashes?
The social impact of industrial 
­contraction and regeneration 
on Britain’s mining communities
David Waddington, Chas Critcher, 
Bella Dicks and David Parry
23	 Restructuring Industry and Territory
The experience of Europe’s regions
Edited by Anna Giunta, Arnoud 
Lagendijk and Andy Pike
22	 Foreign Direct Investment and the 
Global Economy
Corporate and institutional 
dynamics of global-localisation
Edited by Nicholas F. Phelps and 
Jeremy Alden
21	 Community Economic Development
Edited by Graham Haughton
20	 Regional Development Agencies 
in Europe
Edited by Henrik Halkier, Mike 
Danson and Charlotte Damborg
19	 Social Exclusion in European Cities
Processes, experiences and responses
Edited by Ali Madanipour, Goran 
Cars and Judith Allen
18	 Metropolitan Planning in Britain
A comparative study
Edited by Peter Roberts, Kevin 
Thomas and Gwyndaf Williams
17	 Unemployment and Social Exclusion
Landscapes of labour inequality
Edited by Paul Lawless, Ron Martin 
and Sally Hardy
16	 Multinationals and European 
Integration
Trade, investment and regional 
development
Nicholas A. Phelps
15	 The Coherence of EU Regional Policy
Contrasting perspectives on  
the structural funds
Edited by John Bachtler and Ivan 
Turok
14	 New Institutional Spaces
TECs and the remaking of economic 
governance
Martin Jones, Foreword by Jamie 
Peck
13	 Regional Policy in Europe 
S. S. Artobolevskiy
12	 Innovation, Networks and Learning 
Regions?
Edited by James Simmie
11	 British Regionalism and Devolution
The challenges of state reform and 
European integration
Edited by Jonathan Bradbury and 
John Mawson
10	 Regional Development Strategies
A European perspective
Edited by Jeremy Alden and Philip 
Boland
  9	 Union Retreat and the Regions
The shrinking landscape of 
organised labour
Ron Martin, Peter Sunley and Jane 
Wills
  8	 The Regional Dimension of 
Transformation in Central  
Europe
Grzegorz Gorzelak
  7	 The Determinants of Small Firm 
Growth
An inter-regional study in the United 
Kingdom 1986–90
Richard Barkham, Graham Gudgin, 
Mark Hart and Eric Hanvey

  6	 The Regional Imperative
Regional planning and governance 
in Britain, Europe and the United 
States
Urlan A. Wannop
  5	 An Enlarged Europe 
Regions in competition?
Edited by Sally Hardy, Mark Hart, 
Louis Albrechts and Anastasios Katos
  4	 Spatial Policy in a Divided Nation
Edited by Richard T. Harrison and 
Mark Hart
  3	 Regional Development in the 1990s
The British Isles in transition
Edited by Peter Townroe and Ron 
Martin
  2	 Retreat from the Regions
Corporate change and the closure of 
factories
Stephen Fothergill and Nigel Guy
  1	 Beyond Green Belts 
Managing urban growth in the 21st 
century
Edited by John Herington

Code and the City
Edited by Rob Kitchin  
and Sung-Yueh Perng

First published 2016
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2016 selection and editorial matter, Rob Kitchin and Sung-Yueh Perng; 
individual chapters, the contributors
The right of the editors to be identified as the author of the editorial material, 
and of the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance 
with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or ­reproduced or 
utilised in any form or by any electronic, ­mechanical or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including ­photocopying and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the 
publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation 
without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Names: Kitchin, Rob, editor. | Perng, Sung-Yueh.
Title: Code and the city / edited by Rob Kitchin and Sung-Yueh Perng.
Description: New York : Routledge, 2016.
Identifiers: LCCN 2015041564 | ISBN 9781138922105 (hardback) |  
ISBN 9781138922112 (pbk.) | ISBN 9781315685991 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Municipal services–Technological innovations. | Cities and 
towns–Growth. | Management information systems.
Classification: LCC HD4431 .C543 2016 | DDC 363.60285–dc23
LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2015041564
ISBN: 978-1-138-92210-5 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-92211-2 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-68599-1 (ebk)
Typeset in Times New Roman  
by Servis Filmsetting Ltd, Stockport, Cheshire

Contents
List of figures
xiii
List of tables
xv
List of contributors
xvi
  1	 Code and the city: introduction
1
	
Rob Kitchin and Sung-Yueh Perng
PART I
Code, coding, infrastructure and cities
13
  2	 From a single line of code to an entire city: reframing 
the conceptual terrain of code/space
15
	
Rob Kitchin
  3	 The Internet of Urban Things
27
	
Paul Dourish
  4	 Interfacing urban intelligence
49
	
Shannon Mattern
  5	 Abstract urbanism
61
	
Matthew Fuller and Graham Harwood
  6	 Code traffic: code repositories, crowds and urban life
72
	
Adrian Mackenzie
PART II
Locative social media and mobile computing
89
  7	 Digital social interactions in the city: reflecting on  
location-based social networks
91
	
Luigina Ciolfi and Gabriela Avram

xii  Contents
  8	 Feeling place in the city: strange ontologies and 
location-based social media
105
	
Leighton Evans
  9	 Curating the city: urban interfaces and locative media as 
experimental platforms for cultural data
116
	
Nanna Verhoeff and Clancy Wilmott
10	 Moving applications: a multilayered approach to mobile  
computing
130
	
James Merricks White
11	 Exploring urban social media: Selfiecity and On Broadway
146
	
Lev Manovich
PART III
Governance, politics and knowledge
161
12	 Digital urbanism in crises
163
	
Monika Büscher, Xaroula Kerasidou, Michael 
Liegl and Katrina Petersen
13	 Coding alternative modes of governance: learning from 
experimental ‘peer-to-peer cities’
178
	
Alison Powell
14	 Encountering the city at hacking events
190
	
Sophia Maalsen and Sung-Yueh Perng
15	 Semantic cities: coded geopolitics and the rise of the  
Semantic Web
200
	
Heather Ford and Mark Graham
16	 Cities and context: the codification of small areas 
through geodemographic classification
215
	
Alex Singleton
	
Index	
236

Figures
  2.1	 Digital technology stacks
20
  2.2	 Conceptualising the constitution of a digital socio-technical  
system
21
  2.3	 Conceptual framework for programmable urbanism
23
  3.1	 USB ports incorporated into a US power socket
31
  3.2	 The 2004 map of the National Lambda Rail optical fibre 
network displays a remarkable similarity to a map of the 
ARPANet in 1974
39
  6.1	 Event counts for the GitHub team
78
  6.2	 Repositories worked on by the GitHub team
79
  6.3	 Bootstrap repositories with more than 100 forks since 2012
85
  7.1	 Tips for Sheffield train station
98
  7.2	 Tips for the Crucible Theatre, Sheffield
98
  7.3	 Tips used as private banter at a Limerick pub
99
  7.4	 User photographs of Limerick’s Milk Market
101
  9.1	 Saving Face installation
117
10.1	 From left to right: Benkler’s model, Zittrain’s model and the 
proposed model
133
10.2	 From left to right: Hailo tour feature (location refinement), 
taxis near Muckross Parade, tracking the driver in real time 
and automatic card payment
135
10.3	 Clockwise from top left: Moves interface mode (temporal 
representation), two views of Moves interface mode (spatial 
representation) and third-party services built using the  
Moves API
138
10.4	 Left: MMapper Processing sketch. Right: Move-O-Scope  
Web application
140
11.1	 50,000 Instagram photos shared in Tokyo in 2012
147
11.2	 50,000 Instagram photos shared in Bangkok in 2012
147
11.3	 Imageplot showing distribution of selfie photos in five cities 
according to sex and degree of smile
150
11.4	 Screenshot from Selfiexploratory application
152

xiv  Figures
11.5	 Data and image layers used to create the interface for 
navigating a city street in On Broadway project
153
11.6	 Screenshot from On Broadway application, showing a 
zoomed-in view centred on Time Square
154
11.7	 Interaction with On Broadway installation at New York 
Public Library
155
12.1	 A displaced Haitian fixes mobile phones in a tent city near 
Port au Prince, Haiti (24 January 2010)
164
12.2	 Ushahidi Haiti Project situation room in Boston
169
15.1	 Results of a search for ‘Paris’ on Google (4 December 2014)
202
15.2	 Section of the Jerusalem infobox on English Wikipedia as at 
13 July 2014
205
15.3	 Screenshot of Google results after clicking on the population 
figure for Jerusalem (19 January 2015)
208
15.4	 Screenshots after clicking on ‘feedback’ and the ‘Wrong?’ 
hyperlink above the Jerusalem headline on google.com
209
15.5	 Screenshot of Google Public Data Explorer Forum as at 
21 December 2014
210
16.1	 Supergroup level Output Area Classification – UK
224
16.2	 Supergroup level Output Area Classification – Liverpool
225
16.3	 An ‘elbow criterion’ plot used to consider an appropriate 
number of supergroup clusters in a Liverpool Output Area 
Classification
226
16.4	 Supergroup level Liverpool Output Area Classification
227
16.5	 Liverpool Output Area Classification supergroups
229

Tables
  2.1	 Apparatus and elements of a data assemblage
19
  6.1	 20 early and recent repositories on Github.com
83
  6.2 	 Most-forked repositories on GitHub in January 2013
84
  6.3	 Most-forked bootstrap-related repositories during  
January 2013
85
12.1	 Example of messages sent by Haitians
167
12.2	 Crowdsourcing funding for Haiti ‘first responders’
169
12.3	 Excerpt from a chat running alongside the Mission 4636  
effort
170
16.1	 2011 Output Area Classification input variables
221
16.2	 2011 Output Area Classification hierarchy
222
16.3	 Liverpool Output Area Classification labels and brief  
descriptions
228
16.4	 Percentage of output areas assigned to Output Area 
Classification supergroups (rows) and Liverpool Output 
Area Classification supergroups (columns)
230

Contributors
Gabriela Avram is Lecturer in Digital Media and Interaction Design, 
and Senior Researcher at the Interaction Design Centre, University of 
Limerick, Ireland. Building on a background in computer-supported 
cooperative work and knowledge management, her research currently 
focuses on practices in cultural heritage organisations and urban 
communities, and on facilitating technology adoption. Her previous 
work includes studying distributed work practices in software 
development and the uses of social media for work purposes.
Monika Büscher is Professor of Sociology at the Centre for Mobilities 
Research at Lancaster University. She researches the digital 
dimensions of contemporary ‘mobile lives’, with a focus on ethics and 
crises. In 2011, she was awarded an honorary doctorate by Roskilde 
University, Denmark. She edits the book series Changing Mobilities with 
Peter Adey.
Luigina Ciolfi is Reader in Communication at Sheffield Hallam University, 
UK. She holds a Laurea (University of Siena) and a PhD (University of 
Limerick) in Human–Computer Interaction. She studies socio-technical 
systems in settings such as heritage sites, public spaces and professional 
organisations, as well as practices in the design of interactive systems.
Paul Dourish is Professor of Informatics in the Donald Bren School of 
Information and Computer Sciences at University of California, Irvine 
with courtesy appointments in Computer Science and Anthropology. 
His research focuses on information technology as a site of social and 
cultural production, combining topics in human–computer interaction, 
ubiquitous computing and science and technology studies. His most 
recent book (with Genevieve Bell) is Divining a Digital Future: Mess and 
Mythology in Ubiquitous Computing (MIT Press, 2011).
Leighton Evans received a PhD in the Philosophy of Technology and Digital 
Media from Swansea University in 2013. He is a lecturer in digital media 
cultures at the University of Brighton, and was formerly a postdoctoral 
researcher on the Programmable City project at Maynooth University, 

Contributors  xvii
funded by the European Research Council. Leighton is the author of 
Locative Social Media: Place in the Digital Age (Palgrave, 2015).
Heather Ford is University Fellow in Digital Research Methods at the 
University of Leeds School of Media and Communication. With 
a background in Internet rights activism, working with several 
organisations, including Creative Commons, Privacy International, the 
Association for Progressive Communications and Ushahidi, her research 
interests include issues around the governance of digital platforms, media 
power in networked information environments, and the design and 
politics of software platforms.
Matthew Fuller is Professor of Cultural Studies and Director of the Centre 
for Cultural Studies, Goldsmiths, University of London. His books 
include (with Andrew Goffey) Evil Media (MIT, 2012) and he is a 
co-editor of Computational Culture, a Journal of Software Studies.
Mark Graham is Associate Professor and Senior Research Fellow at 
the Oxford Internet Institute. His research focuses on Internet and 
information geographies, and the overlaps between ICTs and economic 
development. His recent books include Society and the Internet (OUP, 
2014, edited with William H. Dutton) and Research and Fieldwork 
in Development (Routledge, 2014, with Daniel Hammett and Chasca 
Twyman).
Graham Harwood is part of the celebrated artists’ group YoHa, where he 
works with his partner Matusko Yokokoji. He also teaches at the Centre 
for Cultural Studies, Goldsmiths, University of London.
Xaroula Kerasidou is a research associate at the Centre for Mobilities 
Research, Lancaster University. Her research interests lie within the 
field of feminist science and technology studies, where she focuses on the 
material and semiotic practices of technoscience. Currently, she works on 
the EU FP7 funded project SecInCoRe (www.secincore.eu).
Rob Kitchin is a professor and ERC Advanced Investigator at the National 
University of Ireland, Maynooth. He is currently a principal investigator 
for the Programmable City project, Digital Repository of Ireland, All-
Island Research Observatory and the Dublin Dashboard. He was the 
2013 recipient of the Royal Irish Academy’s Gold Medal for the Social 
Sciences.
Michael Liegl is postdoctoral researcher and coordinator of the graduate 
program Loose Connections: Collectivity in Urban and Digital Spaces at 
the University of Hamburg. Central to his research are socio-technical 
assemblages formed by the hybridization of online and offline practices. 
His research focuses on digitally mediated collaboration in disaster 
management and digital art, creative work, mobility patterns and 
collectivisation in digital mobile dating practices.

xviii  Contributors
Sophia Maalsen is a postdoctoral research fellow at Macquarie University, 
working on the ARC-funded grant, Governing Urban Energy Transitions: 
Reconfiguring Spaces, Sites, Subjects, with Professor Robyn Dowling and 
Professor Pauline McGuirk. Sophia is an urban and cultural geographer, 
and also writes on feminist and music geographies.
Adrian Mackenzie is Professor in Technological Cultures, Department of 
Sociology, Lancaster University and has published work on technology: 
Transductions: Bodies and Machines at Speed, (2002/6); Cutting Code: 
Software and Sociality (2006), and Wirelessness: Radical Empiricism in 
Network Cultures (2010). He is currently working on an archaeology of 
machine learning and its associated transformations. He codirects the 
Centre for Science Studies, Lancaster University, UK.
Lev Manovich is the author of seven books including Software Takes 
Command (Bloomsbury Academic, 2013) and The Language of New 
Media (MIT Press, 2001). He is Director of the Software Studies 
Initiative, which works on the analysis and visualisation of big visual 
cultural data. He appeared on the List of 25 People Shaping the Future of 
Design (2013) and a list of 50 ‘most interesting people building the future’ 
(The Verge, 2014).
Shannon Mattern is Associate Professor of Media Studies at The New 
School. She writes about media infrastructures, libraries, archives and 
other media spaces. She is the author of The New Downtown Library 
(Minnesota, 2007), Deep Mapping the Media City (Minnesota, 2015) and 
writes regularly for Places, a landscape and urbanism journal.
Sung-Yueh Perng is a postdoctoral researcher on the ERC funded 
Programmable City project at Maynooth University. He received a PhD 
in Sociology from Lancaster University; his current research focuses on 
distributed, collaborative and embodied practices in civic hacking and 
the incorporation of personal analytics into urban lives.
Katrina Petersen is Research Associate at Lancaster University working on 
the SecInCoRe project focusing on the design of a culturally and ethically 
conscious disaster information sharing system for the EU. Her main 
research is on visualising risk, disaster maps and how to communicate 
between diverse groups.
Alison Powell is Assistant Professor at the London School of 
Economics and Programme Director of the MSc course in Media 
and Communication (Data and Society). Her research examines 
how people’s values influence the way technology is built, and how 
discourses, practices and governance structures are produced in relation 
to new technological systems. She is especially interested in open source 
cultures.

Contributors  xix
Alex Singleton is Professor of Geographic Information Science at the 
University of Liverpool. His research concerns the development of an 
empirically informed critique of the ways in which geodemographic 
methods can be refined for effective yet ethical use in public resource 
allocation applications.
Nanna Verhoeff is Associate Professor at the Department of Media and 
Culture Studies at Utrecht University. She publishes on emerging and 
changing media cultures of early cinema, mobile and location-based 
arts and media, and urban screens and interfaces. Her books include 
The West in Early Cinema (Amsterdam UP, 2006) and Mobile Screens 
(Amsterdam UP, 2012).
James Merricks White is studying for a PhD with the Programmable City 
project at Maynooth University. He is researching the role played by 
standards and processes of standardisation in the development of digital 
technologies in the city.
Clancy Wilmott is a PhD student at the University of Manchester. Her 
research focuses on the impact of digital mobile mapping practices on 
place-making, wayfinding and the spatial imagination in three post-
colonial cities: Hong Kong, Sydney and Los Angeles. She is also affiliated 
to the Charting the Digital research project led by Sybille Lammes, which 
is funded by the European Research Council.

This page intentionally left blank

1	
Code and the city 
Introduction
Rob Kitchin and Sung-Yueh Perng
The modern city exists as a haze of software instructions. Nearly every urban 
practice is becoming mediated by code.
(Amin and Thrift 2002: 125)
Over the past few decades, software has become essential to the functioning 
of cities. Urban systems and the physical and social infrastructure of the city 
are increasingly composed of and mediated by software-enabled technolo-
gies, and the management and governance of society framed by and under-
taken through interconnecting socio-technical systems. A diverse range of 
public and private organisations now deploy digital technologies to monitor, 
regulate and control their infrastructure and the delivery of services using 
coded assemblages of hardware (such as chips, boards, sensors, actuators, 
transponders, meters, wires, batteries, screens, etc., combined into digital 
devices), software (e.g., firmware, middleware, operating systems, programs, 
apps), flows of data and interfaces, which are networked together (via various 
forms of Internet connections: e.g., wired, wireless, radio, satellite) (Kitchin 
and Dodge 2011).
Such coded assemblages now exist with respect to urban government (e.g., 
city services, public administration), utilities (e.g., energy, water, lighting), 
transportation (both car-based and public transit), public and private surveil-
lance and security, emergency response, communications (e.g., mobile phone 
networks, the Internet), financial institutions and retail chains, environmental 
monitoring (of pollution, environmental risk, weather), and other services. 
All kinds of websites and apps exist – including information and data portals, 
crowdsourced maps and encyclopaedias, and reviews of shops, accommoda-
tion, etc. – that provide insights about urban environments, resources, services 
and pressing issues, as well as providing a means to source further data. A 
large percentage of people now traverse their cities carrying a relatively power-
ful computer in the form of a smartphone that hosts locative social media plat-
forms, such as Twitter, Foursquare and Tinder, enabling and facilitating new 
forms of social interaction and socio-spatial behaviour, and location-based 
services providing spatially contextual information and recommendations.

2  Rob Kitchin and Sung-Yueh Perng
Indeed, interacting with software has become an everyday occurrence for 
people, to the extent that it is mostly treated as routine and habit, operating 
as a ‘technological unconscious’ that is only noticed when it performs incor-
rectly or fails (Thrift 2004; Kitchin and Dodge 2011). Moreover, such is the 
pervasiveness of digital technologies and networks, it is impossible now to 
live outside their orbit, even if one possesses no digital devices and resides 
within an analogue home, as all key infrastructures are coded and national 
governments deploy digital systems in managing their affairs. Whether one is 
relaxing at home, travelling across a city, engaging in work, undertaking con-
sumption, or communicating with friends and family, these are now activities 
that are mediated by code.
Digital technologies and services, then, are increasingly important to how 
we understand and plan cities, how we manage urban services and utilities, 
and how we live urban lives, helping to produce what have been termed ‘smart 
cities’: densely instrumented urban systems that can be monitored, managed 
and regulated in real time (see Townsend 2013; Kitchin 2014), whose data 
can be used to better depict, model and predict urban processes and simulate 
future urban development (Batty et al., 2012), and whose deployment facili-
tates new forms of digital subjectivity, citizenship, participation and political 
action (Isin and Ruppert 2015).
And yet, despite the rapid development and deployment of digital tech-
nologies for augmenting and facilitating city management and urban life, 
and the creation and roll-out of new forms of networked urbanism, it is 
fair to say that, in contrast with the thousands of academic studies and the 
experimentation of companies seeking to develop, test and implement new 
technological products, critical analyses of the relationship between code and 
cities are small in number, underdeveloped conceptually and lacking detailed 
empirical case materials. The speed of technological innovation and material 
deployment, and the power of the discursive regimes driving their adoption, 
is outpacing and outflanking critical reflection and intervention. Moreover, 
critical social scientists and humanities scholars are still struggling to get to 
grips conceptually with a series of interrelated phenomena – code, ubiquitous 
computing, big data, locative social media, mobile computing, networked 
urbanism and smart cities – at the same time as trying to map out and dissect 
their consequences and implications.
The book
Code and the City is designed to add to and extend the theoretical and empiri-
cal work conducted to date, providing both new conceptual thinking and 
illustrative examples of the relationship between software and the urban. It is 
not focused specifically on the notion and creation of smart cities, but rather 
on the technologies, networks and relationships that enable their production. 
As such, the book is interested in charting and understanding the recursive 
relationship between code and the city: how the city is translated into code, 

Code and the city: introduction  3
and how code reshapes the city. To do this, the book brings together an 
interdisciplinary group of authors (from geography, sociology, media stud-
ies, cultural studies, communications, informatics and computer science), as 
critically examining this recursive relationship requires a variety of expertise 
and knowledge and for these to be brought into dialogue. As well as a range 
of disciplinary and theoretical perspectives, to illustrate the diversity of differ-
ent coded assemblages and the coded production of space, the chapters also 
detail a number of empirical examples, including the Internet of Things, com-
munity wireless, locative social media and other apps, urban art installations, 
code libraries, search engines, geodemographics, city interfaces, hackathons 
and crowdsourced emergency response.
The chapters were initially prepared for a workshop at the National 
University of Ireland, Maynooth, in September 2014, which was funded by 
the European Research Council through an Advanced Investigator Award to 
Rob Kitchin for The Programmable City (project ERC-2012-AdG-323636-
SOFTCITY). The workshop met the travel costs of a carefully selected group 
of researchers, enabling them to attend. Each paper was drafted and submit-
ted in advance of the meeting, extensively discussed at the workshop and 
subsequently revised for publication in this volume. A second volume based 
on a similar workshop held in September 2015, Data and the City, will hope-
fully form a companion book. To provide a structure, we have divided the 
book into three sections, each with five papers.
Code, coding, infrastructure and cities
The first section considers the relationship between code and the city in a 
broad sense, focusing on code, its production, and how it is being embedded 
into cities and used to reshape city life.
In Chapter 2, Rob Kitchin argues that, to date, the literature focusing on 
the relationship between code and the city has a number of shortcomings. He 
posits that studies that concentrate on code are often narrow in remit, fading 
out the city, and tend to fetishise and potentially decontextualise code at the 
expense of the wider socio-technical assemblage within which it is embedded. 
Studies that focus on the city tend to examine the effects of code, but rarely 
unpack the constitution and mechanics of the code producing those effects. 
To try and provide a more holistic account of the relationship between code 
and the city, he forwards two interlinked conceptual frameworks. The first 
places code within a wider socio-technical assemblage. The second conceives 
the city as being composed of millions of such assemblages. The latter, Kitchin 
contends, aims to provide a means of productively building a conceptual and 
empirical understanding of code and the city that scales from individual lines 
of code to the complexity of an entire urban system.
Much of the rhetoric and creation of smart city technologies revolves 
around the production of an Internet of Urban Things and urban ­computing – 
­networked devices, sensors and actuators embedded into the fabric of 

4  Rob Kitchin and Sung-Yueh Perng
buildings and the infrastructure of cities. Paul Dourish critically examines, 
as two parallel discourses, the Internet of Things and smart cities, in order 
to identify points of connection and to read the pragmatics and politics of 
deployment of each through the other. In the first part of his essay, Dourish 
traces the development of the Internet of Things and provides a set of obser-
vations concerning its networked nature, its temporality, its scaling, its oper-
ation and relations to people. In the second part, he turns his attention to 
smart cities, applying the same framework of observation. Dourish notes that 
both the Internet of Things and smart cities are plagued by tensions between 
holistic design and piecemeal accumulation, temporalities of development, 
and disparities in control and management. The consequence he contends 
is that, in contrast to the marketing hype, smart cities evolve in a piecemeal, 
gradual, disparate manner, under the control of different groups, shaped 
by politics, and consists of a hodge-podge of technologies using varying 
standards and protocols, and builds on an array of existing technology and 
infrastructure. There is no master plan, but rather lots of patching, hacking, 
jury-rigging and settling. In so much as smart cities exist, they are ‘accidental 
smart cities’. Dourish argues that an understanding of the Internet of Urban 
Things necessitates examining their socio-technical assemblage, with serious 
attention paid to the ‘technical stack’, their temporalities, their politics and 
the participation they engender.
Much information about cities is presently accessed through screen inter-
faces, which present particular urban visions. Shannon Mattern critiques the 
‘widgetisation’ of urban resources through such coded media and provides a 
rubric for thinking about the kinds and sources of data that underpin these 
systems, the design and implementation of such systems, and the people 
for whom such systems are created and deployed. How these coded urban 
dashboard and city operating systems are being deployed to produce smart 
cities, Mattern argues, reflects a certain kind of instrumental rationality 
that serves particular corporate and government interests and shifts urban 
vision and interaction from collective endeavour to personal consumption 
and convenience: translating urban sociality and spatiality ‘from our messy 
city into my efficient city’. Mattern contends that much more consideration 
needs to be paid, on the one hand, to unpacking how urban interfaces are 
framed, designed and work, and, on the other, on how to design interfaces for 
urban citizens that are open, transparent, creative and imaginative and open 
up possibilities rather than limiting conduct and facilitating command and 
control. Such an approach would facilitate thinking about the relationship 
between technology, people and cities; what kind of cities we want and what 
kind of citizens we want to be in the era of smart cities.
For Matthew Fuller and Graham Harwood, the increasing use of compu-
tation to manage and control cities necessitates the production of a certain 
kind of abstract urbanism. Abstract in the sense that the logics of computa-
tion are underpinned by processes of abstraction, reduction and empiricism 
that inherently frame social and spatial processes with respect to defined 

rule sets. They trace the rationale and logic of computational models of 
urban processes, especially simulations, back to game theory, developed in 
the 1940s and racial segregation modelling, from the 1960s, through to agent-
based models designed to simulate how individuals of differing characteris-
tics behave in the city under different conditions. For Fuller and Harwood, 
computers are abstract machines that may make claims to objectivity but are 
in fact thoroughly political through the choices made with regards to math-
ematical structures underpinning the models and encoded in software. As 
such, while social simulations express forms of emergence, they do so within 
a field of defined constraints. And yet, despite their limitations, models and 
modelisations are being ever-more integrated into the design and operation 
of city spaces and services, and urban issues are becoming computational 
problems. Fuller and Harwood thus argue that, as computation is increas-
ingly embedded into urban life, and software becomes a city-making force, 
it is crucial that its processes of abstraction and reduction, and the conse-
quences thereof, are exposed and examined.
In Chapter 6, Adrian Mackenzie asks and answers two key questions. In 
what frame and at what levels of abstraction does the density and plurality 
of code in the city become legible or even enumerable? What has happened 
to the cycling through and rewriting of code over the last 15 years? Drawing 
on Thrift and French (2002), he discusses three geographies of trafficking 
code through cities: a geography of writing code (where code writing takes 
place), a geography of power and control (how code defines and enacts rule 
of urban conduct and interlinks systems) and a geography of indeterminancy 
(how code produces emergent spaces). Mackenzie argues that, over the past 
15 years, a reordering of code traffic has occurred, with the clustered produc-
tion of code being decentred through a much more networked flow of code. 
He illustrates his argument through an examination of GitHub, an enormous 
code repository initially centred in San Francisco, but now with branches 
and users distributed globally. Code, he details, travels between different 
bits of software and GitHub acts as both a platform for social coding and a 
terminus for code traffic that rechannels and reshapes the code that passes 
through it. Mackenzie concludes that the production of code is less like a 
machine, a system or an assemblage but more like a crowd, and that, given 
the mergers, coalescences, branching and replication of bodies of code within 
code repositories, there is no single operational level at which code governs 
cities. As such, code needs to be viewed as a mixing process that reconfigures 
the infrastructure, logistics and circulation of individuals in cities; to make 
sense of such code means examining the traffic in code – how it moves and 
takes shape – rather than isolated pieces of software, systems or applications.
Locative social media and mobile computing
The second section considers the relationship between code, locative social 
media and mobile computing, focusing on how smartphones in particular and 
Code and the city: introduction  5

6  Rob Kitchin and Sung-Yueh Perng
the locative social media apps they enable are mediating how people interact 
with the city and each other, and how the large quantities of data generated 
from such apps can be used to explore and analyse these relationships.
With the rise of smartphones, location-based social media has become an 
increasingly popular means of documenting and mediating interactions with 
city spaces and places. Drawing on initial studies of Foursquare – an app that 
links and shares location, activity, tips and photos – and their own research 
of Foursquare use in Limerick, Ireland, and Sheffield, UK, Luigina Ciolfi 
and Gabriela Avram examine the technological support of human activities 
and the relationship between code, digital agency and the physical world. 
In particular, they explore: how location-based social networks (LBSNs) 
are used by individuals, and how they influence socio-spatial behaviour and 
frame place perception, as well as being used strategically with respect to 
self-presentation; and how LBSN interactions are rematerialised in the physi-
cal world and also feed back into how the software works. Their findings 
highlight how digital social interactions are increasingly interwoven with 
urban spaces and places, producing new kinds of code-mediated socio-spatial 
behaviours and practices.
Similarly, Leighton Evans, also focusing his analysis on Foursquare, argues 
that the use of location-based social media can result in deep and novel under-
standings of locations. He contends that the crowdsourced contributions of 
other users and the information pushed by the app help individuals to rap-
idly attune themselves to places. Drawing on Heidegger’s phenomenology 
and Sloterdijk’s theory of spheres, he explores how the moment that place 
is appreciated as place (that is, as a meaningful existential locale) can be 
reconciled with the delegation of the epistemologies of placehood to a com-
putational device and location-based social media application. Drawing on 
data from an ethnographic study of Foursquare users, code and computa-
tional devices are contextualised as a constant foregrounding presence in the 
city. The engagement of the user, device, code and data in understanding place 
is a moment of phenomenological revelation that is co-constituent of all these 
elements, wherein code is the membrane that allows information to flow and 
influence, and yet is withdrawn and opaque to users. As such, the compu-
tationally mediated spatial behaviours of LBSNs, and thus the relationship 
between code and the city, operates largely beyond the circumspection of their 
users. Consequently, Evans argues, it is important to theorise and empirically 
examine the phenomenological unfolding of urban computational praxes in 
order to appreciate their diverse affects and effects.
Screen interfaces to interactively access, explore and engage with informa-
tion are becoming an increasingly common feature of many urban spaces. In 
some cases, these screen interfaces are art works that layer together spaces, 
software, databases and interactive touchscreen technology and are designed 
as thinking machines to prompt critical reflection on such urban technology 
and the datafication and codification of urban culture. In Chapter 9, Nanna 
Verhoeff and Clancy Wilmott examine in detail one such art installation, 

Saving Face, created by artists Karen Lancel and Herman Maat, which links 
a large, public urban screen with a smaller screen housed in a kiosk, wherein 
participants are invited to add their face to a database, with a composite 
image of all participants being projected on the large screen. Verhoeff and 
Wilmott contend that Saving Face, and other similar works, enable consid-
eration of: the specificities of the use of mobile, interactive and networked 
media; the performativity and embodiment of engaging with such media; 
and how the city is reflected back into media artworks. They contend that 
such artworks can be understood as curatorial laboratories for embodied 
criticality. Moreover, as theoretical objects, they suggest that such projects 
allow us to investigate layering and location design principles for urban inter-
faces. Through their analysis, Verhoeff and Wilmott consider the dispositif 
of urban interfaces, the participatory agency of the individual in the act of 
interfacing, the installation as a public event, and the curation of cultural 
data and spaces. In so doing, they start to develop heuristic tools for the criti-
cal evaluation of urban interfaces or as interfaces of cultural curation.
Through an analysis of the taxi service application, Hailo, and the personal 
life-logging application, Moves, James Merricks White argues that it is not 
enough to examine the relationship between code and the city in order to 
understand the work and effects of these apps. Rather, he contends, they rely 
on a vast network of interlocking technologies with a complex spatial topol-
ogy. White forwards a multilayered model, what he calls a ‘socio-technical 
stack’, consisting of four interlocking and hierarchically organised compo-
nents – hardware, code, data(base) and media interfaces – designed to pro-
vide a heuristic for the critical examination of mobile applications that does 
not fetishise any particular layer, such as code, at the expense of others. His 
examination of Hailo demonstrates how the reconfiguration of hardware and 
telecommunications infrastructure is crucial in disrupting traditional radio-
based taxi businesses and raises a number of legal and regulatory issues. 
Moves, in contrast, is an example of how app-generated data can exceed the 
software configurations in which it is represented, and provide a platform for 
other apps. Placing software in its wider technical stack, and framing that 
stack within its wider socio-technical assemblage, White contends, enables 
the political and economic entanglements of these apps and the mutual con-
stitution of computation and the city to be deciphered.
Lev Manovich has been at the forefront of developing new cultural ana-
lytics – the analysis of massive digital, cultural datasets, especially those 
generated via social media, such as Instagram, Twitter and Foursquare, using 
computational and visualisation techniques. Through a series of related pro-
jects, Manovich has compared the characteristics and content of social media 
for different cities and how best to extract and communicate meaningful 
information from the millions of photos and other data generated by people 
within cities daily. In Chapter 11, Manovich details the process of construct-
ing new cultural analytics for two projects. Selfiecity is a dataset of selfie 
photos shared via Instagram in five cities. To determine whether these photos 
Code and the city: introduction  7

8  Rob Kitchin and Sung-Yueh Perng
differ in style and content between cities, Manovich and his team created 
a number of different types of visualisations, including blend video mon-
tages, imageplots and Selfiexploratory, an interactive website. On Broadway 
is a multimodal, interactive data visualisation for a single street that blends 
together data harvested from Instagram, Twitter, Foursquare, Google Street 
View, taxi pick-ups and drop-offs, and economic indicators from the US 
Census Bureau, and plotted into 100-metre wide rectangles positioned every 
30 metres along 13.5 miles of Broadway, New York. The idea is to enable 
citizens to explore the rich, cultural ‘big data’ relating to a place they either 
visit or live. Together, the two projects reveal the extent to which new loca-
tive social media are generating vast troves of cultural data about cities and 
their inhabitants. Manovich argues that while such datasets open up the pos-
sibility of new forms of surveillance, they also create new opportunities for 
computational cultural analytics to inform and delight citizens.
Governance, politics and knowledge
The third section examines the urban politics of code; how it is deployed to 
manage cities in times of crisis, how alternative coded assemblages can be 
produced by communities through civic hacking, and the politics of how code 
is used to make sense of and produce knowledge about cities.
In times of crisis, such as an earthquake, the digitally networked infra-
structure can be severely disrupted, but it can also provide a means to quickly 
and effectively connect and organise emergency responses both locally and 
globally. Monika Büscher and her colleagues discuss the latter in Chapter 
12, examining digital urbanism under conditions of crisis. Drawing on the 
examples of the earthquakes in Haiti (2010) and Japan (2011), they detail 
how the use of mobile phones, cloud computing, locative social media, 
distributed mapping and networked logistics were used to locate survivors 
and coordinate relief efforts, and enabled people located at a distance to 
contribute productively to localised trauma through language translation, 
topping up phone payments, mapping work and documenting damage. The 
use of new ICT technologies, and how they could rescale and reterritorialise 
emergency responses, has proven to be a disruptive innovation, changing 
established practices and taken-for-granted social and organisational con-
ventions, economic and political models, and notions of humanity and jus-
tice. However, while these technologies have undoubted benefits, Büscher 
and colleagues detail that they facilitate surveillance, qualculation and auto-
mation. Moreover, they use their case studies to consider wider philosophical 
questions concerning the relationship between people and technology, the 
ethics of care, and how to design better IT for crisis response.
The majority of smart city initiatives that deploy coded infrastructure are 
owned and managed by companies and states and are deployed through 
top-down governance via systems of centralised control. Alison Powell, 
in contrast, considers alternative, bottom-up, participatory visions of the 

relationship between code and the city and what they might mean for the 
governance of urban space. She does so through an examination of peer-
to-peer urbanism, as produced through the discourse, practices and archi-
tectures of community wireless networks, which are owned and run by local 
communities. Such peer-to-peer networks, Powell contends, enact a ‘politics 
of the minor’ – localised political interventions that disrupt the dominant 
order – and create new forms of technological citizenship. They therefore 
illustrate the possibilities of alternative ways of producing coded cities that 
have different organisational practices, modes of architecture, political sensi-
bilities and spatial formations. However, they are also vulnerable to erasure 
or absorption by the dominant order, as has happened with many commu-
nity wireless networks. Nonetheless, they highlight that there is no teleologi-
cal inevitability to how smart cities will unfold.
Hackathons and civic hacking have become popular events in which indi-
viduals collaborate to produce technological solutions to urban problems. 
Sophia Maalsen and Sung-Yueh Perng examine how hackathons take place, 
how the coding produced within them seeks to address urban problems, and 
the implications and challenges that emerge in that process, by drawing on 
their ethnographic participant observation of Code for Ireland events in 
Dublin, Ireland. In particular, Maalsen and Perng focus on the placing of 
hackathons, examining the role of the venue, its spatial arrangements and 
the fluidity and messiness of the hackathon process, the relationship between 
individuals and the collective hack, and the productive tension between 
what the participants want to do and what the government or companies 
running the hackathon desire. In the process, Maalsen and Perng reflect 
on how hackathons seek to translate the problems of the city into apps 
that seek to provide answers and, in turn, transform ways of living. They 
conclude, however, that the events are often more effective in facilitating 
networking and providing a social experience than producing apps that 
effect change.
Heather Ford and Mark Graham examine how places are codified in data 
and data structures, and linked and represented through the Semantic Web, 
to produce digital representations that augment knowledge about cities. In 
particular, they focus on Google’s Knowledge Graph, which links, structures 
and shares data from Wikipedia, UNdata and other sites, to provide snapshot 
information about places in relation to searches without the need to visit other 
sites. In combination, Google and Wikipedia’s algorithms and databanks 
determine how a city is presented. This is far from a neutral process, however, 
with a locale’s political context often embedded into its digital layers. Ford 
and Graham illustrate this by examining how different language versions of 
Wikipedia, as well as Wikidata, Freebase and Google, present information 
about Jerusalem, a highly contested city. Their analysis highlights how the 
intersections of people, practices, tools, laws, and geopolitics produce differ-
ent, contested codified versions of Jerusalem, depending on language version 
(English vs Hebrew vs Arabic), but that nuances, provenance, agency of 
Code and the city: introduction  9

10  Rob Kitchin and Sung-Yueh Perng
editors and transparency in politics are often obscured. Ford and Graham 
conclude that the messy political informational layers of cities are presently 
becoming more accessible to machines and more opaque to humans; struc-
tured to enable an automatic production of geographical knowledge, but one 
that obscures heterogeneity and presents a narrowly framed view of cities.
Alex Singleton’s chapter provides a detailed illustration of the abstract 
urbanism identified by Fuller and Harwood, presenting the codification of 
geodemographic classifications, their history and their use. Geodemographic 
models group areas into categories based on shared population and built-
environment characteristics, using practices of abstraction, reduction and 
representation. These models are then used for a variety of purposes, includ-
ing area-based social policy formulation and targeted marketing, having 
diverse effects on city life. Singleton details how constructing these models 
is both a science and an art, involving the use of statistics and computa-
tion, but also builder judgement and experience to create classifications that 
seemingly best represent the characteristics of a place. He also details how 
the models can be influenced by scaling, zones, input variables, measure-
ment, weights, transformations and clustering methods. Singleton illustrates 
the effect of the geographical extent of the classification boundaries on the 
geodemographics produced by comparing the same method applied to the 
UK and Liverpool. He argues that such urban codification has great utility, 
but also that the methods deployed to create them need to be open in nature 
so that the process of abstract urbanism is transparent and open to scrutiny 
and challenge.
Code and the city
Taken together, the chapters highlight the diverse ways in which the city 
and code are being co-produced and how this, in turn, is reshaping urban 
infrastructures, management, knowledge and living. Several themes that cut 
across the chapters advance the debate as to how best to make sense of the 
relationship between code and the city. We highlight three that we think 
demand particular attention.
First, what is at stake is the transformation of urban infrastructures, 
knowledge and everyday practices through their enduring and emergent 
associations with code. There is a pressing need, then, to understand the 
nature and work of code in the city. At the same time, we need to be mindful 
of fetishising code at the expense of the full socio-technical assemblage that 
constitutes digital technologies and their enactment. Software-enabled tech-
nologies consist of amalgams of infrastructure, hardware, operating systems, 
software and data that are bolted together and work in conjunction to per-
form their work. How the city is rendered as models and captured in code as 
algorithms is a crucial element in the reterritorialisation of the city through a 
computational or mathematical logic (see Chapter 5). This abstract urbanism 
is, however, enacted through coded assemblages that work in contingent and 

contextual ways, dependent upon a range of social, cultural, political, legal 
and economic forces that shape how they are constructed and operate (see 
Chapters 2 to 4 and 10). These coded assemblages have varying temporalities 
and scalings (see Chapter 4); there is a geography and sociology to the pro-
cess through which they are created (see Chapters 6, 13, 14 and 16); and they 
work not in isolation but in relation to other coded assemblages to create a 
dense network of coexisting, collaborating and competing infrastructures 
and systems.
Second, these assemblages are not flat ontologies, composed of horizontal, 
equally weighted networks of association. Nor are they neutral, objective, 
non-ideological in their conception and functioning. Rather, they are full of 
politics and power, and asymmetrical, hierarchical and contested relations 
(see Chapters 4 and 12 to 15). Digital technologies operate within, recast 
and reproduce political economies: they form the apparatus of the state, the 
engines of capital accumulation for business, and can be deployed and recast 
in acts of resistance and transgression by citizens. They are created to enact 
the desires of their producers and deployers and are expressions of power that 
work to (re)produce particular socio-spatial configurations, at the same time 
as they are challenged and subverted (see Chapters 13 and 15).
Third, there is performativity to the creation and enactment of coded 
assemblages, with them unfolding in contingent, relational, contextual and 
embodied ways (see Chapters 6 to 9). There is no teleological inevitability 
or set path dependency to how digital technologies transduce and reterri-
torialise cities; how they are created, deployed and used; how they produce 
and communicate geographical knowledge; and how they enable new forms 
of spatial behaviour and place making (see Chapters 7 and 8). Rather, they 
emerge and evolve through diverse practices, often in piecemeal, distributed, 
embodied and disparate ways (see Chapters 3, 12 and 13), but also through 
more carefully delineated but nonetheless emergent processes (see Chapters 
6, 11, 15 and 16).
Taken together, these three observations point to the need for critical 
scholarship that can encapsulate two outcomes that are often difficult to 
achieve simultaneously. On the one hand, there is a need for more holis-
tic accounts that seek to place the relationship between code and the city 
in a wider context. On the other, there is a need for detailed, nuanced, 
empirically rich accounts that tease apart complex, contingent, relational 
processes and unpack how coded assemblages are formulated, produced 
and work. Moreover, much more normative and ethical thinking needs to 
take place with respect to what kinds of coded cities we wish to build and 
inhabit. Collectively, we believe the chapters in Code and the City produce 
such breadth and depth and begin to map routes for thinking creatively 
about future socio-spatial relations, providing useful insights into how digi-
tal technologies are enabling new forms of programmable urbanism. We 
hope that you similarly find the book a stimulating, informative and con-
structive read.
Code and the city: introduction  11

12  Rob Kitchin and Sung-Yueh Perng
Acknowledgements
The research for this work was funded by a European Research Council 
Advanced Investigator Award to Rob Kitchin, entitled The Programmable 
City (ERC-2012-AdG-323636-SOFTCITY).
References
Amin, A. and Thrift, N. (2002) Cities: Reimagining the Urban, London: Polity.
Batty, M., Axhausen, K.W., Giannotti, F., Pozdnoukhov, A., Bazzani, A., 
Wachowicz, M., Ouzounis, G. and Portugali, Y. (2012) ‘Smart cities of the future’, 
European Physical Journal Special Topics, 214: 481–518.
Isin, E. and Ruppert, E. (2015) Being Digital Citizens, New York: Rowan and 
Littlefield.
Kitchin, R. (2014) ‘The real-time city? Big data and smart urbanism’, GeoJournal 
79(1): 1–14.
Kitchin, R. and Dodge, M. (2011) Code/Space: Software and Everyday Life, 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thrift, N. (2004) ‘Remembering the technological unconscious by foregrounding 
knowledges of position’, Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 22(1): 
175–90.
Thrift, N. and French, S. (2002) ‘The automatic production of space’, Transactions of 
the Institute of British Geographers, 27(3): 309–35.
Townsend, A. (2013) Smart Cities: Big Data, Civic Hackers, and the Quest for a New 
Utopia. New York: W.W. Norton and Co.

Part I
Code, coding, infrastructure 
and cities

This page intentionally left blank

2	
From a single line of code to  
an entire city
Reframing the conceptual terrain  
of code/space
Rob Kitchin
Introduction
Thousands of papers and reports document the development of new digi-
tal technologies and their potential impact on cities and citizens, or have 
examined the role software plays in managing urban infrastructures and 
practices. The vast majority of these studies, however, focus on the technical 
development of new innovations and the production, deployment and effects 
of software from a non-critical, technological, engineering and governance 
perspective. A relatively small proportion take a more critical perspective, 
detailing how certain digital technologies produce new socio-spatial prac-
tices and effects (such as spatial sorting, algorithmic regulation, anticipatory 
governance and control creep) and forms of networked urbanism and their 
wider social, political and economic consequences to urban life (e.g., Mitchell 
1995; Graham and Marvin 2001; Graham 2005; Foth 2008; Shepard 2011). 
Only in a handful of cases, however, has critical and conceptual attention 
been focused on the nature of software itself, its underlying code, and its 
relationship to urban management, governance and everyday practices from 
a more social, cultural and political perspective (e.g., Thrift and French 2002; 
Mackenzie 2006; Kitchin and Dodge 2011; Kelley 2014).
Drawing inspiration from software studies – a new field that takes soft-
ware, and its production and deployment, as its object of critical analysis 
(see Fuller 2008; Berry 2011; Manovich 2013) – these critical interventions 
consider the ways in which cities and citizens are translated into code and 
how this code is then used to reshape cities and mediate the lives of their 
inhabitants. The principal argument forwarded is that:
•	
Code is an actant that possesses ‘secondary agency’ (Mackenzie 2006), 
that is, it is ceded the power to process data and to make automated, 
automatic and autonomous decisions and actions, thus making aspects 
of the city sentient (Dodge and Kitchin 2007; Shepard 2011).
•	
Code transduces space, that is, it alters the unfolding production of space 
through its deployment (Dodge and Kitchin 2005).

16  Rob Kitchin
•	
The city becomes programmable, that is, open to recoding and reme-
diation, but also to being buggy and hackable (Kitchin 2011; Townsend 
2013).
Code, it is thus argued, through its work as an actant, produces forms of 
coded space, wherein code augments or mediates the production of space but 
is not essential to its production, and code/space, wherein code is essential to 
a space being produced as intended (Kitchin and Dodge 2011). Much of the 
city is now produced as code/space, wherein if the code fails, the space is not 
transduced as desired (e.g., if checkout software in a supermarket crashes 
then a space is transduced as a warehouse instead of a supermarket, or if 
check-in software in an airport fails then the space is transduced as a large 
waiting room – in both cases there is no longer any manual way to process 
transactions; code and space are mutually constituted). Moreover, code and 
forms of automated management (a mode of algorithmic governance pro-
duced by software wherein technologies are enabled to make automated, 
automatic and autonomous decisions about how to process information and 
act without human oversight) are actively and extensively employed in the 
management and governance of urban systems, especially with respect to 
critical infrastructure and utilities (e.g., transport, energy, water) and polic-
ing, security and surveillance.
My book with Martin Dodge, Code/Space: Software and Everyday Life 
(2011), was an attempt to provide an overarching, holistic conceptual frame-
work for thinking about code and the city and to make sense of the changes 
that digital technologies were making to the urban condition. The book 
sought to take ideas and observations from urban studies and software stud-
ies and work them through each other, both as a way to better understand the 
nature of software, and its role in everyday life, and the changing form and 
function of city infrastructure and urban life. We illustrated our arguments 
by documenting how software was reshaping travel, home and work. As 
with all such texts, it was provisional – a staging post rather than definitive 
guide – and it very much fetishised software as a key medium and operator in 
shaping the urban condition.
In this chapter, I want to revisit some of the conceptual ideas that Martin 
Dodge and I developed and to rework and extend them, focusing particu-
larly on deepening and widening our conceptualisation of code and soft-
ware, to frame them within the wider socio-technical assemblage in which 
they are developed and work, and to consider how these socio-technical 
assemblages coalesce and interact to produce the city. The rest of the chapter 
is divided into two sections. The first focuses on code itself and the impor-
tance of delving into the nuts and bolts and mechanics of its constitution and 
operation, while at the same time not overly fetishising code at the expense 
of the wider socio-technical assemblage within which it is embedded. The 
second focuses on how these socio-technical assemblages are framed within 
the wider discursive and material technological terrain and urban landscape, 

From a line of code to an entire city  17
and interact and scale to produce densely instrumented cities consisting of 
millions of coded objects and systems, all in dynamic flux. In this sense, the 
two sections are trying to find a way of dealing with the issue of productively 
building a conceptual understanding that scales from individual lines of 
code to the complexity of an entire urban system; of building a conceptual 
edifice that moves beyond marrying software studies to urban studies. This 
is no easy  challenge, and I would see the arguments I make as another 
provisional  step that others will hopefully help develop and make more 
robust.
Thinking about code and the city
In Code/Space, Martin Dodge and I argued that software needed to be under-
stood as being both a product of the world and a producer of the world. 
Code  – the lines of declarations, procedures, commands and algorithms, 
expressed in different languages (assembly, scripting, procedural, etc.) – that, 
when compiled, create software are not simply the result of a neutral, tech-
nical exercise. Rather, coding needs to be understood as a complex and 
contingent process, shaped by the abilities and worldviews of programmers 
and engineers, working in companies or on their own time, situated in social, 
political and economic contexts (Rosenburg 2007). Software development 
occurs in a collaborative framework, with individuals performing as part of 
a team or re-appropriating code from libraries or ideas from websites, books 
and magazines. Often, several teams will work on different aspects of the 
same program, which are then stitched together. Teams can have different 
visions about what they are trying to achieve, and have different skill levels 
to tackle the job at hand. Software, then, is not an immaterial, stable, value-
free product; it is a complex, multifaceted, mutable set of relations created 
through diverse sets of discursive, economic and material practices rooted 
in particular locales. Moreover, this software does not simply represent the 
world, but actively participates in it, transducing space, reshaping work, 
transforming practices, and so on (Dourish 2001).
We argued for a need to, on the one hand, delve further into the nature 
of code itself, and in particular to start to unpick how coding is actively 
practised and code created in context, and, on the other, to examine the work 
that code does in the world. Here, I want to focus on the former. In trying to 
make sense of code and coding with respect to urban systems, we advocated: 
(1) a focus on the code itself, deconstructing the lines of code and examining 
the ways in which elements of the world, and ways to think about and process 
them, are captured and formalised in sets of interlinked algorithms, and exca-
vating how the code and algorithms evolve through revisions and editions, 
as they incorporate new ideas, ambitions, policy and law; (2) ethnographies 
of coders and coding projects, including their wider social, political and eco-
nomic framing. In other words, we posited a very software studies approach 
to making sense of code and cities.

18  Rob Kitchin
I am still of the view that an in-depth focus on code and coding would 
be an enormously profitable endeavour. Given the huge growth in forms 
of algorithmic governance – everything from recommendation systems, to 
automated forms of surveillance, to profiling and sorting – it is becoming 
increasingly important to understand the aetiology of code (how algorithms 
are constructed and operate), how they are utilised, and to tease apart their 
inherent politics (see Gillespie 2014; Kitchin 2014b). This is evident in two 
recent, excellent software studies texts: Montfort et al.’s (2012) 10 Print, a 
detailed analysis of a single, but iconic, line of code; and Manovich’s (2013) 
Software Takes Command, in which he provides an in-depth genealogy of the 
‘softwarisation’ of cultural media – art, photos, film, television, music – that 
has taken place since the 1970s. That said, I have a major concern with this 
approach in and of itself: it adopts an analytical lens that over-fetishises and 
potentially decontextualises code at the expense of its wider assemblage of 
production and use.
Since the publication of Code/Space, I have written another monograph – 
The Data Revolution (Kitchin 2014a) – which I loosely think of as the 
third book in a trilogy of sorts (Mapping Cyberspace (Dodge and Kitchin 
2001): infrastructure; Code/Space: software; The Data Revolution: data) and 
started a large, five-year European Research Council funded project, The 
Programmable City, which involves ten subprojects focused on the intersec-
tions of ubiquitous computing, software, big data and the creation of smart 
cities. Both endeavours have highlighted that the relationship between code 
and the city is complex and diverse. Code and software are critical to net-
worked urbanism, but so too are data, platforms, hardware, interfaces and 
users. And none of these can be fully understood without being considered 
in relation to one another, nor outside of their wider context. This has been 
brought home to me in two ways, which when combined provide a path 
forward.
First, in The Data Revolution, I developed an argument that to fully com-
prehend an open data system, or a big data product, or a research data infra-
structure, one needs to examine its entire data assemblage (see Table 2.1). 
The apparatuses and elements detailed in Table 2.1 interact with and shape 
each other through a contingent and complex web of multifaceted relations. 
And just as data are a product of the assemblage, the assemblage is structured 
and managed to produce those data (Ribes and Jackson 2013). Data and 
their assemblage are thus mutually constituted, bound together in a set of 
contingent, relational and contextual discursive and material practices and 
relations. This argument can be equally extended to code or software (indeed, 
this is an extension of a discussion first expressed in Code/Space). For exam-
ple, an app such as Foursquare or a city geographical information system 
(GIS) consist of a large amalgam of apparatuses and elements that shape how 
they are conceived, developed, administered, operated, and interactions with 
them deployed. A GIS is underpinned by a realist system of thought; it pulls 
together and combines hundreds of analytical and visualisation algorithms 

and dozens of datasets and has to be able to handle lots of different data for-
mats, standards and protocols; it has a diverse set of accompanying forms of 
supporting documentation, in both trade and academic journals; the system 
and its data are maintained, updated and used by many collaborating stake-
holders, through a diverse set of practices, undertaken by many workers, 
using a range of materials and infrastructures; its operational costs are a 
source of contention; its use is shaped by legal frameworks and regulations; it 
is one part of a multibillion-dollar industry and community of practice; and 
so on. And GISs continue to evolve and mutate as ‘new ideas and knowledges 
emerge, technologies are invented, organisations change, business models are 
created, the political economy alters, regulations and laws are introduced and 
repealed, skill sets develop, debates take place, and markets grow or shrink’ 
(Kitchin and Lauriault 2014). They are thus always in a state of becoming. 
One cannot fully grasp the constitution, operation and work of a GIS by 
concentrating attention on its code, despite the fact that without code a GIS 
could not exist. It has to be framed as a socio-technical assemblage.
Second, I have been trying to assemble my thoughts with respect to making 
conceptual sense of algorithms (Kitchin 2014b) and interfaces (Kitchin 
Table 2.1  Apparatus and elements of a data assemblage
Apparatus
Elements
Systems of thought
Modes of thinking, philosophies, theories, models, 
ideologies, rationalities, etc.
Forms of knowledge
Research texts, manuals, magazines, websites, experience, 
word of mouth, chat forums, etc.
Finance
Business models, investment, venture capital, grants, 
philanthropy, profit, etc.
Political economy
Policy, tax regimes, incentive instruments, public and 
political opinion, etc.
Governmentalities 
and legalities
Data standards, file formats, system requirements, 
protocols, regulations, laws, licensing, intellectual property 
regimes, ethical considerations, etc.
Materialities and 
infrastructures
Paper and pen, computers, digital devices, sensors, 
scanners, databases, networks, servers, buildings, etc.
Practices
Techniques, ways of doing, learnt behaviours, scientific 
conventions, etc.
Organisations and 
institutions
Archives, corporations, consultants, manufacturers, 
retailers, government agencies, universities, conferences, 
clubs and societies, committees and boards, communities 
of practice, etc.
Subjectivities and 
communities
Of data producers, experts, curators, managers, analysts, 
scientists, politicians, users, citizens, etc.
Places
Laboratories, offices, field sites, data centres, server farms, 
business parks, etc., and their agglomerations
Marketplace
For data, its derivatives (e.g., text, tables, graphs, maps), 
analysts, analytic software, interpretations, etc.
Source: Kitchin 2014a: 25
From a line of code to an entire city  19

20  Rob Kitchin
et al. 2015), drawing on related, but distinctly labelled literature (e.g., critical 
code studies, human–computer interaction, new media studies), thus adding 
to my existing ideas with respect to infrastructure, code and data. This has 
led to a consideration, drawing on the discussion and conceptual diagrams 
of Montfort et al. (2012), Bogost and Montfort (n.d.), van Dijck (2013, 
detailed in Chapter 10) and Chapter 10 (see Figure 2.1), of the make-up of 
the digital technology stack (the elements that work together), underpin-
ning particular digital innovations, products or services that are deployed in 
cities. In my version of the stack, there are six elements: material platform 
(infrastructure – hardware), code platform (operating system), data(base), 
code or algorithms (software), interface, and reception or operation (user or 
usage). Each layer has effects with regards to the others. For example, the 
hardware influences the choice of operating system, which shapes the choice 
of programming environment; the form and extent of the data influence how 
algorithms are constructed, as do user expectations and patterns of use; the 
interface is constrained by the hardware and shapes user experience of a tech-
nology, and so on (Montfort et al. (2012) provide a nice discussion about how 
a single line of code and its output is affected by what language it is expressed 
in, what parameters are selected and what hardware it is run on). Prioritising 
code, at the expense of the rest of the stack, places a constraint on develop-
ing a holistic, socio-technical understanding of how a digital technology is 
conceived and works in practice (Chapter 10). This holistic approach is also 
currently limited by each layer in the stack being the focus of a particular field 
of study – new media studies, human–computer interaction, software studies, 
critical data studies or platform studies (see Figure 2.1).
Taken together, the notion of a data assemblage and technology stack 
has led to the creation of an initial wider conceptual framing for The 
Programmable City, a project that intertwines these ideas into an overarch-
ing notion of a digital socio-technical assemblage (see Figure 2.2). Within 
this perspective, code or software is just one element, albeit a critical one, 
in a much wider assemblage that frames the interrelationship between code 
and the city. Making sense of a socio-technical assemblage involves drawing 
Figure 2.1  Digital technology stacks
Reception/operation
Reception/operation
Interface
Interface
Data
Interface
Interface
Form /function
Algorithm s
Data(base)
Data(base)
Code
Protocols
Softw are
Code platform
Platform
Defaults
Hardw are
M aterial platform
Softw are
Bogost and Montfort (no date) 
Van Dijck (2013) 
White (2014) 
Kitchin (2014)

on ideas and empirical insights from a range of fields within critical social 
science and science and technology studies, including new media studies, 
game studies, human–computer interaction, software studies, critical code 
studies, critical data studies and platform studies, as well as anthropology, 
sociology, political science, economics and human geography. Unpacking a 
digital socio-technical assemblage, then, is no easy task, but is manageable 
as a large case study, given that it is focused on a single assemblage, such as 
a program, app or system. The city, however, consists of millions of inter-
connected socio-technical assemblages, working in concert and contest to 
transduce the urban condition. A key question then is how to make sense of 
this dense, interconnected web of assemblages that are constantly working in 
dynamic flux. It is to this conundrum I now turn.
Thinking about code and the city
The problem with examining individual socio-technical assemblages in detail 
is that the city largely disappears from view. Certain elements are examined, 
but in isolation, meaning that a more holistic understanding of how vari-
ous systems combine and interact to produce the whole is never formulated. 
Clearly, cities are large, complex, multifaceted, open systems and it is all but 
impossible to fully comprehend all their interlocking systems. Nevertheless, 
it is possible to map out the ways in which socio-technical assemblages (mis)
align, work together, compete, coalesce to form larger assemblages, and so 
on. To date, very little detailed empirical research has been conducted on 
how socio-technical assemblages are framed within the wider discursive and 
Figure 2.2  Conceptualising the constitution of a digital socio-technical system
From a line of code to an entire city  21
Digital socio-technical assemblage
Critical Social Science 
Science & Technology Studies
System /process 
performs a task
Context 
frames the system/task
New M edia Studies 
Gam e Studies
Reception/operation
(user/usage)
Systems of thought
HCI, Rem ediation Studies
Interface
Forms of knowledge
Critical Code Studies 
Software Studies
Code/algorithm s
(software)
Finance
Critical Data Studies
Data(base)
Political econom ies
Platform  Studies
Code platform  
(operating system)
Governm entalities & legalities
Organisations and institutions
Subjectivities and com m unities
M arketplace
M aterial platform 
(infrastructure -  hardware)

22  Rob Kitchin
material technological terrain and urban landscape, and how they interact and 
scale to produce densely instrumented cities. Yet such research would usefully 
illustrate how networked urbanism is being built and functions in practice.
In contrast, the field of urban studies suffers from the converse problem. 
Since the early 1990s, as noted in Chapter 1, a fairly substantial literature 
on the development of networked urbanism and smart cities has emerged. 
These studies have focused on examining the effects of networked, digital 
infrastructure on the management and regulation of various urban systems, 
and urban governance and economy more broadly, providing useful insights 
into how software-enabled technologies are transforming cities and urban 
life. However, there is a major omission in such work: it discusses the effects 
of digital socio-technical assemblages, but rarely unpacks the constitution 
and mechanics of those assemblages. For example, a paper might discuss 
anticipatory governance and its effects on civil liberties, or the security vul-
nerabilities of the Internet of Things and its consequences with respect to 
privacy, without explicating the specific ways in which systems are config-
ured, code and algorithms work, data are parsed and analysed, users inter-
face, engage, resist, and so on. In part, this is because the socio-technical 
assemblages are blackboxed; it takes a little more effort to leverage access or 
to undertake approaches that would shine a light into the box (see Kitchin 
2014b), but it is mainly to do with adopting a viewpoint that examines effects 
rather than causes. In Code/Space, Dodge and I illustrated this by comparing 
approaches that examine the underlying epidemiology of ill-health and the 
effects of ill-health on the world. Our argument was that while one can gain 
an understanding of the relationship between health and society by study-
ing how ill-health affects social relations, one can gain deeper insights by 
also considering the specifics of different diseases, their aetiology, and how 
these manifest themselves in shaping social relations. Similarly, one could 
examine how telematic networks shape traffic management without studying 
how such effects are manifestly the result of how the telematic assemblage 
is constituted and configured, with rules and procedures formalised within 
algorithms and code.
It seems to me, therefore, that we have a major disconnect in the literature. 
Science and technology scholars are focused on the nature of specific elements 
of socio-technical systems. Urban scholars are focused on the embedding 
of digital technologies into urban environments and their social, political 
and economic effects. Occasionally, these perspectives meet, but largely they 
remain apart. A key question, for me at least, is how to marry them into a 
conceptual whole, or at least place them in productive tension. The solution 
seems to be to scale the socio-technical perspective up, and drill the urban 
studies focus down so that they overlap in view and epistemology.
Figure 2.3 provides an initial attempt at setting out a conceptual framework 
for what I term ‘programmable urbanism’ – the instrumented, mutable form of 
smart cities – that scales between individual socio-technical assemblages and 
their components to the city and their dense interconnection and embedding 

within a wider discursive, political and economic landscape. The framework 
thus seeks to promote and support research that attempts to simultaneously 
unpack socio-technical assemblages and chart their interconnections and 
interdependencies, and how they scale to frame and create city life. It thus 
aims to produce a holistic analysis, examining how programmable urbanism 
is framed within a wider discursive, political and economic landscape (the 
rhetoric of smart cities, for example) and how it is built, functions and has 
effects in practice. The apparatus of ‘political economies’, ‘finance’, ‘govern-
mentalities and legalities’, etc. appear in each socio-technical assemblage, and 
the wider landscape of smart cities, to denote that there are a multitude of 
discursive and material elements at play, some supporting individual assem-
blages and others the broader terrain of city policy, which often align but can 
also be in conflict. For example, smart city policy within a city might gener-
ally support technocratic forms of governance, but preclude some forms 
owing to legal interventions. Yet there could be an active discursive field 
supporting the roll-out of precluded socio-technical assemblages.
Enacting this framework through empirical study would be an arduous 
task for an individual, but it is certainly not beyond the bounds of a research 
team or network of collaborators. It would also be possible to draw insights 
by stitching together findings and ideas from across the literature to create a 
synoptic analysis. It therefore seems plausible that its vision could be realised, 
enabling us to gain an enhanced understanding of the relationship between 
code and the city that scales from lines of code to the city in action.
Figure 2.3  Conceptual framework for programmable urbanism
From a line of code to an entire city  23
S m art Cities
Wider discursive, political and economic landscape
Political economies
Governmentalities & legalities
Finance
Organisations and institutions
Marketplace
Subjectivities and communities
Systems of thought
Forms of knowledge
Diverse, interconnected socio-technical assemblages
Digital socio-technical assemblage
System/process 
performs a task
Context 
frames the system/task
Reception/operation
(user/usage)
Systems of thought
Forms of knowledge
Interface
Code/algorithms
(software)
Finance
Political economies
Data(base)
Governmentalities & legalities
Code platform 
(operating system)
Organisations and institutions
Material platform 
infrastructure -  hardware)
Subjectivities and communities
Marketplace
Constantly contested and evolving overtim e

24  Rob Kitchin
Conclusion
Cities are rapidly becoming composed of digitally mediated components and 
infrastructures, their systems augmented and mediated by software, with 
widespread consequences for how they are managed, governed and experi-
enced. A smart city is not a vision of a future city, as often depicted in the 
media; it already exists in practice through the millions of interconnected, 
digital socio-technical assemblages embedded into the fabric of cities that 
frame how people travel, communicate, manage, play, consume, work, and 
so on. The challenge for critical scholars is to understand the tightening 
bonds between code and the city: how such bonds are configured and work 
in practice, and what they mean for how cities operate and for citizen’s lives.
My argument in this chapter is that while there has been much progress in 
examining programmable urbanism, there is much conceptual and empirical 
work to be done. To date, the literatures concerning, respectively, code and 
the city have remained quite divided, and both have shortcomings. On the 
one hand, studies that focus on code are narrow in remit, fading out the city, 
and tend to fetishise code at the expense of the wider socio-technical assem-
blage within which it is embedded. On the other hand, studies that focus on 
the city tend to examine the effects of code but rarely unpack the constitution 
and mechanics of the code producing those effects.
My contention is that we need to marry the ideas within these two litera-
tures to provide a more holistic account of the relationship between code and 
the city. Building on ideas initially developed in Code/Space (Kitchin and 
Dodge 2011), I have forwarded two, interlinked conceptual frameworks. 
The first places code within a wider socio-technical assemblage. The second 
conceives the city as being composed of millions of such assemblages. In so 
doing, the latter seeks to provide a means of productively building a con-
ceptual and empirical understanding of programmable urbanism that scales 
from individual lines of code to the complexity of an entire urban system. It is 
certainly not comprehensive in scope or captures the complex processes and 
interdependencies at play. But it does, I believe, provide an initial scaffold for 
seeking to scale software studies up towards the city and to drill urban studies 
down towards code.
Acknowledgements
The research for this work was funded by a European Research Council 
Advanced Investigator Award to Rob Kitchin, entitled The Programmable 
City (ERC-2012-AdG-323636-SOFTCITY).
References
Berry, D. (2011) The Philosophy of Software: Code and Mediation in the Digital Age, 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Bogost, I. and Montfort, N. (n.d.) ‘Levels’, Platform Studies, available from http://
platformstudies.com/levels.html [accessed 7 August 2014].
Dodge, M. and Kitchin, R. (2001) Mapping Cyberspace, London: Routledge.
Dodge, M. and Kitchin, R. (2005) ‘Code and the transduction of space’, Annals of the 
Association of American Geographers, 95(1): 162–80.
Dodge, M. and Kitchin, R. (2007) ‘The automatic management of drivers and driving 
spaces’, Geoforum, 38(2): 264–75.
Dourish, P. (2001) Where the Action Is, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Foth, M. (2008) Handbook of Research on Urban Informatics: The Practice and 
Promise of the Real-time City, New York: Information Science Reference.
Fuller, M. (2008) Software Studies: A Lexicon. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gillespie, T. (2014) ‘The relevance of algorithms’, in T. Gillespie, P.J. Boczkowski and 
K.A. Foot (eds) Media Technologies: Essays on Communication, Materiality, and 
Society, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Graham, S.D.N. (2005) ‘Software-sorted geographies’, Progress in Human Geography, 
29(5): 562–80.
Graham, S. and Marvin, S. (2001) Splintering Urbanism: Networked Infrastructures, 
Technological Mobilities and the Urban Condition, London: Routledge.
Kelley, M.J. (2014) ‘The semantic production of space: pervasive computing and the 
urban landscape’, Environment and Planning A, 46(4): 837–51.
Kitchin, R. (2011) ‘The programmable city’, Environment and Planning B, 38: 945–51.
Kitchin, R. (2014a) The Data Revolution: Big Data, Open Data, Data Infrastructures 
and Their Consequences, London: Sage.
Kitchin, R. (2014b) ‘Thinking critically about algorithms’. Programmable City 
Working Paper 5, Social Science Research Network, available from http://ssrn.com/
abstract=2515786 [accessed 16 November 2015].
Kitchin, R. and Dodge, M. (2011) Code/Space: Software and Everyday Life, 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kitchin, R. and Lauriault, T. (2014) ‘Towards critical data studies: charting and 
unpacking data assemblages and their work’, Programmable City Working Paper 2, 
Social Science Research Network, available from http://ssrn.com/abstract=2474112 
[accessed 24 August 2015].
Kitchin, R., Lauriault, T. and McArdle, G. (2015) ‘Knowing and governing cities 
through urban indicators, city benchmarking and real-time dashboards’, Regional 
Studies, Regional Science, 2: 1–28.
Mackenzie, A. (2006) Cutting Code: Software and Sociality, New York: Peter Lang.
Manovich, L. (2013) Software Takes Command, London: Bloomsbury.
Mitchell, W.J. (1995) City of Bits: Space, Place and the Infobahn, Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Montfort, N., Baudoin, P., Bell, J., Bogost, I., Douglass, J., Marino, M.C., Mateas, M., 
Reas, C., Sample, M. and Vawter, N. (2012) 10 PRINT CHR$(205.5+RND(1)); 
:GOTO 10, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ribes, D. and Jackson, S.J. (2013) ‘Data bite man: the work of sustaining long-term 
study’, in L. Gitelman (ed.) ‘Raw Data’ is an Oxymoron, Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Rosenberg, S. (2007) Dreaming in Code: Two Dozen Programmers, Three Years, 4,732 
Bugs, and One Quest for Transcendent Software, New York: Three Rivers Press.
Shepard, M. (2011) Sentient City: Ubiquitous Computing, Architecture, and the Future 
of Urban Space, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
From a line of code to an entire city  25

26  Rob Kitchin
Thrift, N. and French, S. (2002) ‘The automatic production of space’, Transactions of 
the Institute of British Geographers, 27(3): 309–35.
Townsend, A. (2013) Smart Cities: Big Data, Civic Hackers, and the Quest for a New 
Utopia, New York: W.W. Norton and Co.
van Dijck, J. (2013) The Culture of Connectivity: A Critical History of Social Media, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

3	
The Internet of Urban Things
Paul Dourish
Introduction
The history of computer culture is one of successive waves of colonisation – 
the colonisation of everyday life by digital systems. Once confined to air-
conditioned server rooms in large institutional settings, digital systems have 
moved to fully colonise the office, and then the home, and then spaces of 
entertainment. Current developments revolve around two new sites of colo-
nisation. One is the ‘smart city’ – urban space reconfigured through the wide-
spread deployment of sensing and computational systems, linking everyday 
space into the ‘Cloud’ and bringing the technologies of data analytics into 
the infrastructure of city life. The other goes under the label of the ‘Internet 
of Things’ – a drive to incorporate networked computation into the fabric 
and furniture of daily life, and particularly into ‘smart’ versions of everyday 
objects, such as door locks, refrigerators, power switches, lightbulbs, pedom-
eters and thermostats. Sensor-enabled and network-connected, these devices 
will be able – so the marketing material assures us – to incorporate compu-
tational intelligence into all aspects of our engagement with our everyday 
life, and operate seamlessly together, turning the home into a single compu-
tational system rather than a collection of disparate components, appliances 
and services.
These two developments are linked. Urban computing involves the same 
sorts of embedded sensor and wireless communication technology that are at 
the heart of the Internet of Things (IoT) agenda, while the IoT promises to 
be able to apply the same sorts of statistical machine learning or ‘big data’ 
algorithms that are often presented in the context of urban computing. That 
said, the rhetorical schemes that surround them are quite different. Urban 
computing tends to be described in terms of urban management, security 
and resource management, while the IoT arguments are focused primarily on 
convenience and luxury. Their sites of impact are different too – city manag-
ers, service providers and urban planners on the one hand, and consumers 
and homeowners on the other.1
In this article, my goal is to take more seriously the idea that these two 
constellations of technology and rhetorical practice have important things in 

28  Paul Dourish
common – both in terms of underlying facilities and in terms of the imaginary 
futures that they evoke. I want to think about what they might have to say to 
each other if we approach them as parallel discourses. In particular, I want to 
try to re-examine some of the rhetorics of code and the city that this volume 
is broadly examining and see them through the light of the Internet of Things. 
This involves, in places, taking a more technical reading of the foundations 
of sensor-based computing, but then following that through to see how the 
pragmatics and the politics are linked.
The Internet of Things
In the late 1980s, at Xerox’s Palo Alto Research Center, Computer Science 
Laboratory director Mark Weiser initiated a wide-ranging research project 
into what he dubbed ‘ubiquitous computing’ (Weiser 1991). ‘UbiComp’ (as it 
became known) constituted, in Weiser’s words, a third wave of computing. In 
the first wave, a single mainframe computer had served the needs of hundreds 
or even thousands of users. In the second wave – the wave of ‘personal com-
puting’ – the mantra had been ‘one person, one computer’: the primary site 
of interaction was a single computer that served the needs of one person (one 
person at a time, at least). In UbiComp’s third wave, Weiser argued, a single 
person would interact with tens, hundreds or thousands of devices – some 
large, some small, some visible, some hidden. Rather than being devices that 
we would need to sit down and use, these devices would surround us – 
they would be embedded in our everyday environment, incorporated into 
door knobs, beds, pens and walls, augmenting the capacities of whiteboards, 
books, picture frames and television sets, and communicating with each other 
wirelessly to create coherent and collective computational experiences.
UbiComp became a major focus of research attention for the computer 
science community – one so significant, in fact, that it has been argued that 
it essentially disappeared as a topic in itself, suffusing itself into every other 
domain of computer science research (Abowd 2012). At the same time, it also 
provided a fruitful site for encounters between computer science and social 
science, turning, as it did, the stuff of everyday life into a site of computa-
tional encounter (e.g., Dourish and Bell 2011).
The current marketing label for much of what was once understood as 
UbiComp is ‘the Internet of Things’. This speaks particularly to UbiComp’s 
concern with digital embeddedness – with the idea that everyday objects and 
devices might now become ‘smart’ through the incorporation of small, cheap 
digital processing capabilities, sensors, actuators and wireless communica-
tion devices. The rhetoric of the IoT is an attempt to reinvigorate research 
and development activity around smart devices at a moment when the market 
might otherwise turn its attention to the migration of technological capacity 
into the ‘Cloud’. If cloud computing is an attempt to consolidate computa-
tional capacity in a small number of centralised sites, then the Internet of 
Things is an attempt to decentralise it once more and distribute it through 

The Internet of Urban Things  29
myriad devices in every home, in every room and at every opportunity. At 
the same time, of course, it is also a piece of corporate marketing – one that 
asserts the ongoing relevance of hardware manufacturers and device provid-
ers at a time when investment and popular attention had shifted towards the 
online services provided by Internet start-ups.
If the term ‘ubiquitous computing’ was one only a nerd could love, then 
the term ‘Internet of Things’ is surely one that does the same for marketers. 
However, if we can put to one side the inherent awkwardness of the term, 
and the question of why a rebranding was necessary at all, then we might find 
some utility in thinking it through – its invocation of the Internet, its thing-
centredness, the way that problems are formed, the way that data flows are 
imagined, and so forth. In the next few pages, I will pick up in turn a series 
of observations sparked by the rhetoric of the Internet of Things that might 
provide us with some lenses through which we can examine similar questions 
in the smart city.
The Internet of Things is not the Internet
‘Internet of Things’ is a marketing term as much as a technical one, and in 
consequence, strict technical definitions are hard to come by. Nonetheless, 
despite the fuzziness of the categories, it is reasonable to conclude that, in 
general, the Internet of Things is not the Internet. And the ways in which it is 
not are instructive.
The key technological achievement of the Internet was the creation of a 
network protocol infrastructure – a means of transmitting data – that could 
operate seamlessly over a range of network infrastructures, including wire-
less, satellite, broadband and point-to-point channels. The TCP/IP protocol 
‘stack’ – most importantly, IP, the internetwork protocol – is the defining 
feature of the Internet, making it possible to establish connections directly 
between different hosts on different networks.
While accessibility from the Internet is an important feature for IoT appli-
cations – for the purposes, say, of monitoring energy usage from your laptop 
or controlling lights from your phone – these are in many ways not Internet 
applications themselves because there is no end-to-end connection between 
the Internet device and many IoT devices. In other words, IoT devices are not 
themselves connected to the Internet.
This may seem like a nigglingly small technical point, or even a meaning-
less detail. What does it matter whether IoT devices are on the Internet or 
not, if we can control them or monitor them from the Internet? However, this 
seemingly small point has some important consequences. One is that it means 
that those properties that we typically ascribe to the Internet – expansibility, 
openness, interoperability, and so on – may not apply in the case of the IoT. 
(As I have argued elsewhere, they may apply less in the case of the Internet 
than we might think, too, but that is a different topic (Dourish 2015a).) 
If one of the essential features of the Internet is that, because everything 

30  Paul Dourish
communicates using IP, then everything can communicate with everything 
else, then that is most certainly not the case with the Internet of Things, in 
which specialised gateways, controllers, hubs and proxies, introduced by a 
variety of manufacturers and running a profusion of sometimes-proprietary 
network protocols, are widespread. New devices do not necessarily interoper-
ate, and their connections – if they can connect at all – must be mediated by 
other devices that understand how to mediate between them. Arguably, there 
is no Internet of Things because there are many networks of things – incom-
patible ones.
The temporal dynamics of things
One of the fundamental ideas that the term ‘Internet of Things’ seems 
designed to convey is novelty. Just as ‘the Internet’ has brought innovation, 
revolution and disruption to all sorts of services and industries, so the story 
goes, now it can do the same for ‘things’. The label seems to promise that the 
world of ‘things’ will now move at the speed of the Internet – at the appar-
ently dizzying pace at which new businesses, new services and new technolo-
gies appear online. The term, then, embodies a temporal contradiction right 
off the bat. The reason that we might want to harness the temporal dynamics 
of the Internet to the world of otherwise stable and static things is that things 
do not, themselves, experience the same pace of innovation, revolution and 
disruption. ‘Things’ do not seem to be caught up in quite such a breathless 
hype cycle. ‘Things’ do not demonstrate the pace of the Internet – that is why 
we need the Internet of Things, is the claim. How are we to understand the 
temporal dynamics at work when these are brought together?
We might take a leaf out of Stewart Brand’s playbook, in his capacity 
as someone for whom both the Internet and things have mattered (Brand 
1987; 1995; Turner 2006). In How Buildings Learn, Brand proposes a model 
for thinking about the way that buildings change and evolve. What he calls 
‘shearing layers’ (an elaboration of a concept originally coined by architect 
Frank Duffy) are six elements of a building that coexist – site, structure, 
skin, services, space and stuff. They are organised according to their rate of 
change. Stuff – the contents of the building, such as furniture, ornaments, 
and the objects of everyday life – moves and changes frequently. The space 
plan – the layout of rooms – changes too, as the house is remodelled, but 
changes less often than the ‘stuff’. The next least frequent sites of change 
are the services of the building – infrastructures that connect the building 
to the outside world, such as gas, electricity, water and sewage. The build-
ing’s ‘skin’ – its exterior cladding – changes even less frequently, although 
it might be renewed over many decades. The fundamental structure of the 
building  – its mechanical core, foundations and load-bearing beams – is 
subject to change only rarely, and changeable but least dynamic of all is the 
building’s site – its location and orientation (most commonly, the site lasts 
longer than the structure itself).

The Internet of Urban Things  31
A similar analysis might be usefully directed towards the Internet itself, 
which comprises many different elements of both physical and digital infra-
structure that evolve at different rates. However, a more significant issue 
here concerns the way that the Internet of Things, as a point of encounter 
between digital technologies and domestic or urban infrastructure, requires a 
melding of the temporal dynamics of the two. It is a well-worn idea that tech-
nology – particularly software-based technology – changes quickly. There 
are a lot of mistaken assumptions bound up in that easy claim (there is much 
that is old in the most modern technology, particularly when we delve into 
the guts of operating systems and programming languages), but nonetheless 
we need to pay attention to the different rates of change of different parts of 
the IoT system.
A simple but telling example is represented by the power socket shown in 
Figure 3.1. In addition to standard US NEMA 5-15R power sockets, it also 
provides two USB type-A plugs that can be used to charge devices such as 
Figure 3.1  USB ports incorporated into a US power socket
Source and copyright: 2014 Killian Murphy, reproduced by permission.

32  Paul Dourish
mobile phones. For people who find themselves struggling to find the right 
adapter at the right time, or are tired of the ever-expanding battery of con-
nectors, cables and adapters that we carry around with us, these can be of 
considerable value – I have more than once been pleased to find them when 
staying with a friend or checking into a hotel. But the plug embodies the very 
different dynamics of analogue and digital infrastructures.
NEMA – the National Electrical Manufacturers’ Association – was estab-
lished in 1926 and the NEMA 5 socket was standardised over 60 years ago, 
in the early 1950s, becoming widespread in the 1960s. (It is based on an 
earlier 2-pin standard that is still operative today – including in parts of my 
own 1930 home.) By contrast, the USB type-A connector was standardised 
in 1995. Apple was widely ridiculed when, in 1998, it introduced the first 
personal computer to eschew then-standard PC ports (such as parallel, serial 
and PS/2 connections) and provide only USB ports for all devices. As it 
turned out, most other manufacturers quickly followed suit. If Apple’s bet 
on the USB port was in any way prophetic, then we might want to note that 
Apple recently (early 2015) introduced a new device which provides only a 
single digital port, the new, smaller and physically incompatible USB type C 
connector. The two connectors, then, embody very different ideas of infra-
structural lifetime. Most people do not want to replace the power outlets in 
their houses every 17 years. (I clearly have not.)
Arguably, for many IoT applications, the situation is worse. Computers 
only a few years old may become incompatible with modern, more secure, 
implementations of Wi-Fi wireless networking. A ten-year-old Web browser 
is incapable of displaying most modern websites. The objects that become 
‘smart’ in the IoT world are generally those that change slowly, but the 
embeddedness of IoT technologies implies a form of fixity that is in many 
ways incompatible with the cycle of software development and deployment. 
Apple’s most recent releases of iOS will run only on phones manufactured in 
the last couple of years; on Android, the situation is even worse, since Google 
does not design the handsets itself, with the result that Google has pretty 
much given up on backward compatibility for Android, and most Android 
phones will only ever run the version of the operating system that they were 
shipped with.
It is important to note that Brand’s shearing layer analysis, although 
organised in terms of a simple linearity of change, speaks also for other com-
plexities in the evolution of infrastructure. Writing about the problems and 
opportunities associated with the use of advanced technology for sustainable 
energy use, Dillahunt and colleagues (2009; 2010) have emphasised the differ-
ent degrees of control over building fabric available to different groups, and 
in particular the challenges that low-income communities may face in imple-
menting technological shifts – a particular problem when environmental sus-
tainability is framed as a moral problem to be addressed through individual 
acts of consumer choice (DiSalvo et al. 2010; Dourish 2010). This issue will 
be returned to in more detail later.

The Internet of Urban Things  33
The IoT’s scale problem
The very idea of the ‘Internet of Things’ is one that responds in some sense to 
a shift in scale that has taken place over the lifetime of the Internet. Early in 
its history, the devices that were connected via the Internet (or its predecessor, 
ARPANet) were large computers – mainframes and minicomputers that gen-
erally filled large air-conditioned rooms and required special facilities for their 
upkeep. Even the first Internet routers – interface message processors – were 
delivered on trucks and installed via fork-lift. (A common stop on tours of my 
campus is a nearby engineering building where some discoloured panels five 
or six stories off the ground show where the first computers were installed via 
crane when it turned out that they were too large to fit through any door.) The 
premise of the ‘Internet of Things’ – that objects as small as switches, valves 
and button-panels might now be connected to the Internet – reflects the idea 
that the objects that the Internet connects are now of a quite different order.
Discussions of scale frequently founder on the failure to acknowledge the 
difference between ‘scale’ and ‘size’. ‘Size’ encompasses problems of growth, 
of number, of multiplicity and of limits. ‘Scale’ focuses on the emergence of 
different kinds of objects at different classes of size. So, for example, my arm 
comprises tens of millions of cells; but the emergence of an ‘arm’ as an object 
of attention is not merely a question of size. Questions of size and of scale are 
both relevant here. We will begin with a problem of size, and in particular, 
the size of the Internet address space.
Perhaps unexpectedly, one technological shift that industry observers have 
suggested that the IoT may trigger is the switch from the current generation 
of internet protocols (known as IPv4) to the next generation (known as IPv6). 
IPv6 is not, at this stage, new; it was standardised in 1998. However, adop-
tion has been slow, at best, since IPv4 is widely deployed and adequate for 
many purposes. While IPv6 incorporates several technological innovations, 
the most pressing problem that it resolves is that the IPv4 address space is 
close to being exhausted; there are almost no new IPv4 network addresses 
available for new Internet-connected devices. Now, as explored earlier, many 
IoT devices do not actually use Internet protocols anyway, and those that 
do make use of partial solutions (like the use of network address trans-
lation, a protocol mechanism built into most domestic network gateways) 
that provide a simple, if clunky, workaround. However, the vision of truly 
Internet-connected things – many more of them than the traditional com-
puters for which the Internet was designed – would seem to provide further 
impetus for the adoption of IPv6, which vastly expands the ‘address space’ 
(the number of devices that can be individually identified by IP addresses) 
and so eases the congestion problems that have bedevilled IPv4 over the last 
several years. Arguably, the widespread switch from IPv4 to IPv6 will be 
more consequential for other devices – desktop computers, laptops, tablets 
and mobile phones – than for the unconventional IoT devices, but the IoT 
might nonetheless provide the trigger for the transition.

34  Paul Dourish
The problem of addressing is matched by a related problem, which is that 
of control. A world of smart devices poses a significant problem for monitor-
ing and management. Arguably, one of the key enabling technologies for the 
Internet of Things is not an IoT device at all – the smartphone. ‘Control from 
your phone’ is perhaps the one common feature of IoT pitches. Arguably, 
this is an issue not of size but of scale – that is, of the units of control and the 
organisation of interfaces. How are devices collected together for the purpose 
of control? How is it that, in the Internet of Things, a new set of considera-
tions – not of network nodes or organisations but of homes, rooms, zones and 
families – emerge as relevant objects of technical attention? The multiplicity of 
devices and the difficulties of controlling so many with a single user interface 
require that new scalar features, such as homes and rooms, emerge as techni-
cal objects. This is not simply a matter of network topology – the structure of 
the way that different networks connect together – but rather of new kinds of 
ways in which the human logic of physical space must be represented to the 
computer system in order to make the network of things manageable.
In other words, the embedding of technologies into new sorts of spaces, as 
implied by the Internet of Things, requires too that those spaces become vis-
ible and legible to the structures of control – both social and technical – upon 
which those technologies are founded. Critically, this reconfiguration of sizes 
and scales associated with myriad small devices and the smartphone as a 
universal interface involves one other key element – the ‘Cloud’. However, 
since the role of the Cloud as a mediating entity raises other important issues, 
it is best to raise it separately as part of an examination of the role of the user 
in the Internet of Things.
IoT routes around the user
In John Gilmore’s well-worn aphorism, the Internet is argued to ‘treat cen-
sorship as damage and route around it’. The technical logic of the Internet 
supports many potential paths between a start-point and an end-point, so 
that data can follow the path of least resistance, ‘routing around’ congestion 
or temporary technical problems – or, in Gilmore’s metaphor, human inter-
vention. In the Internet of Things, however, it is often the user who is being 
routed around.
In traditional Internet applications, human users are on one end of a con-
nection, if not both. So, a connection might link a human user to a game 
server, or a pair of human users via a video connection, or a human user to 
a website. In the Internet of Things, however, at least one end of the con-
nection is guaranteed to be, well, a thing – and, most probably, what the 
thing connects to is a server or cloud-based service (to which it reports its 
status, activity logs or sensor data readings). Devices that form part of the 
Internet of Things are often particularly inscrutable, offering little more than 
a glowing or flashing LED as a signal of activity. They communicate not with 
people, but with other digital infrastructures. One’s access to this information 

The Internet of Urban Things  35
is, at best, limited and mediated. The ‘smart meter’ that regulates and meas-
ures the electrical service in my house, for example, does not communicate 
directly to me, but rather to my electricity provider – and even when I buy 
another IoT device, a gateway that connects to the smart meter, this gateway 
sends the data to another service, where I can access it only indirectly and in 
manners determined by the Cloud service provider. In the Internet of Things, 
users are at best of secondary relevance. Where once we thought simply of 
people being ‘on the Internet’, the key move of the Internet of Things is not 
that it is an Internet of Users that has been extended to incorporate things 
too, but that it is an Internet of Things first in which users potentially play 
no part.
Given that the IoT is frequently deployed in settings with a significant 
personal stake – domestic spaces, personal transportation and health moni-
toring, for example – this explicit attempt to ‘route around’ the user raises a 
number of important considerations. One is the consequence for ‘audit’ – for 
determining the validity of information and for monitoring the extent of the 
data flow.
An example of the importance of data audit: When I moved from the UK 
to the USA, I requested copies of my medical records so that I could provide 
details of my medical history to my US physician. Only with extreme reluc-
tance did my British GP practice agree to do this, and the records I received 
were still, they emphasised, partial (since medical notes were, they argued, 
the property of the physician and not the patient). When I had the chance to 
review the records, I discovered that many of them were not mine at all, but 
actually were records of my father’s medical history, from many years before. 
While the clues were there to be read (most especially notes of patient age at 
time of treatment), I had never had the opportunity to review or audit them, 
and so it was over a decade before this ever came to light.
Verifying content, then, is a critical function in any information system, 
but one that is systematically erased in the architecture of many Internet 
of Things applications. A related function of audit is that it provides for an 
assessment of the information that is being transmitted (including content, 
volume and frequency). One consequence of the opaque nature of communi-
cation in the Internet of Things is the nature of the sensor data stream set-up. 
Is there monitoring in real time? Does the device (e.g., a motion-activated 
smart light) transmit sensor data (motion data) or process it locally? How 
detailed are the available sensor data? Where are they being transmitted? Are 
the data encrypted? When the user is in the loop, these questions are easy to 
answer. When communication is enabled device-to-device or device-to-Cloud 
without a user channel, answering them is difficult or impossible.
The final question that is raised here is that of ownership. Who owns the 
data generated by and transmitted on the Internet of Things? What kinds 
of contractual and voluntary agreements govern the relationship between 
devices, users, storage and service providers? How are responsibilities, for 
stewardship, accuracy and responsiveness for example, distributed between 

36  Paul Dourish
these? A recent text examines cloud computing from a legal rather than 
a technical perspective and demonstrates unequivocally that contemporary 
legal arrangements are inadequate to the challenges thrown up by cloud 
computing, particularly in the public sector (Millard 2013).
The Cloud plays a critical enabling role in the Internet of Things, partly 
because of the issues of scale addressed earlier. The very distribution of 
digital capacity implied by the Internet of Things – the embedding of com-
putational capacities into so many objects and elements – requires a point 
of integration, a coming together that can integrate information and action, 
make sense of sensor readings, correlate information streams and produce 
coherent analyses. This happens, in general, in the Cloud. The Cloud’s role 
is central, then, even as these issues of audit, assessment and ownership are 
thrown into question. The Internet of Things addresses its user in quite dif-
ferent ways from those we have come to expect.
Smart cities and the Internet of Things
Our motivation for examining the rhetorical and technical strategies behind 
current interest in the Internet of Things has been as a backdrop for exploring 
some questions related to digital technology in urban settings. Fundamental 
IoT technologies are often aspects of an urban computing story – embedded 
sensors, distributed networking, cloud-based integration and large-scale data 
analytics all have a part to play in how we imagine the encounter between 
code and the city. However, I am more interested here in how the relationship 
between social and technical that we have seen at work in the analysis of the 
IoT provides a context that can illuminate discussions of urban computing.
First, we need to think a little about code and the city. There are at least 
two separate stories about the relationship between code and the city that 
need to be borne in mind.
The first, the conventional narrative, is the somewhat breathless account 
of a city whose every operational feature, from traffic flow to crime preven-
tion, air quality management and service billing is digitised, integrated and 
managed in real time through a combination of human action and algorith-
mic enhancement. In the smart city, flows of people, goods and activities 
are mirrored by, and often anticipated by, flows of data and algorithmic 
attention that ensure seamless hand-off between different functional units. 
As Greenfield (2014) notes, it is a rhetoric that is manifestly impractical and 
fantastical, but it is significant nonetheless because of its power to animate 
processes of civic decision making and investment, the relationship that it 
imagines between public and private interests, the patterns of investment to 
which it is already giving rise, and the very sense of inevitability that it seeks 
to promote.
The second is what we might call, to adapt a phrase from Edwards and 
Grinter (2001), the ‘accidentally smart city’. Edwards and Grinter were writ-
ing about the way that images of the ‘smart home’ were deployed in UbiComp 

The Internet of Urban Things  37
research. Given the prevalence of arguments about seamlessness and holism at 
work in those accounts, Edwards and Grinter argued that, to the extent that 
conventional homes can be thought of as ‘smart’, they are accidentally smart, 
rather than smart by design. They are not designed as ‘smart’ from the outset, 
nor do they become ‘smart’ in one sweeping moment. They become smart 
slowly, over time, without perhaps much design intent. They acquire digital 
capacities slowly and cumulatively – a network at first, a digital power meter 
later, an Internet-connected digital video recorder or television further down 
the line, wireless networks of different sorts, games machines, and so on. These 
devices enter the home separately, and over time. They are not designed to be 
‘of a piece’; they may or may not talk to each other, or they may do so with 
different degrees of success. They are built to different standards (or different 
variants of the same standard) with varying degrees of compatibility. They 
occupy different parts of the home, with different degrees of accommoda-
tion (devices in my own home are connected sometimes wirelessly and some-
times by wireline where old, thick walls from 1930 prove less compatible with 
wireless signals than walls of contemporary construction). In the accidentally 
smart home, there is no unified design perspective; in the accidentally smart 
home, the struggle to get things to work together is one of continual improvi-
sation and compromise. It is a familiar picture.
Similarly then, the story of the accidentally smart city is not of one in 
which a single strategy and coherent design approach yields an urban space 
in which information is woven into the fabric. Instead, the city becomes 
smart in the same piecemeal, gradual, disparate manner in which the home 
becomes smart – little by little, one piece at a time, under the control of differ-
ent groups, without a master plan, and with a lot of patching, hacking, jury-
rigging and settling. Unlike the homogenising gaze that James Scott (1998) 
suggests in Seeing Like a State, the characteristic of high modernist states, 
legal scholar Marianne Valverde (2011) suggests that ‘seeing like a city’ is 
fragmented. Cities, she observes, are not managed by formal grids; they do 
not offer or conform to uniform accounts. Instead, cities are patchworks 
of overlapping, related but not-quite-consonant regions of regulation and 
management – tax assessment districts, construction zones, postal routes, 
school catchment areas, political wards, historical districts, council districts, 
police precincts and more. Sometimes these line up; sometimes they do not. 
Sometimes they are defined with respect to infrastructure; sometimes they are 
defined with respect to historical and social convention. Sometimes they are 
visible to citizens; sometimes they are purely matters of professional practice.
These are two accounts of the smart city, but we can see significant paral-
lels with the case of the Internet of Things. Holistic design versus piecemeal 
accumulation, the dynamics of the development of technology and infra-
structure, and disparities in control and management are issues that plague 
both systems. Of course there is more to this than mere analogy; to a large 
extent, the technical platforms for both urban computing (at least in the first, 
more triumphal, account) and the Internet of Things are the same – these 

38  Paul Dourish
are both conjunctions of distributed sensing, large-scale communication and 
data analytics. They have a good deal in common because they are two ver-
sions of the same design imperative.
So, can we use the understanding of the Internet of Things to reopen ques-
tions around smart cities? Can we turn in particular to the topics discussed 
here – protocols, ownership, audit, scale and temporal dynamics – to unpack 
the relationship between code and the city?
Protocols and their politics
As Bowker and Star (1999) observe in their classic study of infrastructures, 
new infrastructures are built upon old. They follow paths that are already 
laid down. In the UK, for example, major roads follow the paths of roads 
built during the Roman occupation (such as Dere Street, Watling Street and 
Ermin Street, parts of whose routes are now followed by highways, includ-
ing the A1, the A2 and the A5). Much the same is true of Internet highways. 
Networks are built to connect centres of computation; computational facili-
ties are located where the networks are accessible; and over successive genera-
tions of technology, the same patterns recur (see Figure 3.2).
These patterns of network evolution produce uneven sites of dense inter-
connection. For example, about 30 miles north of my house in Long Beach, 
California, in the southern part of downtown Los Angeles, a 35-storey 
server farm and Internet packet exchange known as One Wilshire is the 
most densely  networked building in the USA. It is a point where many 
networks converge – extensions from trans-Pacific cables (Starosielski 2015) 
and points of presence for major network providers, such as Level 3, Tata 
Communications, TeliaSonera, AT&T, Verizon and Cogent. Since the 
Internet is a network of networks, those networks have to meet somewhere, 
and One Wilshire is a place they meet. So significant is One Wilshire in the 
fabric of western US Internet connectivity that I have been unable to find a 
single network path from my home to any network destination that does not 
go through One Wilshire. This is a matter of concern for multiple reasons, 
not least in light of Snowden’s revelations about National Security Agency 
surveillance at points of network density (Greenwald 2014).
Ethernet pioneer Bob Metcalfe observed that the value of a network 
increases exponentially (rather than linearly) with the number of people who 
are on it. That same observation is also true of network connection points. If 
I am a network service provider, I need to be connected to other networks; if 
I am located in One Wilshire, then I am within easy reach of many. Indeed, 
the very density of network connections within One Wilshire makes it almost 
impossible for any provider to leave – or for a new entrant to consider locat-
ing elsewhere. The new networks go where the old networks already run, 
because that is where the interconnections are.
As sites like One Wilshire demonstrate, we can read the topology of Internet 
connectivity on two levels – one of designed structure, and one of emergent 

Figure 3.2  The 2004 map of the National Lambda Rail optical fibre network (left) displays a remarkable similarity to a map of the 
ARPANet in 1974 (right). In many cases, not only are the same cities connected, but often the same sites within those cities – perhaps 
some of the same buildings?

40  Paul Dourish
structure. The designed structure of the Internet – that is, the structure 
encoded in its fundamental design principles – is entirely open. In contrast 
with network designs based on fixed structures, such as rings, stars and trees, 
the design of the Internet allows for ad-hoc interconnections between com-
ponent networks and so for an entirely arbitrary topology (Dourish 2015b). 
However, in practice, commercial efficiencies have resulted in the emergence 
of a series of regional networks that provide high-speed interconnections 
in specific areas, and high-speed long-haul networks that connect regions 
and countries. Different corporations specialise in the provision of different 
sorts of network, and so different classes of network – transit carriers, tier 1 
providers, and so on – emerge within a hierarchical structure. The emergent 
structure is necessarily more particular than the designed structure, but, more 
interestingly, reflecting not just technical but also market arrangements, it is 
specifically hierarchical and considerably more structured than the designed 
structure. The ‘openness’ and ‘resilience’ that characterise the ways in which 
we think about the Internet may be features of the Internet as designed but 
turn out to be less true as properties of the Internet as implemented. More 
significantly, protocols implemented and incorporated into the Internet 
Protocol suite after the initial design – protocols designed to solve problems 
that emerged in the context of an implemented, running network – reinforce 
and encode aspects of this hierarchical structure (Dourish 2015a; 2015b).
Again, as we saw with the case of the IoT, the specific protocols in ques-
tion – the technical realities that lie below the banner of ‘the Internet’ – need 
to be taken into account when we want to consider the properties of that 
network, or the kinds of social arrangement that can be enacted through it. 
Addressing modes, connection architectures and arrangements for naming 
and routing need to be accounted for, because they are deeply coupled with 
organisation and institutional arrangements. In the case of the Internet of 
Things, we noted that the way that the ‘Internet’ becomes present – or fails 
to materialise – in the Internet of Things has consequences for the ability of a 
user to become involved, and in particular can obscure the flows of informa-
tion within circuits of transmission that essentially route around the user. 
In the case of urban computing, we might similarly be concerned about the 
nature of the flows created. While urban computing efforts are touted as ways 
of promoting democratic or civic engagement, providing smoother access to 
municipal services or ensuring equality of information and access, we should 
bear in mind the ways that specific protocol designs often lend themselves to 
reinforcing rather than reconfiguring traditional inequities.
It is useful in this regard to contrast conventional urban computing efforts 
with what is sometimes known as ‘DIY networking’ – efforts essentially to 
create ‘new Internets’, ones that often attempt to maintain some of the tech-
nical infrastructure of the conventional Internet but reassess its institutional 
arrangements (e.g., Antoniadis et al. 2008; Gaved and Mulholland 2008; 
Jungnickel 2014; Powell 2011). These ‘alternate Internets’ are alternate in 
various ways – in their instantiated structures, in their systems of regulation, 

The Internet of Urban Things  41
in their patterns of evolution, and in their suites of applications and uses – 
although they often rely on the same protocol foundations as the commercial 
Internet. They demonstrate the different ways that a single protocol frame-
work can be deployed with different politics – and sometimes with the limits 
upon particular frameworks. The fact that these are often themselves spa-
tially constituted – sometimes urban, sometimes rural, but always situated – 
is particularly relevant to the discussions that arise throughout this volume, 
demonstrating an alternative entwining of technological opportunity and 
regional vision to that manifested by most ‘smart city’ efforts.
Citizenship
The problems of the presence or absence of the user in the Internet of Things 
become problems of the presence or absence of the citizen in the smart city. 
Greenfield (2014) has written perceptively of the role of the citizen in visions 
of the smart city, with a particular focus on prototypical spaces such as New 
Songdo City in South Korea. As he has noted, the role of ‘citizen’ is not a 
primary one for residents of these spaces; they are workers, consumers, and, 
perhaps, occupants first, and citizens only secondarily, if at all. The smart 
city is a centre of entertainment, and provides opportunities for leisure, for 
travel and for consumption, but it is not designed for political participation, 
for moral or spiritual development or even for collective association. While 
places like New Songdo City represent one version of a smart city vision, 
other encounters between code and the city are those of the ‘accidentally 
smart city’ – a newly (and unevenly) informated space with its own history 
and characteristics. This is the smart city vision espoused by those who see 
opportunities for more efficient digital management of existing city services 
and structures. However, although this is a different conception of the smart 
city, it shares with the first a somewhat marginal role for residents as citizens. 
Just as the Internet of Things ‘routes around’ the user by directly connecting 
objects to commercial entities and only incidentally perhaps to us, so too do 
smart cities frequently ‘route around’ their citizens.
Of course, many smart-city projects are constituted precisely in order to 
promote the connection between citizens and city administrators, and the 
potential for supporting engagement, activism and community are impor-
tant aspects of e-government programmes in general (e.g., Homburg 2008), 
including in urban or municipal contexts. The challenge is to be able to do so 
in ways that foster participation of diverse groups. Pelle Ehn and colleagues 
at Malmö University have explored opportunities to address these questions 
through a range of projects that have adapted techniques developed in the 
participatory design movement in the context of diverse urban populations, 
particularly with immigrant and other marginalised communities (Ehn et al. 
2014). Even when technology can be fruitfully harnessed to capitalise on 
the energy and interest of citizen groups, disconnects between their interests 
and those in positions of power and influence remain significant. Light et al. 

42  Paul Dourish
(2009) have documented a project that was, in many ways, remarkably suc-
cessful in terms of engagement, and yet left participants feeling frustrated 
that their concerns met with little interest or response from officials. Projects 
such as those documented by Ehn and Light and their colleagues are just the 
sort that are regularly held up to exemplify the way that digital technologies 
provide a new platform for enrolling people in civic participation activities 
and for harnessing citizen creativity in a reformulated encounter with urban 
governance. The technological platforms may be new, but they are deployed 
in the context of age-old problems.
Scale
How do we, as urban residents and citizens, experience the smart city? Digital 
infrastructures produce new grids and logics through which our relationship 
with the city is mediated (Dourish and Bell 2011). Users of Global Positioning 
System (GPS) navigation systems describe the joys of deliberately ‘getting 
lost’, knowing that technology can always point their way home, opening up 
new opportunities for exploring space (Leshed et al. 2008); students discuss 
the ways that their movements around a university campus are shaped by the 
availability of power outlets to charge digital devices (Barkhuus and Dourish 
2004). Perhaps more interesting though is the possibility that technology may 
remediate our experience not just of spatial structure but of spatial scale.
Several years ago, a group of colleagues and I studied spatial practices 
amongst paroled sex offenders whose location was being tracked with GPS 
units bound to their ankles (Troshynski et al. 2008; Shklovski et al. 2009; 
Shklovski et al. 2015). At the time, this was a pilot program, and our study 
was piggy-backed on a feasibility evaluation that the state of California was 
conducting in order to determine whether this sort of monitoring was useful 
and practical; as it happened, a ballot proposition was passed which intro-
duced mandatory lifetime GPS tracking for sex offenders before the feasi-
bility trial was conducted. We went into the study with an interest in how 
location-based technologies served as a lens through which urban space was 
experienced. What did it mean, for instance, to move around the city but 
maintain a two-thousand-foot exclusion radius from every park, playground, 
school, library or swimming pool? How does one manage one’s movements 
through space in the face of these conditions, and how does technology 
reveal the space to you as being organised in such a way as to facilitate legal 
wayfinding?
The answer, as it turned out, was that it does not. One reason is significant, 
if prosaic – not only can one not ask Google Maps to plot a route from A 
to B maintaining those exclusion zones, but many of the participants in the 
pilot program were also prevented by their parole conditions from using the 
Internet anyway. However, more significantly, conventional urban spaces are 
simply so densely dotted with exclusionary hazards that our parolees found 
that it was simply impractical to move around the city in any conventional 

The Internet of Urban Things  43
sense. Their solution was not to figure out which side of the street was further 
away from hazards that might land them back in jail; their solution instead 
was to move to places – exurbs, rural towns and unincorporated areas – where 
such amenities as a library or a public swimming pool, or even a school, were 
not to be found. In the group meetings that were part of their parole regime, 
they would exchange information about where such ‘safe’ places might be 
found. In other words, the shift that had taken place for them was a shift in 
scale. The exclusions were framed in terms of feet, but the changes that they 
experienced were those of miles – not so much a simple displacement (walk-
ing along one street rather than another so as to maintain greater distance 
from a school), but rather a search on a different scale for different places 
where dangers did not lurk so densely.
In the case of the IoT, we saw that forms of human scale that had previ-
ously not been issues of technical concern now became manifest within the 
interface and interaction, represented digitally. In the case of GPS navigation 
for the parolees, an inverse pattern emerges, where technologies that puta-
tively represent the city at the scale of streets or metres create an experiential 
structure that operates at the level of towns or kilometres. In both cases, a 
complex interplay emerges between the scales of representation and the scales 
of experience, an interplay that depends significantly on patterns of action 
rather than simply upon design. Given their grounding within systems of 
practice that give them meaning, these scales too have their temporal dimen-
sions, as understandings of spatial structure – the social organisation of space 
(e.g., Kelleher 2003) and the cultural dimensions of movement (e.g., Munn 
1996) – themselves evolve over time.
Temporalities
The problems of the encounters between old and new and of the problematic 
persistence of infrastructure that we saw in the Internet of Things are no less 
true, and arguably more so, in the case of the smart city. That is, just as we 
saw how the Internet of Things must operate in a world in which infrastruc-
ture has a lifetime longer than we might ever want to imagine, so too, when 
building the infrastructure of the smart city, what you are building is not the 
glitteringly new urban infrastructure of blockbuster sci-fi movies; what you 
are building is the next London Underground, something to be encountered 
by millions daily as more than faintly Victorian but so deeply embedded in 
the practice of the city that it can never become anything else. The smart city 
often involves taking all the problems of the Internet of Things, embedding 
them in concrete and burying them under city streets that can only ever be 
dug up again at the cost of a good deal of traffic disturbance and pedestrian 
grumbling.
However, there is a second and perhaps most significant issue concerning 
infrastructural persistence in the case of the city, and this leads to the kinds of 
values associated with age in urban experience. While ‘building for the ages’ 

44  Paul Dourish
is rarely a rallying cry for urban designers in the early twenty-first century, 
‘designed obsolescence’ is even less effective, even if it has been the watch-
word of the computer industry. The smart city, in other words, is a celebra-
tion both of the new and the old, of the kinds of permanence that allow us 
to enjoy the Renaissance splendour of Florence and, at the same time, the 
pressures that prevent people from using last year’s power supply with this 
year’s laptop.
Temporal contradictions of a similar sort came to light in recent work with 
colleagues studying the Cassini mission to Saturn (Vertesi and Dourish 2011; 
Mazmanian et al. 2014). Cassini is arguably engaged in the most advanced 
navigation ever of a NASA mission; although probes have gone much farther 
on ballistic orbits, Cassini is explicitly flown though the Saturn system, and 
nobody has ever flown a spacecraft so far away in such a complex space for 
so long. In these terms, it is undoubtedly a cutting-edge project. However, at 
the same time, it is something of a dinosaur. Designed in the 1980s using tech-
nological platforms developed in the 1970s, it was built and launched in the 
1990s to arrive at Saturn in 2004, at which point the scientific mission could 
begin. By definition, then, by the time the science began, the spacecraft was, 
in design terms, obsolete; the ground systems significantly predate the devel-
opment of contemporary software platforms (including not only bespoke 
systems at NASA, but commercial programming languages and operating 
systems). To work on Cassini, then, is to work in a temporal double bind, 
operating on the cutting edge and the trailing edge simultaneously.
This temporal double bind underscores the problematic rhetoric of tempo-
rality in smart cities and urban computing – one that is not unique to those 
sites, by any means, but is pervasive in contemporary culture. Useful antidotes 
to aspects of this rhetoric are to be found in recent examinations of the way in 
which rhetorics of novelty and the pace of change are used to narrate prob-
lems and opportunities in daily life. Edgerton (2011), for example, presents a 
series of compelling examples that undercut conventional arguments about 
technological progress by showing how old technologies persist amongst the 
new despite our blindness to them (e.g., the significant role played by horses 
for transportation and haulage during World War II); Wajcman (2014) criti-
cally examines the idea that digital technology is responsible for a sense of 
the increasing pace of life in the twenty-first century. Examinations of this 
sort provide us with a useful conceptual foundation for resisting univocal 
accounts of novelty in urban computing and looking at the more complicated 
temporal texture within which these accounts are embedded.
Conclusions
What might we take away from this exploration? The analogy between the 
technologies and discourses of the Internet of Things and those of urban com-
puting is intriguing, but the analogy itself is not, in the end, a hugely substan-
tive one. What it suggests or reveals is more important than the analogy itself.

The Internet of Urban Things  45
The first entailment is the need to be able to approach technological inter-
ventions in ways that incorporate the whole technical ‘stack’, as well as its 
social and political considerations. Social scientists have long argued for 
the need to be able to form socio-technical understandings that do not hive 
off the social and the cultural from the technical, but understand them as 
being thoroughly entwined and mutually constitutive. However, within those 
discussions, technology itself is often left largely unexamined. I have argued 
elsewhere that discussions of the socio-technical implications of ‘the Internet’ 
are largely meaningless unless we grapple in detail with what the Internet 
specifically is, in contradistinction to other possible digital networking con-
figurations (Dourish 2015b). Similarly, any account of the role of Internet 
technologies in urban computing needs to be able to examine how protocol 
configurations render ‘Internet’ arguments – about openness, for instance, or 
about access, or about adaptability – more or less effective.
A second consideration that we see arise out of the analogy between these 
two technological regimes is the resituating of power and control in digital 
environments. Digital environments reconfigure social and technical infra-
structures by taking centralised phenomena and distributing them and by 
relying upon or producing new forms of concentration – of power, of logic, 
of action, of control and of visibility. The Internet of Things is based on a 
distribution of computational power but also on a shift in the points of con-
nection – from the home to the Cloud, from the desktop to the mobile.
The third point concerns the way that accounts of old and new technolo-
gies lend meaning and justification to different accounts of the incorporation 
of digital technology into the fabric of daily life. One particularly prevalent 
account, for instance, holds that technology changes quickly (and inevita-
bly) while human or social responses are sluggish and faltering. One might 
just as well, of course, note that the source of technological change is itself 
human and organisational, while conventional technologies embed within 
them a whole history of archaeological artefacts – today’s most fashionable 
smartphone apps incorporate software architectures from the 1990s, network 
protocols from the 1980s and operating system kernels from the 1970s. There 
is more to the temporality of technology than a single dimension.
Fourth, this perspective calls for renewed attention to the questions of 
participation engendered through technological platforms. While many in 
the technology design community have argued for the adoption of so-called 
participatory design techniques as a way to engage people with civic struc-
tures through technology, a number of researchers have drawn attention to 
the problems of marginalisation and selective participation that are often at 
the heart of these projects (e.g., Ehn et al. 2014; McCarthy and Wright 2015). 
The widely recognised problems of minority participation in science and 
technology, both in academia and in industry, speak to problems of seeing 
technological projects as inherently democratic and inclusive. Using infor-
mation technology as the tool of urban change may shift but not necessarily 
open up the sites of power and agency.

46  Paul Dourish
The encounters between code and the city, then, are telling not because 
they move us beyond existing questions of urban control, management, rep-
resentation and participation. They are telling precisely because of the ways 
in which they continue to make those questions relevant.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Adam Greenfield, Kat Jungnickel, Rob Kitchin, Ann Light, 
Alison Powell, Irina Shklovski and participants in the Code and the City 
workshop at the National University of Ireland and the Dagstuhl Seminar 
on DIY Networking for conversations that inspired aspects of this discussion. 
Melissa Mazmanian and Phoebe Sengers provided useful and generous com-
ments on an incomplete draft. Colleagues in the Intel Science and Technology 
Center for Social Computing, especially Ken Anderson, Ian Bogost, Carl 
DiSalvo and Tom Jenkins, have been of tremendous value in framing think-
ing about the Internet of Things.
Note
1	 I should note that I am focusing my examples here on a domestic account of the 
Internet of Things, which, while prominent, is not, by any means, the only one. 
Similar arguments, and indeed the same labels, are applied in such domains as 
workplace and factory automation, for example, which are similarly seen as major 
IoT application areas. I draw my examples from the domestic space primarily 
because it is likely to be more familiar to a majority of readers but the central issues 
apply more broadly.
References
Abowd, G. (2012) ‘What next, UbiComp? Celebrating an intellectual disappearing 
act’, Proceedings of ACM Conference of Ubiquitous Computing, 31–40.
Antoniadis, P., Le Grand, B., Satsiou, A., Tassiulas, L., Aguiar, R., Barraca, J.P. 
and Sargento, S. (2008) ‘Community building over neighborhood wireless mesh 
networks’, IEEE Society and Technology, 27(1): 48–56.
Barkhuus, L. and Dourish, P. (2004) ‘Everyday encounters with ubiquitous comput-
ing in a campus environment’, Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on 
Ubiquitous Computing UbiComp 2004, 232–49.
Bowker, G.C. and Star, S.L. (1999) Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its 
Consequences, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brand, S. (1987) The Media Lab: Inventing the Future at MIT, New York: Viking 
Press.
Brand, S. (1995) How Buildings Learn: What Happens after They’re Built, New York: 
Viking Press.
Dillahunt, T., Mankoff, J., Paulos, E. and Fussell, S. (2009) ‘It’s not all about green: 
energy use in low-income communities’, Proceedings of the 11th International 
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, 255–64.
Dillahunt, T., Mankoff, J. and Paulos, E. (2010) ‘Understanding conflict between 

The Internet of Urban Things  47
landlords and tenants: implications for energy sensing and feedback’, Proceedings 
of the 12th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, 149–58.
DiSalvo, C., Sengers, P. and Brynjarsdóttir, H. (2010) ‘Mapping the landscape of 
sustainable HCI’, Proceedings of ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems CHI 2010, 1975–84.
Dourish, P. (2010) ‘HCI and environmental sustainability: the politics of design and 
the design of politics’, Proceedings of ACM Conference on Designing Interactive 
Systems DIS 2010, 1–10.
Dourish, P. (2015a) ‘Packets, protocols, and proximity: the materialities of Internet 
routing’, in L. Parks and N. Starosielski (eds) Signal Traffic: Critical Studies of 
Media Infrastructures, Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Dourish, P. (2015b) ‘Not the Internet, but this Internet: how othernets illuminate 
our feudal Internet’, Proceedings of Critical Alternatives (Fifth Decennial Aarhus 
Conference), Aarhus, Denmark, 157–68.
Dourish, P. and Bell, G. (2011) Divining a Digital Future: Mess and Mythology in 
Ubiquitous Computing, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Edgerton, D. (2011) The Shock of the Old: Technology and Global History since 1900, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Edwards, K. and Grinter, R. (2001) ‘At home with ubiquitous computing: seven 
challenges’, Proceedings of International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing 
UbiComp, 256–72.
Ehn, P., Nilsson, E. and Topgaard, R. (2014) Making Futures: Marginal Notes on 
Innovation, Design, and Democracy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gaved, M. and Mulholland, P. (2008) ‘Pioneers, subcultures, and cooperatives: the 
grassroots augmentation of urban places’, in A. Aurigi and F. De Cindio (eds) 
Augmented Urban Spaces: Articulating the Physical and Electronic City, Aldershot: 
Ashgate.
Greenfield, A. (2014) The City Is Here For You to Use. Part 1: Against the Smart City, 
New York: Do Projects.
Greenwald, G. (2014) No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden, the NSA, and the US 
Surveillance State, New York: Metropolitan Books.
Homburg, V. (2008) Understanding E-Government: Information Systems in Public 
Administration, London: Routledge.
Jungnickel, K. (2014) DiY WiFi: Re-imagining Connectivity, Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Kelleher, W. (2003) The Troubles in Ballybogoin: Memory and Identity in Northern 
Ireland, Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Leshed, G., Velden, T., Rieger, O., Kot, B. and Sengers, P. (2008) ‘In-car GPS 
navigation: engagement with and disconnection from the environment’, 
Proceedings of ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 
2008, 1675–84.
Light, A., Simpson, G., Weaver, L. and Healey, P. (2009) ‘Geezers, turbines, fantasy 
personas: making the everyday into the future’, Proceedings of ACM Conference on 
Creativity and Cognition CandC’09, 39–48.
McCarthy, J. and Wright, P. (2015) Taking [A]part: The Politics and Aesthetics of 
Participation in Experience-Centered Design, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mazmanian, M., Cohn, M. and Dourish, P. (2014) ‘Dynamic reconfiguration in plan-
etary exploration: a sociomaterial ethnography’, MIS Quarterly, 38(3): 831–48.
Millard, C. (ed.) (2013) Cloud Computing Law, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

48  Paul Dourish
Munn, N. (1996) ‘Excluded spaces: the figure in the Australian aboriginal landscape’, 
Critical Inquiry, 22(3), 446–65.
Powell, A. (2011) ‘Metaphors, models and communicative spaces: designing local 
wireless infrastructure’, Canadian Journal of Communication, 36(1): 91–114.
Scott, J. (1998) Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human 
Condition Have Failed, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Shklovski, I., Vertesi, J., Troshynski, E. and Dourish, P. (2009) ‘The commodifica-
tion of location: dynamics of power in location-based systems’, Proceedings of 
International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing UbiComp 2009, 11–20.
Shklovski, I., Troshynski, E. and Dourish, P. (2015) ‘Mobile technologies and spa-
tiotemporal configurations of institutional practice’, Journal of the Association for 
Information Science and Technology, 66(10): 2098–115.
Starosielski, N. (2015) The Undersea Network, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Troshynski, E., Lee, C. and Dourish, P. (2008) ‘Accountabilities of presence: refram-
ing location-based systems’, Proceedings of ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems CHI 2008, 487–96.
Turner, F. (2006) From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole 
Earth Network, and the Rise of Digital Utopianism, Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press.
Valverde, M. (2011) ‘Seeing like a city: the dialectic of modern and premodern ways of 
seeing in urban governance’, Law and Society Review, 45(2): 277–312.
Vertesi, J. and Dourish, P. (2011) ‘The value of data: considering the context of 
production in data economies’, Proceedings of ACM 2011 Conference on Computer-
Supported Cooperative Work, 533–42.
Wajcman, J. (2014) Pressed for Time: The Acceleration of Life in Digital Capitalism, 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Weiser, M. (1991) ‘The computer for the 21st century’, Scientific American, 265: 
94–104.

4	
Interfacing urban intelligence
Shannon Mattern
Introduction
As more cities become ‘smart’, we are beginning to see the political and epis-
temological contradictions of urban ‘sentience’ writ large in steel and silicon. 
Underlying all the personalised data streams and purported opportunities for 
public engagement is still, almost always, a ‘black-box’ control system. We 
citizens are empowered to report failed trash pick-ups or rank our favourite 
hospitals, but not entitled to know what happens to our personal data each 
time we pass through a toll booth. We often have little understanding of 
how and where the mediation of urban systems takes place within the city 
itself.
City governments, technology companies and design firms – the entities 
teaming up to construct these highly networked future-cities – have proto-
typed various interfaces through which citizens can engage with the smart 
city. But those prototypes embody institutional values that are not always 
aligned with the values of citizens who have a ‘right to the city’ (Lefebvre 
1996; 2003). Judging from the promotional materials released by corporate 
smart city makers, you would think that one of the chief preoccupations 
of the smart city is reflecting its own data consumption and hyperefficient 
activity back to itself. At its heart is a ‘control centre’ lined with screens that 
serves in part to visualise and celebrate the city’s supposedly hyperrational 
operation. Rio’s Ops Centre, designed by IBM, integrates data from 30 city 
agencies; its layered screens feature transit video feeds, weather informa-
tion and maps of crime statistics and power failures, as well as other snafus 
(Singer 2012). The city is thus partitioned into atomised projects, services and 
flows, each competing for technicians’ attention. We see a similar ‘widgetisa-
tion’ in Arup’s proposed dashboard for Melbourne staff: This is Your City in 
Real Time.1
Governments and their citizens need to think more deeply about these 
designs. What does it mean to ‘modularise’ urban services? To offer a map-
based snapshot of something as complicated as ‘public health’? To permit 
users to filter data streams of interest? To dedicate prime screen space to 
‘fast-moving’ data while pushing relatively static urban dimensions to 

50  Shannon Mattern
the bottom of the screen? What kind of intelligence do these windowed 
screens manifest?
If the Ops Centre dashboard has received too little critical analysis, the 
public interface has received almost none at all. Some smart city propos-
als represent the public interface as a schematic mock-up, with apparently 
little regard for interaction design. Others proffer a completely blank slate. 
(Intel renders its Sustainable Connected Cities interfaces as tiny, benevolent 
explosions).2 The range of imagined programs and services is shockingly 
narrow: typically the street interface is little more than a conduit of transit 
information, commercial locations and reviews, and information about tour-
ist attractions and cultural resources.
Many city governments have developed Web portals to showcase their open 
data, and they host hackathons and competitions, usually resulting  in 
apps that serve a single function – finding farmers’ markets, for instance, or 
measuring air quality – and rarely survive without sufficient institutional sup-
port  (Again, the ‘widgetisation’ of urban resources.) Almost always, they 
frame their users as sources of data, who feed the urban algorithmic machines, 
and as consumers of data, concerned primarily with their own efficient naviga-
tion and consumption of the city. These interfaces to the smart city suggest 
that we have traded in our environmental wisdom, political agency and social 
responsibility for corporately managed situational information, instrumental 
rationality, and personal consumption and convenience. We seem ready to 
translate our messy city into my efficient city.
Assuming that greater populations will find themselves residing in net-
worked, intelligent megalopolises, we need to give more serious consideration 
to designing urban interfaces for urban citizens, who have a right to know 
what is going on inside those black boxes – a right to engage with the operat-
ing system as more than mere reporters-of-potholes-and-power-outages. We 
need to focus attention on the ‘bleed points’ between the concrete and digital 
and social city, those zones where citizens can investigate the entwinement of 
various infrastructures and publics.3
Examining existing and proposed, even speculative, interfaces allows us to 
ask ourselves what kind of a ‘public face’ we want to front our cities, and, even 
more importantly, what kinds of intelligence and agency – technological and 
human – we want our cities to embody. We need to consider how these inter-
faces structure their inputs and outputs, how they illuminate and obfuscate 
various dimensions of the city, how they frame interaction, how that interac-
tion both reflects and informs the relationship between citizens and cities and, 
ultimately, how these interfaces shape people’s identities as urban subjects. 
We will need to challenge the common equation of ‘interface’ with ‘screen’, 
and the implications of reducing urban complexity to a two-dimensional visu-
alisation. Can we – and I do believe that this must be a collaborative, interdisci-
plinary enterprise – envision interfaces that honour the multidimensionality 
and collectivity of the city, the many kinds of intelligence it encompasses, and 
the diverse ways in which people can enact their agency as urban subjects?

Interfacing urban intelligence  51
The urban stack
In his 1997 book Interface Culture, Steven Johnson defines the interface as 
‘software that shapes the interaction between user and computer. The inter-
face serves as a kind of translator, mediating between the two parties, making 
one sensible to the other’ (Johnson 1997: 14).4 Branden Hookway (2011: 14) 
agrees that the interface does its work ‘as the zone or threshold that must be 
worked through in order [for the user] to be able to relate to technology’.5 In 
that working-through, the interface structures the user’s agency and identity 
and constructs him or her as a ‘subject’, which is different from a mere ‘user’, 
in that the subject’s identity shifts in response to contextual variations and is 
informed by historical, cultural and political forces.
However, the zone between person and machine is only the most visible 
type of interface. Computer systems are commonly modelled as a ‘stack’ of 
protocols of varying degrees of concreteness or abstraction – from the physi-
cal Ethernet hardware to the abstract application interface – with interfaces 
between every layer of this stack (Solomon 2013; Bratton 2016).6 Alexander 
Galloway (2012: 54) defines ‘interface’ broadly as ‘a general technique of 
mediation evident at all levels’. At the user level, the technique might be 
graphical, sonic, motion-tracking, gestural, tangible or embodied, or of 
another variety (see also Dourish 2001; Homecker and Buur 2006).
Thus, we might think of future city technologies as an ‘urban stack’. At 
the highest level, we find all those zoomable maps and apps that translate 
urban data into something useful. Today, the most ubiquitous vehicle for this 
digested and visualised data is the mobile phone.7 The widespread availabil-
ity of open data via smartphone apps (and globally via text messaging) has 
inspired many urban residents to explore ‘deeper’ down the stack, to under-
stand how local systems work behind the scenes: how their water arrives 
at their homes, for example, or where their garbage goes when disposed. I 
have written elsewhere about ‘infrastructural tourism’ and DIY data-science 
projects that connect citizens with those often-obfuscated networks (Mattern 
2013a; 2013b; Tironi et al. 2014).
Yet much of what is ‘beneath’ or ‘behind’ the user interface remains 
inaccessible and unintelligible. Powering these public-facing interfaces are 
highly sophisticated technical and administrative networks that integrate 
urban services and infrastructures – water, power, police and fire services, 
snow removal, etc. – with computer operating systems.8 Living PlanIT, for 
instance, ‘owns and monetises’ the Urban Operating System (UOS™) – with 
projects in the UK, the Netherlands and Portugal – which ‘extracts, aggre-
gates, analyses and manages sensor data’ in urban environments, thereby 
‘harvesting useful intelligence and also enabling management, control and 
greater efficiency for many city services’.9 Control and efficiency: these are the 
values – and the ends of intelligence – built into this system. Yet citizens do 
not come into contact with the operating system; they merely reap its efficient 
rewards. The obfuscation of the operating system – largely intentional and 

52  Shannon Mattern
perhaps even necessary, to the extent that it enables us to focus attention on 
the data most immediately relevant to our urban experiences – is also risky. 
We forget just how extensively these layered interfaces structure our com-
munication and sociality, how they delimit our agency, and how they are 
defining the terrain we are interfacing with.
How might we conceive of interfaces that allow us to monitor those aggre-
gators and protocols, and even deeper levels of the urban stack – the code, 
the hardware, etc. – that undergird integrated (and often proprietary) urban 
operating systems? Below the human–computer level of the urban stack, we 
have the wireless networks that transport the data from and to us, and the 
application programmer interfaces (APIs) that allow various entities to build 
apps that tap into our cities’ open data.10 Particularly, given the complexity 
of these networks, and the profound implications their algorithms can have 
for urban politics and our identities as urban ‘subjects’, we should have a 
means of looking inside the box, if not tinkering with the code.
Observers have long sought to wrap their heads around complex urban 
operations and to picture the totality of the urban domain. The rise of print 
in the fifteenth century brought new maps, guidebooks and public posters 
that shaped residents’ comprehension of and interaction with their cities 
(San Juan 2001; Wilson 2005). The explosion of newspapers in the late nine-
teenth century likewise offered a new means of ‘overviewing’ the expanding, 
increasingly diverse, polyglot metropolis. The inventions of panoramic and 
aerial photography and, eventually, satellite imagery offered ever-more com-
prehensive, scalable representations of cities – and our places within them 
(Bruno 2002; Vidler 2011: 317–28; Parks 2012; Haffner 2013; Huhtamo 2013; 
Kurgan 2013). Today, media facades, public screens, ambient interfaces, 
responsive architectures and other forms of ‘public interactives’ are trans-
forming our physical environments into interfaces in their own right. In the 
Melbourne proposal,11 Arup envisioned screens embedded in architectural 
facades, at transit stations, on the sides of trams, and hanging from posts on 
every block. Even local waterways, the designers suggested, could become 
‘ambient’ conduits for visually (and perhaps sonically and haptically) sharing 
information about their own workings.
Yet I have to wonder: interfaces to what? What is the ‘city’ they propose to 
put us in relation with, and how deep into the stack does that relation go? In 
too many cases, the ‘city on the screen’ is little more than a set of measureable 
events, trackable movements and rateable services. Could we develop urban 
interfaces that actually help us wade through, make sense of – and critically 
engage with – the oceans of data generated by our cities and presented to 
us in edited form? Could alternative modes of presentation encourage us to 
think about the biases, affordances and limitations built into our tools and 
techniques of data representation? Could we ‘read’ our urban interfaces – our 
windows into the urban operating system – as a means of assessing the ethos 
of urban development, ensuring that our cities’ operations are upholding an 
open, democratic ethic?12

Interfacing urban intelligence  53
Interface critique
The most prevalent ways of thinking about human–computer interaction are 
framed by values central to engineering. According to media scholar Johanna 
Drucker (2011: 1), the evaluation of interfaces typically involves ‘scenarios 
that chunk tasks and behaviours into carefully segmented decision trees’ 
and ‘endlessly iterative cycles of “task specification” and “deliverables”’ (see 
also Drucker 2013). Such thinking tends to equate the ‘human’ in human–
computer interaction with an efficiency-minded ‘user’. This is, of course, how 
much smart cities discourse frames inhabitants, too – as efficiency-minded, 
affect-less consumers of urban resources. But if we want our cities to embrace 
a wider set of experiences and values – serendipity, ambiguity, even produc-
tive, ‘seamful’ inefficiency – and to facilitate more diverse forms of human 
agency, what should we be looking for in those interfaces between the city and 
its inhabitants?13
I offer a rubric for how we might evaluate our urban interfaces. We should 
consider:
•	
The materiality, scale, location and orientation of the interface. If it is a 
screen: where is it sited, how big is it, is it oriented in landscape or por-
trait or another mode, does it move, what kinds of viewing practices does 
it promote? If there is audio: where are the speakers, what is their reach, 
and what kind of listening practices do they foster?
•	
The modalities of interaction with the interface. Do we merely look at 
dynamically presented data? Can we touch the screen and make things 
happen? Can we speak into the air and expect it to hear us, or do we have 
to press a button to awaken Siri? Can we gesticulate naturally, or do we 
have to wear a special glove, or carry a special wand, in order for it to 
recognise our movements?
•	
The basic composition of elements on the screen – or in the soundtrack or 
object – and how they work together across time and space.
•	
How the interface provides a sense of orientation. How do we understand 
where we are within the ‘grand scheme’ of the interface – how closely we 
are ‘zoomed in’ and how much context the interface is providing – or the 
landscape or timeframe it is representing?
•	
How the interface ‘frames’ its content: how it chunks and segments – via 
boxes and buttons and borders, both graphic and conceptual – various 
data streams and activities.
•	
The modalities of presentation – audio, visual, textual, etc. – the interface 
affords. What visual, verbal, sonic languages does the interface use to 
frame content into fundamental categories?
•	
The data models that undergird the interface’s content and structure our 
interaction with it: how sliders, dialogue boxes, drop-down menus, and 
other GUI elements organise content – as a qualitative or quantitative 
value, as a set of discrete entities or a continuum, as an open field or a set 

54  Shannon Mattern
of controlled choices, etc. – and thereby embody an epistemology and a 
method of interpretation.
•	
The acts of interpretive translation that take place at the hinges and por-
tals between layers of interfaces: how we use allegories or metaphors – the 
desktop, the file folder or even our mental image of the city-as-network – 
to ‘translate’, imperfectly, between different layers of the stack.
•	
To whom the interface speaks, whom it excludes, and how. Who are the 
intended and actual audiences? How does the underlying database cat-
egorise user types and shape how we understand our social roles and 
expected behaviour? This issue is of particular concern, given the striking 
lack of racial, gender and socio-economic diversity in much discourse 
and development of ‘smart cities’.
•	
What kinds of information or experience are simply not representable 
through a graphic or gestural user interface, on a zoomable map, via 
data visualisation or sonification? While some content or levels of the 
protocol stack may be intentionally hidden – for the sake of ‘public’ 
security, for instance, or to protect Cisco’s and IBM’s intellectual prop-
erty – Galloway (2012: 91) argues that some things are unrepresentable, 
in large part because we have yet to create ‘adequate visualisations’ of 
our network culture and control society. Yet we should also consider 
the possibility that some aspects of our cities are not, and will never be, 
machine-readable (Greenfield 2012).14 Affect, for example. Or beauty. In 
our interface critique, then, we might imagine what dimensions of human 
experience and the world we inhabit cannot or should not be translated 
or interfaced.
Slabs and clouds
Using this rubric, here I want to examine in brief two case examples.15 First, 
consider Urbanscale’s Urbanflow system, an ‘urban operating system’ that 
would facilitate journey planning and wayfinding (privileging pedestrian 
travel), service discovery (including locations, reviews, open hours, etc.), 
access to ambient data (including information on all the signature ‘urban 
informatics’ concerns, like air quality and noise pollution) and ‘citizen respon-
siveness’ (i.e., encouraging citizens to report problems and make requests for 
public services).16 Urbanflow, they claimed, would offer a ‘dedicated platform 
where the city and its citizens can meet’. Their detailed proposal for the city 
of Helsinki envisioned larger-than-human-scale slabs positioned throughout 
the city.17 These screens would detect motion, ‘wake up’ when you walk 
by and ‘hail’ you to interact, and they would immediately place you in the 
middle of a map – ‘You Are Here’ – situated at your current coordinates, 
oriented to reflect the cardinal direction you are facing.
Urbanscale and their partners, Nordkapp, paid more attention than 
most smart city developers to interface design and human–computer 

Interfacing urban intelligence  55
interaction-driven understandings of user experience, while also allowing 
for serendipitous discovery and evincing a keen aesthetic sensibility. The 
design team claimed that, with Urbanflow, ‘the city itself becomes … easier 
to navigate for visitors, and more serendipitous for locals. City officials and 
municipal governments would be provided with a completely new way to 
connect with citizens and visitors.’ Still, we must wonder about the politics 
of the interface’s egocentric framing: the fact that you, the user, are always 
at the centre. What urban imaginaries and realities are ‘toggled off’ when 
your own navigational, informational and service needs are always front and 
centre?
Second, the ‘Cloud’ is an interfacial monolith at superscale.18 Bringing 
together a massive global team of designers, engineers, artists and organisa-
tions (including Arup, Google and MIT), the Cloud was to be an observation 
deck for the 2012 Olympic Games. Its tall, spiral ramp would carry pedestrians 
and cyclists high up to a cluster of transparent inflatable spheres and obser-
vation decks, where visitors could walk ‘amongst the clouds’. The inflatable 
structure was to be itself a substrate for data visualisation; it would allow for 
the geolocation of information about medal winners and attendance at the 
Olympic events, energy use, transportation patterns, mobile phone activity, 
even historical information about the region. And it would display some of 
that data via augmented-reality interfaces, which would ‘layer’ information 
on top of the landscape visible below. The Cloud would also generate data by 
collecting rainwater, harnessing wind and providing a unique sensory experi-
ence for visitors to be in the weather – in the ubiquitous London clouds while 
in the Cloud. As explained by Dan Hill (2009), then an Arup representative 
on the design team, the Cloud would ‘take aggregate individual patterns and 
reveal them at civic scale, thus binding the city’s activity together via a gentle 
ambient drizzle of data’.
Pie-in-the-sky it may have been, but the embodied interactive experience 
is worth considering as a model for urban interfaces. The Cloud proposed 
a macro-scale view that approximated the scale of modern information net-
works, literalising the metaphor of the data cloud. Participants would have 
assumed the position of ‘aggregators’ by walking around the space and 
kinaesthetically, choreographically, tying together various threads of data.19 
Its primary public would have been the visitors to Olympic Park – but because 
the monumental structure would be widely publicised on television and the 
Internet, its ‘audience’ would have been global. That audience could have 
posted their own relevant content on social media, which might have then 
made its way to one of the screens inside the Cloud, for folks on-scene to see.
But we do not know how that data would have been made perceptible. We 
see no representation of the embedded screens or their interfaces in the team’s 
renderings, and we have no indication of what other sensory outputs might 
have been engaged. The renderings emphasise visitors’ elevated point of view 
and kinaesthetic experience, which do indeed allow for a novel ‘embodiment’ 
of urban data. But I wonder: by transforming surveillance and aggregation 

56  Shannon Mattern
into an immersive display, a fair attraction, without addressing the power 
and privilege associated with those perspectives and roles, would the Cloud 
have ‘destroy[ed] the … divide between audience and spectacle’, or would it 
have turned its subjects, and their data, into spectacle?
Breaking the frame
In his critique of financial interfaces, economist and philosopher Georgios 
Papadopoulos (2013) acknowledges the potential of the interface to function 
disruptively (such a shame that this term has been spoiled by Silicon Valley!), 
unmasking the norms and limitations of the financial system it models, and 
offering a ‘transparent’ look at its underlying ideologies. Galloway (2012: 
94) similarly calls for a ‘counter-cartography’ – which might be realised 
through the urban interface – that reveals and tests the protocols of our 
‘informatic imagination’. It is not enough merely to ‘intervene at the level of 
“content”’ – for instance, to use a flow chart or PowerPoint or Google Map 
to trace networks of power. We have to test the ‘prohibitions’ of our plat-
forms’ forms and materialities and affordances, too; we need to experiment 
with ‘new data types, new “if-then” statements, new network diagrams, new 
syllogisms’ (Galloway 2012: 97).
Can we create a formal or structural parallel between the urban structures 
we desire and the interfaces we create to mediate those cities? Are we sure, 
Hill (2013) wonders, that core civic values – serendipity and productive inef-
ficiency, personal and civic responsibility, ‘meaningful activity from citizens 
and government, the city as public good, and … diversity and regard for the 
affective dimensions of urban experience – are part of the smart city vision?’ 
Furthermore, he asks, ‘are our governance cultures and tools in the right 
shape to genuinely react to the promise of the network?’ Are these same 
values embodied formally in our smart city interfaces? Could governments 
use these tools to ‘boldly prototyp[e] new versions’ of themselves? Could 
citizens use these same tools to investigate urban power structures and access 
to resources? We should be using our urban interfaces to afford our publics 
a peek ‘down  the urban stack’, to the invisible infrastructures that make 
the city work; to call attention to the unrepresented populations and urban 
problems that are filtered out of our whitewashed and abstracted city render-
ings; to highlight opportunities for improvement, and the roles that everyday 
people could play in effecting that change. We could be using our urban 
interfaces to educate our publics about the nature of government and the 
expanding ‘science’ of urban management – about the methodologies of data 
gathering and analysis, the politics of visualisation, the algorithms behind 
the ‘urban operating system’ and the servers and wires and waves that make 
it all possible.
Consciously and critically designing our urban interfaces could compel us 
to ask questions about what kind of cities we want, and what kind of citizens 
we want to be. The creation of a better interface – an interface that reflects 

Interfacing urban intelligence  57
the ethics and politics that we want our cities to embody – is necessarily a 
collaborative process, one drawing on the skills of designers of all stripes, 
technicians, engineers, logisticians, cultural critics and theorists, artists, bus 
drivers and sanitation workers, politicians and political scientists, econo-
mists, policy-makers and myriad others (including women and people of 
colour, who have been egregiously underrepresented in relevant debates). If 
our interfaces are to reflect and embody the values of our city, the conception 
and creation of those interfaces should be ours, too – not Cisco’s, not the 
administrators’, certainly not mine or yours. But ours.
Acknowledgement
This chapter is an abridged and modified version of an essay of the 
same title that I published in Places Journal in April 2014. Please visit https://
placesjournal.org/article/interfacing-urban-intelligence/ for the expanded, 
richly illustrated essay.
Notes
  1	 There is a rendering of the dashboard in Mattern (2014a).
  2	 See Intel Collaborative Research Institute (2012).
  3	 Consider the workshop Interfacing with the City at the 2011 FutureEverything 
festival in Manchester; participants explored the city and documented the ‘bleed 
points’ where the physical and virtual world connected: CCTV cameras, Wi-Fi 
routers, digital art, etc. They used this documentation to discuss ‘how digital 
layers are visible or hidden and how their presence is mediated through the city’ 
(Strutz 2011).
  4	 See Mattern (2014b) for a more thorough discussion of the various ways of 
theorising interfaces.
  5	 See also Hookway (2014).
  6	 See also Wikipedia (2015).
  7	 Of course, some cities of the world are more concerned with providing basic urban 
services – like adequate housing – than designing flashy interactive facades. In 
most of these developing areas, according to Anthony Townsend (2013), despite 
all the attention paid over the past decade to cheap laptops, smartphones are ‘des-
tined to be the true face of ubiquitous computing’, a model of ‘everyware’ comput-
ing that is central to visions of the smart city, on the global scale. Mobile phones 
‘have spread the fastest and have become the single most transformative tool for 
development’ – and via SMS, they can deliver text-based data to residents in less 
richly wired parts of the globe (Christine Zhen-Wei Qiang, quoted in Townsend 
2013: 178). Some international development organisations have designed rugged 
public kiosks to deliver urban informatics in these regions, too (Fabian 2011; see 
also Rekow 2013 for the widespread use of SMS messaging systems).
  8	 For a discussion of the long history of the ‘city-as-machine’ metaphor, and of con-
ceptualising the city through computational models, see Mattern (2013b).
  9	 Other metropolitan areas are creating a ‘city protocol’, an ‘urban innovation model’ 
dedicated to the creation of ‘reports, standards, certification systems, services 
definition, best practices and recommendations to turn cities into more innovative 
and sustainable environments’ (quotes here and above in Living PlanIT (n.d.)). 
Also, in Cisco’s press release: ‘In the same way as the Internet Protocol shaped 

58  Shannon Mattern
the original development of the Internet, the City Protocol will be discussed and 
developed internationally, setting up an evolutive protocol based on the agree-
ment of a global community. It will deliver benefits within and between cities, by 
addressing urban development in an integrated systemic way’ (Cisco 2012). Such 
projects are predicated on the assumption that cities from Kenya to Canada to 
Cambodia operate on a standardised system of rules, regardless of local history, 
culture, geography, climate, etc.
10	 Anthony Townsend (2013: 288) argues that ‘community-owned broadband is 
one of the best investments a smart city can make’; which not only allows citizens 
ready access to Web-based content, but also ‘puts the city in control of its own 
nervous system, giving it tremendous bargaining power over any private company 
that wants to sell smart services to the city government or its businesses or resi-
dents’.
11	 See Melbourne Smart City, available at http://www.cityofsound.com/files/c40_
melbourne_report_final_email.pdf [accessed 26 November 2015]; for more on 
ambient interfaces, see McCullough (2013).
12	 Townsend suggests that we need ‘a new social code to bring meaning to and exert 
control over the technological code of urban operating systems’. Part of that social 
code is an ethic of technical development – a commitment to creating ‘simple, 
modular and open source’ urban software and an ‘organically evolved set of open 
standards’; to documenting and archiving our data streams; and to ‘modelling 
transparently’ – to ‘exposing the algorithms of smart city software’, most of which 
are guarded by government and industry (Townsend 2013: 284, 287, 290, 295).
13	 Anthropologist Dorien Zandbergen (2013) writes about her involvement in an 
interdisciplinary team that designed an air-quality reading device. She found 
that compromises and contradictions in the design pointed to ‘different types of 
futures, and, by extension, to different ways in which the ideal of this alleged smart 
city can be realised’. While the device’s hardware was open source, its software 
was commercial, which meant that its full features were available only to paying 
customers. Furthermore, when the device was ultimately enclosed in a shiny, 
user-friendly casing – thus blackboxing the critical issues debated throughout 
the design process – the device ‘stopped facilitating discussions about the actual 
meaning and reliability of the data, and instead adopted marketing language, sell-
ing “transparency”, “efficiency”, and above all, a Plus account with helpdesk facil-
ity’. She suggests that, in smart cities, ‘user-friendliness’ should apply not to its 
‘flashy interfaces and shiny casings’, but to ‘discussions of power and value that 
go into the production of our everyday technologies’.
14	 While the original post has been inexplicably redacted, the ideas it contains are 
still of great value.
15	 In the longer version of this article (Mattern 2014a), I offer a number of other case 
studies plus illustrations related to the two examples discussed here.
16	 See Urbanscale (n.d.).
17	 See Nordkapp and Urbanscale (2011).
18	 See http://www.raisethecloud.org/ [accessed 19 August 2015].
19	 See the brochure for the Cloud http://web.mit.edu/giodn/Public/theCLOUD_
texts.pdf [accessed 1st April 2014].
References
Bratton, B. (forthcoming 2016) The Stack: On Software and Sovereignty, Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Bruno, G. (2002) Atlas of Emotions: Journeys in Art, Architecture and Film, New 
York: Verso.

Interfacing urban intelligence  59
Cisco, (2012) ‘Barcelona, GDF SUEZ and Cisco announce the launch of the city proto-
col’, 28 August 28 2012, available from http://newsroom.cisco.com/release/998539/
Barcelona-GDF-SUEZ-and-Cisco-announce-the-launch-of-the-City-Protocol 
[accessed 19 August 2015].
Dourish, P. (2001) Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied Interaction, 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Drucker, J. (2011) ‘Humanities approaches to interface theory’, Culture 
Machine, 12, available from http://www.culturemachine.net/index.php/cm/article/
viewArticle/434 [accessed 17 November 2015].
Drucker, J. (2013) ‘Performative materiality and theoretical approaches to interface’, 
Digital Humanities Quarterly, 7(1), available from http://www.digitalhumanities.
org/dhq/vol/7/1/000143/000143.html [accessed 17 November 2015].
Fabian, C. (2011) ‘Spaces around digital access: kiosks in sub-Saharan Africa’, 
Libraries, Archives and Databases, 11 April 2011, available from http://www.
wordsinspace.net/lib-arch-data/wordpress_libarchdata/?p=279 [accessed 19 August 
2015].
Galloway, A.R. (2012) The Interface Effect, Malden, MA: Polity.
Greenfield, A. (2012) ‘The city is here for you to use: 100 easy pieces’, 3 December 
2012, available from http://speedbird.wordpress.com/2012/12/03/the-city-is-here-
for-you-to-use-100-easy-pieces/ [accessed 15 August 2015].
Haffner, J. (2013) The View from Above: The Science of Social Space, Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Hill, D. (2009) ‘Sketchbook: The Cloud’, City of Sound, 11 November 2009, avail-
able from http://www.cityofsound.com/blog/2009/11/the-cloud.html [accessed 19 
August 2015].
Hill, D. (2013) ‘On the smart city; or, a “manifesto” for smart citizens instead’, 
City Of  Sound, 1 February 2013, available from http://www.cityofsound.com/
blog/2013/02/on-the-smart-city-a-call-for-smart-citizens-instead.html [accessed 19 
August 2015].
Homecker, E. and Buur, J. (2006) ‘Getting a grip on tangible interaction: a frame-
work on physical space and social interaction’, Proceedings of ACM CHI 2006 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 437–46.
Hookway, B. (2011) The Interface, PhD thesis, Princeton University.
Hookway, B. (2014) Interface, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Huhtamo, E. (2013) Illusions in Motion: Media Archaeology of the Moving Panorama 
and Related Spectacles, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Intel Collaborative Research Institute (2012) Sustainable Connected Cities, available 
from http://www.cities.io/ [accessed 17 November 2015].
Kurgan, L. (2013) Close Up at a Distance: Mapping, Technology, and Politics, 
Brooklyn: Zone Books.
Johnson, S. (1997) Interface Culture: How New Technology Transforms the Way We 
Create and Communicate, New York: Harper Edge.
Lefebvre, H. (1996) The Urban Revolution, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press.
Lefebvre, H. (2003) Writings on Cities, New York: Oxford University Press.
Living PlanIT (n.d.) What is Living PlanIT?, available from http://www.living-planit.
com/what_is_living_planit.htm [accessed 28 August 2012].
McCullough, M. (2013) Ambient Commons: Attention in the Age of Embodied 
Information, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

60  Shannon Mattern
Mattern, S. (2013a) ‘Infrastructural tourism’, Places, July 2013, available from https://
placesjournal.org/article/infrastructural-tourism [accessed 19 August 2015].
Mattern, S. (2013b) ‘Methodolatry and the art of measure’, Places, November 
2013, available from https://placesjournal.org/article/methodolatry-and-the-art-of-
measure [accessed 19 August 2015].
Mattern, S. (2014a) ‘Interfacing urban intelligence’, Places, available from https://
placesjournal.org/article/interfacing-urban-intelligence [accessed 17 November 
2015].
 Mattern, S. (2014b) ‘Interface critique, revisited’, Words in Space, 22 January 
2014, available from http://www.wordsinspace.net/wordpress/2014/01/22/interface-
critique-revisited-thinking-about-archival-interfaces/ [accessed 19 August 2015].
Nordkapp and Urbanscale (2011) Urbanflow Helsinki, available from http://helsinki.
urbanflow.io/ [accessed 19 August 2015].
Papadopoulos, G. (2013) ‘Digital money, the end of privacy, and the preconditions 
of post-digital resistance’, Post-Digital-Research, available from http://post-digital.
projects.cavi.dk/?p=569 [accessed 19 August 2015].
Parks, L. (2012) ‘Zeroing in: overhead imagery, infrastructure ruins and datalands in 
Afghanistan and Iraq’, in J. Packer and S.B.C. Wiley (eds) Communication Matters: 
Materialist Approaches to Media, Mobility and Networks, New York: Routledge.
Rekow, L. (2013) ‘Including informality in the smart citizen conversation’, in D. 
Hemment and A. Townsend (eds) Smart Citizens, Manchester: Future Everything 
Publications, 35–8.
San Juan, R.M. (2001) Rome: A City Out of Print, Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press.
Singer, N. (2012) ‘Mission control, built for cities’, New York Times, 3 March 2012.
Solomon, R. (2013) ‘Last in, first out: network archaeology of/as the stack’, Amodern 
2: Network Archaeology, available from http://amodern.net/article/last-in-first-out/ 
[accessed 19 August 2015].
Strutz, E. (2011) ‘FutureEverything 2011’, YOUrban, 25 May 2011, available from 
http://yourban.no/2011/05/25/futureeverything-2011/ [accessed 19 August 2015].
Tironi, M., Criado, T.M. and Musiani, F. (2014) ‘Opening up the urban interface: the 
smart city and other experimental forms of “infrastructural politics”’, Society for 
Social Studies of Sciences Annual Conference, 20–23 August 2014, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
Townsend, A. (2013) Smart Cities: Big Data, Civic Hackers, and the Quest for a New 
Utopia, New York: W.W. Norton and Co.
Urbanscale (n.d.) Urbanflow, available from http://urbanscale.org/projects/urban-
flow/ [accessed 19 August 2015].
Vidler, A. (2011) ‘Photourbanism: planning the city from above and from below’, in 
The Scenes of the Street and Other Essays, New York: Monacelli, 317–28.
Wikipedia (2015) Protocol Stack, available from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Protocol_stack [accessed 18 August 2015].
Wilson, B. (2005) The World in Venice: Print, the City, and Early Modern Identity, 
Buffalo: University of Toronto Press.
Zandbergen, D. (2013) ‘Real smart cities are not user-friendly’, Leiden Anthropology 
Blog, 18 December 2013, available from http://www.leidenanthropologyblog.nl/
articles/real-smart-cities-are-not-user-friendly, [accessed 19 August 2015].

5	
Abstract urbanism
Matthew Fuller and Graham Harwood
Introduction
One of the first computational models of a city was set out in Thomas 
Schelling’s paper Models of Segregation (1969). In this and related papers, 
he attempted to provide a logical model of the dynamics of racial segregation 
in North American cities and laid groundwork for what later became known 
as agent-based modelling (Schelling 1969). Although Models of Segregation 
did not at first use a computer, it sets up some of the basic characteristics 
and problems of the field. Such work is also expressed contemporarily, for 
instance in the work of J. M. Epstein (2002) and others in the area of compu-
tational social modelling.1 We use this work as a starting point to think about 
the relationship between urban morphologies and the politics of models and 
with the increasing and multiform kinds of merger between computational 
systems, models and city forms, what it means to inhabit different scales of 
abstract structure. It is in this juncture that abstract urbanism arises.
This chapter examines the ways in which logical forms are positioned 
in relation to urban life as a means of discussing the relations between the 
city and software and will develop a discussion of such logics in relation 
to questions of abstraction, reduction and empiricism. By working with 
the ­materiality of computational systems, especially as they unfold into 
the urban – and the urban in a full sense, as something involving complex 
comings into being of desire, imagination, technologies and forms of power 
– we can at the same time recognise an art of working with the tendency to 
reductionism through which modes of abstraction may operate and also 
work with the highly and complexly empirical. As social simulations are 
increasingly embedded in, or cleave close to, lived social forms, the texture 
and reality-forming capacities of these logics and the fantasies they inspire 
and live by need to be examined.
Development of simulation as a scientific practice
One attractive aspect of modelling as a means of experimental understanding 
is that it offers a science of behaviours rather than of essences. It is peculiar, 

62  Matthew Fuller and Graham Harwood
therefore, that one of the earliest examples of social simulation derives from 
a highly essentialist ontology. Perhaps this might be seen as an example of a 
new epistemic form emerging out of a prior set of commitments that it has 
yet to break. Models of Segregation builds on the game theory established 
by Morgenstern and von Neumann (1947). Schelling’s (1960) earlier game-
theoretic book, The Strategy of Conflict, can be seen as a presiding spirit 
in Models of Segregation’s attempt (Schelling 1969) to map and rationalise 
options in the decisions around actions in the schematised space of non-zero-
sum conflict.2 The opening stages of the paper set up segregation as a fun-
damental axiom of great applicability. Schelling mentions men and women, 
Catholics and Protestants, boys and girls, and officers and enlisted men in an 
army. Not all types of segregation necessarily tend towards dichotomous for-
mation. People are also sorted by ‘sex, age, income, language, colour, taste, 
comparative advantage and the accidents of historical location’, amongst 
other factors. It is assumed that the sorting behaviour for each of these is the 
same.
In the model, a two-dimensional line is drawn (it is important to note that 
this is a line, not a grid) with equal divisions of space along its axis. The line is 
populated with an equal number of ‘black’s and ‘white’s. While the distribu-
tion looks even on the macroscopic level, at the microscopic level it is uneven. 
Maybe three blacks are conjunct with one white, then a black and then three 
whites. If the whites and blacks are content with a 50% split between the 
colour of their neighbours then those who have a white neighbour on one 
side and a black neighbour on the other reach the contentment threshold and 
stand still if the neighbourhood to be considered has a radius of one. Those 
with ‘too many’ black neighbours or white neighbours will move in order 
to achieve contentment. In a neighbourhood with a radius of one, the line 
BBBWBWWW would, several iterations later, become BWBWBWBW. If 
the neighbourhood extends to two houses, then the B and W in the middle of 
BBBWBWWW would be looking for new neighbourhoods. To summarise, 
in Schelling’s model, each agent is ‘black’ or ‘white’ and aims to reside in 
a neighbourhood where the fraction of blacks or whites is above a prede-
fined tolerance. Schelling’s algorithm for determining the pattern of residence 
either creates complete integration or complete segregation.
Curiously, there is no reflection on the constitution of racial sorting even 
in excusatory fig-leaf terms. Like the stories of house-hunting amongst ‘pro-
fessors and their wives’ that Schelling (1971; 1978: Chapter 4) describes else-
where, the specific categories upon and through which segregation operates 
are described as if natural, not even worthy of equivocation as to their rela-
tion to social structure. The racism of the work is both that it operates by 
means of racial demarcation as an autocatalytic ideological given and second 
that it provides a means of organising racial division at a higher level of 
abstraction. To say that Schelling operates within an ideologically racialised 
frame is not to claim either way as to whether Schelling as a person is or was 
consciously racist, but that, in these papers, racial division is an uncontested, 

Abstract urbanism  63
‘obvious’ social phenomenon that can be reduced in terms of its operation 
to a precise set of identifiers and operations. Goldberg’s formulation of the 
problem of racism is useful here:
The mark of racist expression or belief, then, is not simply the claim of 
inferiority of the racially different. It is more broadly that racial differ-
ence warrants exclusion of those so characterized from elevation into the 
realm of protection, privilege, property, or profit. Racism, in short, is 
about exclusion through depreciation, intrinsic or instrumental, timeless 
or time-bound.
(Goldberg 2009: 5)
The naturalisation of such a situation of depreciation by at-a-distance 
means in which entities kindly self-organise into ghettos out of their own 
otherwise unlimited choice must have been a marvellous boon to someone. 
What these papers offer is the construction of a machine for the operation of 
binary categorisation that in turn becomes an engine for spatial organisation, 
of preference-based segregation, as if the provision of housing in the form of 
a market is entirely smooth and demand driven, as if there are no variations 
in housing kinds and qualities, geographical features, cultural variations in 
population, of wealth, and so on.
What Schelling’s work allows for is an operation of governance beyond 
that of direct sorting and selection, the direct command and control of popu-
lations, but rather by eliciting and installing an action grammar in which 
people ‘spontaneously’ recognise, in the words of Nina Simone’s Mississippi 
Goddam (1964), ‘I don’t belong here, I don’t belong there’.
Schelling offers the image of urban form being operated upon by an ‘invis-
ible hand’, emerging at a higher level in social and material channelling. 
There is a tension, then, between the figure of this invisible hand and the view 
of the agent. The hand operates in an ostensibly emergent or natural way, 
arising out of the conditions of the situation as they are, beyond how they are 
seen by individual actants.
Abstraction as urbanism
Schelling’s abstract machine is one for the bipolar reduction of variation. 
One of the advantages of such an abstraction is that it requires no spe-
cific material form, simply logical equivalence. As recounted in a glowing 
festschrift chapter, Schelling initially used pennies, heads or tails up, on a 
draughts board to simulate, ‘what sort of segregation patterns develop given 
various types of preferences and alternative definitions of neighbourhood’ 
(Zeckhauser 2006: x). The scale of the board becomes the limit factor of 
the diagrams published in a later paper, Dynamic Models of Segregation 
(Schelling 1971). One can imagine a media-archaeological analysis of the 
history of simulation starting with such boards. John Conway, in developing 

64  Matthew Fuller and Graham Harwood
the Game of Life, famously extended his to cover most surfaces of his office 
(Gardner 1970). Equally, only having four significant neighbours, termed 
‘Neumann neighbours’,3 draws a simplifying factor from the board, the 
constraints of which may in turn be surpassed by the volume of processing 
offered by electronic computing.
Indeed, a media analysis of the field can divulge a number of aspects of its 
material practice that are often rendered conceptually and procedurally invis-
ible. One such is that models tend to be bound by the temporal constraints 
of ‘turns’ in which all agents shift at the same time. Most models need to 
have all variables change at the same time – but models of sociality need to 
vary the periodicity of change for individual agents. Equally, in the model’s 
interaction with hardware, the need to represent data to human users renders 
the allocation of CPU cycles to drawing graphical representations something 
of an interference when compared with how many agents could be processed 
instead.
A few years after Schelling’s work was published, Ted Nelson (1987: 149) 
stated in Computer Lib that simulation is always political.4 Computers, as an 
abstract machine for the integration of all symbol systems – those operated 
upon by discrete values, or values that can be rendered as digital – provide a 
great degree of plasticity in the social forms they might potentiate: hence the 
significance of Nelson’s formulation. But the specific kind of politics simu-
lated is also articulated by the qualities of the mathematical structures they 
come into composition with (rule sets; systems of four or eight neighbours; 
bounded, unlimited or wrapping grids; and so on). It is a rare case in which 
there is a direct correlation between the various scales of model, media, math-
ematics, the social form modelled, the ideological commitments specified as 
politics in such simulations and the actual politics of the material operations 
of such systems in use. Each of these scales is active.
Diagram city
Epstein and Axtell’s (1994) Growing Artificial Societies: Social Science from 
the Bottom Up drew on Models of Segregation and from Conway’s Game of 
Life. In Conway’s cellular automata and Schelling’s space of segregation, 
the environment has no active properties, something that has consequences 
when these models carry over into urban planning and cityscape modelling. 
Epstein and Axtell’s innovation was to place agents in an active environment 
and to programme them to explore for simple codifications of basic resources 
to keep their metabolisms alive. Agents and environment have internal states 
and behavioural rules that are fixed at the start or that can inherit change in 
interaction with each other. This is a model as a form of regression analysis, 
or rather of using regression as a form of proposition-making mechanism, 
where the relations between entities are fixed but variable. The environment 
is a lattice of resource-bearing sites in a medium that is separate from the 
agents, but on which they operate and with which they interact.5

Abstract urbanism  65
Epstein has produced a body of work discussing the ethics around agent-
based modelling that seek to affect US governmental policy by creating 
explicit models that can be used to explain social phenomena; something he 
is careful to distinguish from prediction. In Why Model?, Epstein (2008) chal-
lenges the assumption that scientific theories are created from the study of 
data. He asserts that without a good theory, it is not clear what data should 
be collected. Modelling requires theorisation and so creates enquiring habits 
of mind that he posits as essential to freedom.
By contrast, agent-based models have been eagerly taken up as objective 
explanations of conflictual social forms. The capacity to express forms of 
emergence, with the invisible hand effectively rationalising commonsensical 
observations of the inevitability of such phenomena as racial segregation 
excites dreams of implementation. As such, this aspect of this work evinces 
a fascination with finding fundamental laws of social aggregation, rhetori-
cally building on those found in natural sciences, in turn afforded by those 
historically associated with mathematics. Such kinds of model and associated 
discourse still act in a representational mode, rather than one of enquiry.
Simulations now operate in a wide range of cases and kinds. They act as 
a form of prognosis and forecasting, of pre-emption and the maintenance of 
irresolvability as well as having the ability to formulate an explanation with 
empirical traction without having to be true. Simulations also develop spe-
cific kinds of techniques and vocabularies, as well as the software to handle 
and interpret them – object-oriented programming being one such example 
(see Fuller and Goffey 2014). Object-oriented programming is fundamen-
tal to how agent-based modelling conceives of itself, as it allows objects to 
hold data and functions in internal states. The object exports a limited set 
of methods with which to interact with it – and the data, rather than being 
globally accessible, are held privately to the object. This is why the behaviour 
of objects comes to the surface – rather than the data that underlie them. 
Functions or methods are the agents’ rules of behaviour.
One novelty in this kind of work is the way particular forms of computa-
tional abstraction themselves become operative elements in social and urban 
formations. Computation becomes folded into the operations of societies, 
and social forms become computational problems. As the programmable 
city begins to incorporate models, such systems become more than represen-
tational. Here, there is a correlation between formulations, such as those of 
Epstein and Schelling (and those that followed in developing simulated socie-
ties), and the social sorting by software described by Steven Graham (2005) 
in his noted article Software-Sorted Geographies. In agent-based modelling, 
by contrast, there is an interplay between the schema of sorting and the 
actions of individuals and social formations, without engaging with the level 
of implementation. Where there is a difference is that Graham describes a dis-
ciplinary sorting on the social. There are kinds of sorting occurring, but these 
are more adequately expressed as a multiscalar, multivariable sorting enacted 
by agents bearing seemingly lucid and operable preference lists arrayed in 

66  Matthew Fuller and Graham Harwood
relation to the behaviour and imagined preferences of others, apparently 
reducible to hard and fast organisation. A particularly interesting moment to 
watch for is when the two merge to some extent, either in actual implementa-
tion, or in the seductive idea that such reductions are fully adequate explana-
tions of specific slices of reality.
In the case of the racism of Schelling’s Models of Segregation, the catego-
ries pre-exist the machine. The machine is there to sort them, to anticipate 
their actualisation, to provide a degree of abstraction in which they can be 
reckoned, and by which the abstraction too can be worked up into an actor 
of a kind in itself. This operation of abstraction is crucial to understanding 
software as a cultural, city-making force.
Logics
The use of computers implies the interrelation of different forms of logic, at 
the levels, for instance, of programming the machine to perform calculations 
and of regulating the behaviour of users in pushing around mice and navigat-
ing menu systems to produce desired results. One way to think about how the 
mass adoption of these forms of logic effects society is in the mode Foucault 
described as discipline, one that analyses and breaks down a phenomenon 
through modelling it to produce a kind of remote control. Computation dis-
ciplines the way a phenomenon is approached and analysed so that when it 
becomes visible again from within the computer it makes the phenomenon 
materially available for comparison and modification. As users participate in 
the flows of power created by the comparison of information, they become 
normalised to its process and are themselves enrolled in the interrelation of 
logics.
Computational forms of normalisation establish the configuration of logics 
needed to make the materiality of the phenomenon available for modification 
via abstraction, verification and reward. The repeated construction and use 
of these forms of logic provides a form of progressive training for those that 
model, feed, collect, process and react to such logics, as well as those objects 
that are the subject of its calculations. Logics decompose processes and the 
entities, including people, that are aggregate with them. The routine process-
ing of or interaction with such models provides a collective logic to be applied 
to all areas of society and the natural world. The move beyond discipline, 
however, is characterised by the absence, further withdrawal or multiplicity 
and duplicity of the ultimately reliable, central control that discipline implies 
as a structuring principle.
Logic gates
Part of the legacy of Schelling’s and Epstein’s work is in the police, aca-
demic and intelligence projects aiming to predict riots via sentiment analysis. 
‘Negative words’, ‘hate speech’, ‘positivity’ and expressions of anger stand 

Abstract urbanism  67
in for a population of shifting emotional registers, moving from stable states 
to those that can be used to require the maintenance of policing budgets, 
harsher policies and sudden rashes of inflamed and excited research budgets. 
The operators of such machines sell their technical fixes as providing a neu-
tral oversight, in which the free expression of populations and individuals 
can be mapped and cross-checked for ‘naughtiness’. What happens is rather 
more complex; social forms are interwoven with those of the state, which 
itself attempts to follow too many filiations and clusterings. In the mean-
time, academic chancers position themselves as dubious mediators, able to 
appear to delve into the firehouse of text produced by a population mapped 
according to weightings assigned to strings of characters. We enter into a 
condition of a generalised politics of experimental control without controlled 
experiment.
Claus Pias suggests that recent theories such as actor–network theory and 
radical constructivism come from the same stock of ideas as simulation, since 
for both:
Their knowledge is consciously – and as a matter of course – furnished 
with a hypothetical index, they admit to their fictional components, they 
position themselves within their conceptual frame of reference, they the-
matize their performance, they are aware of their problematic genesis, 
and they specify their limited application.
(Pias 2011: 54)
A useful provocation following such a proposition is to be found in Latour 
and Lépinay’s reading of Tarde (2009: 19): ‘If you really want to quantify – 
which is after all the foundation of all sciences – you should try to find all 
the available types of quantum, instead of just using one to analyse all the 
others.’ This premise underlies some of the enthusiasm for big data analysis 
at present. It also perhaps implies that social reality is a simplified model of 
more adequately complex modelling schema. But we can also suggest that 
William Bunge’s (1971) later mode of maximalist empiricism coupled with 
high degrees of statistical abstraction is of great relevance here. The proposi-
tion is that to study is to become actively involved, to observe is to change, 
but also to recognise, that though such change may be reciprocal, it may not 
be symmetrical and equivalent. These, now, are the stakes of watching and 
participating, since in the city understood as a platform for self-organisation, 
algorithms, rule sets, data structures, interfaces and procedures have highly 
and perhaps questionably promising agency (Chopra 2014). The recent scan-
dal of researchers from Facebook and the Universities of California and 
Cornell using Facebook’s news feed to operate and experiment on whether 
people responded to the filtering of what appeared in their news feed on the 
basis of whether it was associated with emotional ‘negativity’ or ‘positivity’ 
should be seen as a part of this tendency. The researchers note that Facebook 
constantly experiments with the algorithm to fine-tune this aspect of their 

68  Matthew Fuller and Graham Harwood
‘product’ (Kramer, Guillory and Hancock 2014). It is this state of perpetual 
experiment, linking different scales of realities, that is characteristic of the 
condition of abstract urbanism and the kinds of operation that the integra-
tion of modelling with cities encourages.
This operation of the city as open experiment is, of course, one subject 
to the analysis of power. For Epstein and Axtell, agent-based modelling 
enforces habits of mind that are essential to intellectual and democratic free-
dom. An agent-based model must be explicit and open and be able to be 
examined and doubted, reconfigured and rerun. Epstein aligns agent-based 
modelling to scientific modes of inquiry that he sees as antithetical to estab-
lished discursive intellectual systems. Agent-based modelling provides a free-
dom to doubt large monolithic and deductive forms of knowledge. Epstein 
and Axtell propose that we are on the edge of a new enlightenment based on 
the ubiquity of computing. One in which, for Epstein (2008), ‘intellectuals 
have a solemn duty to doubt, and to teach doubt. Education, in its truest 
sense, is not about “a saleable skill set”. It is about freedom, from inherited 
prejudice and argument by authority.’ The question of whether the enlighten-
ment can be fully called upon in this way is in turn open to doubt, but there 
is something here that suggests some possibilities in that it is a science that 
explicitly calls subjects into being.
This proposed new mode of science of active abstractions involves cities 
and social forms in what Stuart Kauffman calls (2000) ‘the physics of seman-
tics’, logics that have effects in the organisation of conjunction, calculation, 
control and communication. Such a physics of semantics can be seen, at 
other scales, in the way that the agent-based model is involved in the specific 
forms of hardware and software development that conjoin both meaning-
making scaffolds and physical properties. Object orientation in programming 
is seen as a cogent worldview, capable of answering difficult questions about 
behaviour that emerge from complex subjects in the social or in economics, 
where, ‘[it] facilitates essentially any interaction structure (social network) 
and activation regime’ (Axtell 2003). In contemporary accounts, agent-
based modelling also links its ambition to the growth of CPU processing and 
the availability of hard-disk space and network processors assumed under 
Moore’s law. The ‘promising’ nature of abstract cities is thus also woven into 
multiple scales of their materiality.
This suggests that there is the possibility for a mode of experimentation, 
and of experimental politics and urban living that moves from the logics of 
theorems or axioms to an abstract empiricism. Historically, software-based 
simulations essentially replaced the kinds of hardware-based simulations or 
analogues of biological, cognitive and social systems developed in places such 
as Heinz von Foerster’s Biological Computer Laboratory in Illinois (Müller 
and Müller 2007). The questions posed change in this transition, becoming 
allied less with the philosophical concerns characteristic of the Biological 
Computer Laboratory, with its emphasis on epistemology and the question 
of abstraction and reduction from material empirical conditions. We are now 

Abstract urbanism  69
well into another similar transition where, instead of moving from hardware 
to software (with hardware becoming less experimental and idiosyncratic as 
it is rendered in the form of commodity electronics), social and urban forms 
become places of computational interoperation and experiment.
Urban space is increasingly produced in the production, circulation and 
analysis of large volumes of structured and unstructured data. Models and 
modelisations are being integrated into the design of such spatial forms as 
stadia, streets and stations at conceptual and pre-emptive stages for the pur-
poses of safety, transit design and revenue protection. In such cases, agents 
become active as urban entities installed and active in the symbolic and mate-
rial orders of the city.
Just as computational forms structure reality, so do other kinds of model. 
Abstract urbanism is hypothetical, fictional, maximally empirical and, of 
course, abstract. This means that the way in which abstractions become 
materially operative has to operate through these conditions, and also – 
under certain regimes of rhetoric – to shield them, as simply fact-based 
extrapolations. To recognise that they are imaginary, as models, without 
being merely false or simple reifications, is part of the art of abstract urban-
ism. To see agent-based modelling in such a way is to recognise that models 
are also partial cities operating like partial objects, formalised slivers of an 
urban configuration taken for a whole and working their drives into active 
diagrams. Such a condition, in which the possibilities of social fractures 
being triggered in the models and then implemented are manifest, cannot but 
add an ambiguous potency to the operations such an art promises. To work 
abstract urbanism in the condition of models becoming cities then is also to 
open the possibility of operating with a maximalist empiricism. It is to oper-
ate with delicacy and attentiveness in the design of models, but also to the 
arguments, spaces and politics that they bear, that they determine and into 
which they are smuggled, driven and suffused, and which in turn they rely 
on to sustain themselves. It is to saturate models with variables, and to open 
abstraction to social disruption rather than to prepare the abstract retrench-
ment of urban injustice.
But to recognise abstract urbanism is not solely to postulate an interesting 
set of potential political practice, but more, to come to terms with a fun-
damental change in the consistency of cities today – they are suffused with 
logics. This is not simply to say that streets are data structures, people are 
variables and the city is a grid laced with numerical nutrients, which in their 
interaction produce an adequate if simplified mimicry of urban life; but that 
the city, the exemplary space of modernity in all its complexity of desire, vio-
lence, multiscalar layering, imagination, invention and struggle is also a place 
of experiment with modes of composition and of self-emergence at multiple 
scales of abstraction. Such a space is one where fantasies of control, of under-
standing, of ordering, of establishing implicit and explicit coordination and 
pre-emption coexist with their enactment, their failure, their use as excuse, 
and as a space where logic coexists with the surprise of the unforeseen.

70  Matthew Fuller and Graham Harwood
Agent-based modelling provides a means for the phantasmatic appearance 
of logics as an always present compliment of logic itself in that it mobilises 
means by which things occur in and for themselves in the mode of emergence, 
and for a space for arranging the coming into being of ideas of the city that 
are beyond the habitual means of interrogating existing coordinates. Here, 
in the state of being promising, logics both pre-empt surprise and rely upon 
it to provide a gateway to emergence understood as the self-constitution of 
reality; a reality that is, on the one hand, seemingly unblemished by mess, or, 
on the other, one forged in the full ongoing complications of the cityscape in 
which it becomes manifest. This is a deeply ambivalent position. The physics 
of semantics in which such emergence is made is therefore worthy of atten-
tion with all the precision and inventiveness that can be mustered, as it too 
becomes a space in which the city occurs.
Notes
1	 Exemplary of work building on Epstein’s model includes Casilli and Tubaro (2011) 
and Davies et al. (2013).
2	 The paper is revised in Schelling (1978).
3	 Edward F. Moore gives his name to systems of eight neighbours, expanded to 
include those at the corners in a rectilinear grid.
4	 ‘All simulation is political. Every simulation program, and thus every simulation, 
has a point of view. Just like a statement in words about the world, it is a model 
of how things are, with its own implicit emphases: it highlights some things, omits 
others and always simplifies.’ (Nelson 1987: 149).
5	 See Axtell and Epstein’s Sugarscape software.
References
Axtell, R. (2003) ‘Economics as distributed computation’, in T. Terano, H. Deguchi 
and K. Takadama (eds) Meeting the Challenge of Social Problems via Agent-Based 
Simulation, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 3–23.
Bunge, W. (1971) Fitzgerald: Geography of a Revolution, Cambridge, MA: Schenkman 
Press, reprint University of Georgia Press, 2011.
Casilli, A.A. and Tubaro, P. (2011) ‘Why net censorship in times of political unrest 
results in more violent uprisings: a social simulation experiment on the UK riots’, 
Social Science Research Network, available from http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=1909467 [accessed 18 November 2015].
Chopra, S. (2014) ‘Computer programs are people too’, The Nation, 29 May 2014, 
available from http://www.thenation.com/article/computer-programs-are-people-
too/ [accessed 29 August 2015].
Davies, T.P., Fry, H.M., Wilson, A.G. and Bishop, S.R. (2013) ‘A mathematical 
model of the London riots and their policing’, Scientific Reports, 3(1303): 1–9.
Epstein, J.M. (2002) ‘Modeling civil violence: an agent-based computational 
approach’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99(Supplement 3): 
7243–50.
Epstein, J.M. (2008) ‘Why model?’,    Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 
11(4): 12.

Abstract urbanism  71
Epstein, J.M. and Axtell, R. (1994) Growing Artificial Societies: Social Science from 
the Bottom Up, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fuller, M. and Goffey, A. (2014) ‘The unknown objects of object orientation’, in 
P. Harvey, E.C. Casella, G. Evans, H. Knox, C. McLean, E.B. Silva, N. Thoburn 
and K. Woodward (eds) Objects and Materials, London: Routledge.
Gardner, M. (1970) ‘The fantastic combinations of John Conway’s new solitaire game 
“life”’, Scientific American, no 223, October 1970: 120–3.
Goldberg, D.T. (2009) The Threat of Race: Reflections on Racial Neoliberalism, 
Oxford: Wiley Blackwell.
Graham, S.D.M. (2005) ‘Software-sorted geographies’, Progress in Human Geography, 
29(5): 562–80.
Kauffman, S. (2000) Investigations, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kramer, A.D.I, Guillory, J.E. and Hancock, J.T. (2014) ‘Experimental evidence of 
massive-scale emotional contagion through social networks’, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 111(24): 8788–90.
Latour, B. and Lépinay, V. (2009) The Science of Passionate Interests: An Introduction 
to Gabriel Tarde’s Economic Anthropology, Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press.
Morgenstern, O. and von Neumann, J. (1947) A Theory of Games and Economic 
Behaviour, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Müller, A. and Müller, K.H. (eds) (2007) An Unfinished Revolution, Heinz von Foerster 
and the Biological Computer Laboratory (BCL) 1958–1976, Vienna: Edition 
Echoraum.
Nelson, T. (1987) Computer Lib: Dream Machines, 2nd edn, Redmond: Tempus 
Books of Microsoft.
Pias, C. (2011) ‘On the epistemology of computer simulation’, Zeitschrift für Medien- 
und Kulturforschung, 1: 29–54.
Schelling, T. (1960) The Strategy of Conflict, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 2nd edn, 1980.
Schelling, T. (1969) ‘Models of segregation’, The American Economic Review, 59(2): 
488–93.
Schelling, T. (1971) ‘Dynamic models of segregation’, Journal of Mathematical 
Sociology, 1: 143–86.
Schelling, T. (1978) Micromotives and Macrobehaviour, New York: W.W. Norton 
and Co.
Simone, N. (1964) ‘Mississippi Goddam’, in Nina Simone in Concert, Eindhoven: 
Philips.
Zeckhauser, R. (2006) ‘Thomas Schelling, ricochet thinker’, in R. Dodge (ed.) The 
Strategist: The Life and Times of Thomas Schelling, Hollis, NH: Hollis Publishing.

6	
Code traffic
Code repositories, crowds and urban life
Adrian Mackenzie
Introduction
The initial step can be made through the venerable geographical act 
of mapping the expanding realm of machinekind, clearly part of the 
remaining terra incognita.
(Horvath 1974: 188)
In what frame and at what levels of abstraction does the density and plurality 
of code in the city become legible or even enumerable? Writing in 2002, Nigel 
Thrift and Shaun French addressed a version of these questions: ‘Is there any 
way of making a more general assessment of software in the city?’ (Thrift and 
French 2002: 314). They sketched some possibilities, ranging from hegemony 
to haunting:
It would be easy at this point to fall back on some familiar notions to 
describe software’s grip on spaces like cities. One would be hegemony. 
But that notion suggests a purposeful project, whilst software consists 
of numerous projects cycling through and continually being rewritten 
in code. Another notion would be haunting. But again the notion is 
not quite the right one. Ghosts are ethereal presences, phantoms that 
are only half-there, which usually obtain their effects by stirring up emo-
tions – of fear, angst, regret, and the like
(Thrift and French 2002: 311–12)
In their review of different understandings of software in the city, they 
affirm something quite elementary: ‘numerous projects [… are] continually 
being rewritten in code’. The rest of this chapter could be seen as an update 
on that observation from 2002. What has happened to the cycling through 
and rewriting of code?1 Thrift and French go on to describe three geographies 
that were cycling – or as I would prefer to say, trafficking – code through 
cities: a geography of writing code, a geography of power and control and a 
geography of indeterminancy.

Code traffic  73
The first of these geographies is the most obvious, the large and com-
plex geography of the writing of software – of the production of lines 
of code – a geography that takes in many different locations and many 
different languages and which has been built up progressively since the 
invention of programming in the 1940s.
(Thrift and French 2002: 323)
According to Thrift and French, the geography of software writing clusters 
around key places and regions: Silicon Valley, New York, London and a 
number of auxiliary software mass production zones (often concentrating 
on such tasks as consulting, testing and support) in countries like Ireland 
and India. China, Russia and Brazil are not mentioned. As we will see, this 
geographical centring still matters, but in a somewhat reconfigured form: 
code cycles through platforms that tremendously redistribute the production 
of lines of code.
A second, less concentrated, geography of power, conceived in Foucauldian 
terms as the conduct of conduct, or massive proliferation of corporeally prac-
tised rules, was also unfurling through software: ‘In essence, we can say that 
it [software] consists of rules of conduct able to be applied to determinate 
situations,’ (Thrift and French 2002: 325). Through this power geography, 
software increasingly interlinks rather than compartmentalises urban pro-
cesses. In many ways, the app economy, the virtualisation of computing into 
the Cloud and containerised infrastructures, and the spectacular growth of 
social media platforms or, indeed, the Internet of sensor-equipped Things 
attests to an intensified application of rules to determinate situations. Again, 
coding itself, the process of specifying, configuring and propagating these 
rules of conduct, has not been exempt from the conduct of conduct. Coding 
has been powerfully recoded in recent years.
Thrift and French (2002: 328) envisaged a final more open and less local-
ised geography in which abundance produces indeterminacy and lack of 
closure:
The general profusion of software, its increasing complexity and con-
sequent emergent properties, all count as means of producing playful 
idioms that have not been captured by dominant orders. Software’s very 
indeterminacy and lack of closure provide a means of creating new kinds 
of order.
(Thrift and French 2002: 328)
In this geography, ‘profusion’ and ‘increasing complexity’ generate less 
orderly or regulated idioms. These playful idioms are largely irreducible to 
the geographical centres of coding or power-generated control practices, and 
therefore take on singular forms, arise in unexpected locations and articulate 
non-representational processes. Thrift and French attributed this generative 
aspect of software to the phenomenality of code as a form of traffic:

74  Adrian Mackenzie
Software is more like a kind of traffic between beings, wherein one sees, 
so to speak, the effects of the relationship. What transpires becomes 
reified in actions, body stances, general anticipations. We would argue, 
then, that software is best thought of as a kind of absorption, an expecta-
tion of what will turn up in the everyday world.
(Thrift and French 2002: 312)
The ‘traffic between beings’ they refer to here, the reification of ‘general 
anticipations’, the curiously contrasting descriptions of software as absorp-
tion and expectation, could be seen as implicitly urban. They concern ‘traffic’ 
in everyday worlds. In this third geography, the traffic between beings, we 
might see processes of composition that not only generate much code traffic, 
but assemble compositions of people and things that turn up new things.
More than a decade later, these geographies remain in play. Code work 
is concentrated in more or less the same places; and the coded conduct of 
conduct certainly continues. But when we think about code in terms of traf-
fic, what has happened to it? What kinds of new order have eventuated?2 As 
I will suggest, a complicated set of reorderings of code traffic have occurred. 
The centred geographies of code production have been somewhat decentred 
through a much more multilateral or networked flow of code. At the same 
time, the very arrangements that have dislocated the centres of software 
production have themselves become the platform for new platform-based 
centres or hubs for code. In turn, these centres attract and generate saturated 
streams of coding traffic that bring new indeterminacies, diverse distribu-
tions, encounters and adaptations into play.
We could give the code traffic a Deleuzean or a Tardean formulation. 
Deleuze and Guattari write:
Assemblages are passional, they are compositions of desire. Desire has 
nothing to do with a natural or spontaneous determination; there is no 
desire but assembling, assembled desire. The rationality, the efficiency, of 
an assemblage does not exist without the passions the assemblages bring 
into play, without the desires that constitute it as much as it constitutes 
them.
(Guattari and Deleuze 1988: 399)
Deleuze and Guattari’s notion of assembling as passional composition or 
putting together suggests one way of thinking about what is generated in 
code traffic. The ‘traffic between beings’ moves through paths by processes 
that we might understand, drawing on crowd sociologists such as Gabriele 
Tarde and Robert E. Park, as imitation. For both Tarde, the microsociologist 
of crowds, and Park, the urban sociologist, imitation powerfully yet unpre-
dictably effects repetition and invention, and generates new urban forms of 
various kinds (Borch 2005). In particular, Tarde speaks of a ‘coadaptation 
of imitative fluxes, a cooperation, even in an individual brain, but always a 

Code traffic  75
multitude of agents social and infinitesimal, and their ordinary ideas’ (Tarde 
1902: 270). While there is much to discuss here (for instance, Tarde’s political 
conservatism and anachronism poses analytical problems), the ‘coadapta-
tion’ of imitations between a multitude of infinitesimal agents, beneath and 
around individuals, suggests a way of thinking of what happens in code 
traffic. Understood either as passional compositions or coadapting imitative 
fluxes, we might come closer to a concrete understanding of how the transient 
coagulations and diffusions of code traffic may play out in control structures, 
in architectures, in matters of concern, etc. Examining patterns of imitation 
in code moves the emphasis away from code-shaping-cities to code-as-crowd. 
In the code-crowd, mutually shaping imitative fluxes run between people and 
machines in places.3
To treat code traffic, in terms of Tardean crowd sociology, as a coadapta-
tion of imitative fluxes is not to deny the production and power geographies of 
code. It is not to say that code does not still act on cities, on space, on public 
and private practices. High-profile and much discussed changes taking place in 
computational platforms (mobile devices, virtualisation and containerisation 
in the Cloud, etc.) and in algorithmic processes (machine learning) intricately 
reorganise urban life. What transpires there is rapidly reified in actions, body 
stances, etc. But it might also be worth seeing how code has become a mixing 
process, reconfiguring the architectures, logistics and diffuse circulation of 
individuals in cities. We would, from this standpoint, no longer concentrate 
on following how software emanates from global production centres as hier-
archical or supervisory control structures reorganising cities. Furthermore, 
we would no longer focus on isolated pieces of software, systems or applica-
tions but on the transverse flows that change how code itself moves and takes 
shape. We would apprehend coding itself as something closer to pedestrian 
and vehicle movements in a busy street, in which branching, merging, starting, 
turning and stopping compose transient multiplicities adapted to particular 
problems and situations. That is to say, we might attempt to see code as noisy 
and crowded, propagating aggregates in which juxtapositions, proximities 
and patterns of imitation multiply through each other.
git as code traffic: dangerous coagulation or regularised order?
The study of code traffic poses some empirical problems, but we can glimpse 
some of the traffic in code via increasingly aggregated code repositories. 
A huge number of code repositories (possibly around 50 million) are now 
hosted publicly online at a few code repository sites, such as GitHub.com, 
Bitbucket.com, code.google.com and SourceForge.net. Focusing on one of 
these repository hosting platforms – GitHub.com, allegedly the ‘largest code 
repository on planet’ – might be a way to see traffic in code, and to track 
how coadaptive, infinitesimal fluxes flow.4 Code moves in and out of these 
repositories in many different ways. This movement is not logistically or 
hierarchically controlled. It constitutes a vast, complex reticular movement.

76  Adrian Mackenzie
Much of the flow of source code passes through a single piece of soft-
ware called git. ‘Git’, an English word for a person who acts foolishly or 
annoyingly (often in a crowd), was chosen by Linus Torvalds in 2005 as 
the name for a new concurrent versioning system for source code. In 2002, 
Torvald’s work on GNU/Linux epitomised for many people the emergent 
power of open source collaboration – ‘crowdsourcing’ – on the Internet to 
build things outside the geographies of the software industry. (Even then, as 
Thrift and French observed, Linux was a quite centralised hierarchically and 
industry-supported software project.) In turn, git, a revision control system 
for code, allows incremental changes to code made by many people working 
a common software project to merge with or diverge from each other. Today, 
git is probably the most widely used revision control system for code (fol-
lowed by the interestingly named subversion).
What should we make of the control of revisions to code in terms of code 
traffic? In practice, a whole series of converging and diverging movements 
of cloning, forking, pulling, pushing, requesting, branching and merging 
pass through git. Often used on the command-line, commands such as git 
clone, git commit, git push, git stash, git pull, git branch and 
git merge suggest some of the elementary movements that generate code 
traffic in and out of nodes in git-connected bodies of code. For instance, 
some git commands replicate whole bodies of code, while others simply add, 
remove or alter small bits of code. These scale-variations, I would suggest, 
matter to the flows of imitation that occur. Movements of code can take place 
very incrementally, as small bits of code move around, or on a large scale, 
as whole bodies of code travel between different bits of software. As a con-
temporary site of coding, git merits much more empirical description than 
this, but for the present purposes git instantiates a much more distributed 
and granular cycling and rewriting traffic in code. These broadened and dif-
ferentiated movements, while certainly not unique or unprecedented in the 
history of inscriptive techniques, record-keeping systems or archives, have 
become chained and interlinked in recent coding cultures in ways that gener-
ate the rapid transformations associated with many millions of code projects. 
Different bodies of code clone and branch off from each other, and occa-
sionally, but not necessarily, merge again. The geography of coding would 
become less aligned to individual developers in specific times places and times, 
and more open to a range of different styles of code movement, ranging from 
an uncontrollably fluxing miasma of microscale projects through to vast hier-
archical code architectures (such as the linux kernel). They in turn modify 
the mode of movement of code itself by removing some of the checkpoints, 
barriers and thresholds between production and deployment, between design 
and use.
Torvalds did not reckon with social media. Since late 2007, GitHub has 
provided a hosting platform for many git repositories, and now attracts the 
largest share of code traffic of any code repository. From the perspective of 
the git software, GitHub is just another remote code repository. But given 

Code traffic  77
that many, in fact around 13 million, local git repositories have GitHub.
com as their remote repository, then GitHub becomes a hub for git. The 
network and code traffic that now runs through GitHub is on the scale of a 
medium-size social media platform. That is, with 13 million repositories, 6 
million developers, and around 250 million events in the public event stream 
(at the end of 2014), GitHub itself is a kind of code terminus, whose function-
ing, architecture and machinery symptomatically enunciate contemporary 
code traffic more generally. In relying on git, GitHub.com promotes a radi-
cally decentred patterning of code traffic. But this git-like mobility of code 
stands in tension with GitHub’s own existence as a platform, a platform for 
‘social coding’.
Making Github into a git terminus
Several hundred GitHub staff (‘hubbernauts’) are scattered across a dozen 
or so countries, a somewhat dispersed geography for a relatively specialised 
software company that started in 2007 in San Francisco. GitHub work life 
is also putatively non-hierarchical, with no management hierarchy, only a 
git-like structure of fluid teams working on projects.5 In principle, GitHub 
itself therefore makes itself into something like a terminus for code traffic, 
and is, itself, constructed and maintained via just such traffic. The geography 
of work on GitHub is still very much centred in San Francisco (followed 
by Portland, Chicago, Seattle, Boulder, etc.), despite claims of decentralisa-
tion.6 As Thrift and French (2002) argued, geographical localities still matter 
greatly to code. But this largely localised traffic in and around GitHub is 
perhaps less important than the kind of movement of code traffic it seeks 
to operationalise. The hubness or centrality of GitHub is something to be 
produced or made via a combination of geography, rules of conduct and new 
forms of order flowing through code.
If GitHub itself has been produced using git, does it epitomise the kind 
of code traffic I am attributing to git? In some ways it does. If we look at 
the code generated by the staff listed as the GitHub team (233 at the time of 
writing), there is some evidence of their git-like activity as they write the 
code that constructs, augments, reshapes or expands GitHub as a platform. 
Figure 6.1 offers a view of what happens as the several hundred hubbernauts 
work on GitHub as a platform.7 It is important to note that only some of 
the GitHub code appears here. The anchoring repository github/github, 
the repository that contains the code for whatever GitHub becomes, remains 
private.
The events shown in Figure 6.1 roughly summarise some of the code traf-
fic associated with GitHub’s own code during the last few years. We see this 
traffic in the form of events, social coded repackagings of rawer or some-
what more elementary git movements. The mix of different event types still, 
however, suggests something of the git flow of code. While PushEvents 
embody code writing and ForkEvents imply copying (and hence imitation), 

78 Adrian Mackenzie
many other events, including IssueCommentEvents, PullRequestEvents, 
IssueEvents and WatchEvents, point to diff erent kinds of traffi  c in code. In 
some ways, the variety of event categories shown in the fi gure already high-
lights some of the analytical instabilities in tracking code traffi  c. The events 
mix git-related practices, such as pushing or forking, with GitHub-specifi c 
devices such as pull-request or follow that seek to socialise or ‘hubify’ the 
movements of code. ‘Social’ events outweigh technical events, and disentan-
gling what belongs to git from what GitHub has added becomes diffi  cult 
(although not impossible since GitHub must preserve all git movements 
even as it recodes them as ‘social’). GitHub as a terminus for code traffi  c 
rechannels and reshapes much of the traffi  c that passes through it. To the 
ongoing capillary fl ow of code it adds all the social media-style baggage of 
followers and watchers, comments, liking and tagging. This socialisation of 
code traffi  c, as we see next, generates its own kinds of traffi  c.
GitHub as collective meta-git
How would a social media platform aff ect the traffi  c between beings or 
the cycling–rewriting practices of coding? Hubbernauts such as defunkt, 
mojombo or technoweenie have thousands of followers and hundreds 
of repos (i.e., repositories) to their names. While the GitHub team has partici-
pated in some 17,000 public repositories in some way (including just watching), 
they work much more heavily on several hundred of these (see Figure 6.2).
The top repositories display some important features of GitHub as a plat-
form seeking to social reorganise the fl ow of code traffi  c. Many of these reposi-
tories relate to the building out of GitHub as a massive git instance, a kind of 
meta-git. It is hardly surprising that hubbernauts contribute to the git pro-
ject itself or reimplementations of git such as libgit2,  objective-git, 
rugged, hub (a ‘wrapper’ for git) or many-branch-repo. All of these 
Figure 6.1  Event counts for the GitHub team
WatchEvent
ReleaseEvent
PushEvent
PullRequestReviewCommentEvent 
PullRequestEvent 
PublicEvent 
MemberEvent 
IssuesEvent 
IssueCommentEvent 
GollumEvent 
GistEvent 
ForkEvent 
ForkApplyEvent 
FollowEvent 
Download Event 
DeleteEvent 
CreateEvent 
CommitCommentEvent
0 
20000 
40000 
60000 
80000 
100000 
120000

Figure 6.2 Repositories worked on by the GitHub team

80  Adrian Mackenzie
projects are imitations, reimplementations or variations on git. Hubbernauts 
also make contributions to repositories that augment or build out GitHub, 
ranging from documentation websites, such as https://developer.github.com 
or https://training.github.com, websites that promote or showcase GitHub 
(https://government.github.com/) or its features (24pullrequests), 
repositories for testing GitHub (hellogitworld), repositories that act as 
question-and-answer sites about GitHub (feedback), repositories that con-
tain code for accessing the GitHub APIs (http://octokit.net) or link GitHub 
with other Web services (github-services) or other code development 
platforms (git-tfs).
Certain elements of the platform generate more code traffic than others. 
For instance, libgit2 attracts a large number of imitative events (cloning 
or forking) because the git functionality of committing, branching, merg-
ing, forking, cloning, etc., underpins nearly all of the other flows of imitation 
associated with the growth of 13.2 million repositories and several hundred 
million events. Typically of such entities, libgit2 migrates throughout the 
software development ecosystem so that ‘bindings’ to libgit2 have been 
made in almost any programming language imaginable, from Delphi to Lua, 
as well as to database back-ends such as MySQL, redis, memcache or the 
ubiquitous sqlite.
Hubbernaut code traffic heavily configures the practices of writing, copy-
ing, viewing and packaging code at various levels, and in disparate facets. 
Heavily trafficked repositories, such as cloud9, dotfiles, gitignore, 
vimmode, rbenv, ace and atom, figure prominently, and attest to a con-
stant retooling and reconfiguring of coding at the level of hand and eye 
movements. Arranging packages and libraries of code so that they are ready 
to hand is another major activity. The most active repository, homebrew, 
manages and updates software packages for MacOS computers, popular 
with coders. There are also a number of repositories that concern how people 
sit down and keep coding while writing code for GitHub. Play is a music 
server: ‘We have employees all over the world, but Play lets us all listen to 
the same music as if we were all in the office together. This has actually made 
a big impact on our culture,’ (https://github.com/github/play). Similarly, 
Hubot and Hubot-scripts are part of a software robot system that the 
GitHub team use extensively to maintain the GitHub platform, run the many 
online chatrooms they use as they work with each other, continuously deploy 
the changes they make on the master branch of github/github onto their 
production servers (the servers that actually run the code that makes up 
GitHub) and send updates to various social media platforms. One Hubot 
runs the whole of GitHub. Finally, many repositories listed here concern the 
infrastructure of GitHub as a software platform. Some are language-specific 
environments heavily used at GitHub, such as rubinius, an implementa-
tion of the Ruby programming language. Some, such as rails, are libraries 
that provide much of the dynamic infrastructure that holds GitHub as a col-
lection of servers and databases together as a platform. Other repositories, 

Code traffic  81
such as choosealicence or linguist, implement GitHub features con-
cerned with licensing or tagging repositories by programming language. Since 
GitHub repositories can also function as webpages, blogs or wikis, other 
repositories, such as jekyll and gollum, provide code for that. Other 
heavily used repositories, such as bootstrap, zepto and twui, provide 
elements of the graphic layout, colours, styles, fonts and icons that comprise 
the visual appearance and interactive features of GitHub pages (and I return 
to this kind of software later).
The fabric of GitHub as a platform is constructed and connected along 
many edges. It folds in many different elements on various scales, rang-
ing from almost microscopically perceptual configurations, such as editor 
settings, through to large infrastructural developments, such as elastic-
search. GitHub comprises programming language implementations, server 
infrastructures, deployment mechanisms, Web-frontend frameworks, various 
social media formats (wiki, blog), Javascript page and graphic elements, as 
well as the code versioning system of git, robots that automate chatrooms 
and servers that streams music to developers at different places and times. 
All of these together recursively construct the platform, with varying degrees 
of coherence and visibility, ranging from the vital github/github reposi-
tory through to the many public-facing repositories that hubbernauts either 
release to the world or participate in publicly. The broader point here is that 
code traffic in and around GitHub is itself constantly transformed, modified 
and intensified by the flows of imitation that hubbernauts themselves semi-
consciously generate as they assemble the platform. Music, robots, editors, 
libraries, databases and webpages intersect with each other as the small-
crowd teams of GitHub work and, in the object of their mimetic immersion, 
with GitHub itself. The flow of elements comprising GitHub is, I suggest, 
typical of the ways in which code traffic concatenates things today. The 
mixing of different things in code traffic generates the forms, the changes in 
scale, the new modes of distribution, partitioning or localisations associated 
with contemporary life. The platform GitHub, in this case, itself a platform 
in principle oriented to the multiplication of code traffic, is a deeply passional 
assemblage, not a rationally ordered technology.
The panoply of code repositories frequented by the GitHub staff suggests 
something more general about the flow of code traffic. The recursive work of 
hubbernauts on GitHub can be seen as projected over the three urban-code 
geographies described by Thrift and French. We can now see that the urban 
centring of software writing still largely applies, but subject to some signifi-
cant transformations in how it relates to such settings. The git version con-
trol processes open centres to more distributed and mutable collectives. The 
widely scattered geography of the GitHub team suggests something of this. 
The second geography of power and control (conduct of conduct) no doubt 
runs through much of what hubbernauts make (and here we could think, for 
instance, of the social coding of git traffic as events, or farther afield, the 
many DMCA takedown notices posted at https://github.com/github/dmca, 

82  Adrian Mackenzie
or the recent denial-of-service attacks on GitHub attributed to the Chinese 
government, or the repo choosealicence, which seeks to regulate flows 
of code according to legal licence). This power geography, however, does not 
completely supplant the geography of indeterminacy or the ‘new forms of 
order’ that GitHub itself as an assemblage exemplifies, even as it builds out 
the GitHub platform as a hub for widely dispersed and somewhat vagabond 
flows of code.
Github as convolutional process
The ‘social coding’ apparatus that is the visible face of GitHub – watchers, 
followers, stars, showcases, search facilities, along with their attempts to 
render code flow more like public spaces (see the ‘showcases’ at http://github.
com/explore for examples of this public-making) – does not completely corral 
or control the imitative fluxes on GitHub. The primary git fluxes are more 
networked than the social media apparatus that GitHub assembles because 
they are not dependent on the formats and facades supplied by the GitHub 
platform, but instead mix people and things together. In other words, these 
convolutional fluxes animate the more crowd-like aspects of code traffic, and 
they criss-cross geographies, cities, feeding into and overloading GitHub 
geography in key respects.
How would we characterise something of these relatively pre-social imita-
tive fluxes in the GitHub traffic?8 Some analytical purchase on the convolution 
of people and things in code traffic can be gained by looking at the full names 
of repositories on GitHub. Note that these names are not coded by GitHub. 
Repository names on GitHub are lightly formatted. The first part of a reposi-
tory name refers to a person or organisation (‘mojombo’, ‘wycats’, etc.) and 
the second to the specific code repository (grit, merb-core). Both parts of 
the full repository name are interesting, but the name as a whole points to an 
intersection between groups and people and things, between coders and code. 
The constant variations of these names bear the traces of the complicated 
enmeshing of people and things, between coders and code that looms large 
in code traffic.
For present purposes, however, the second part of the name is more symp-
tomatic since it refers more directly to the code. A simple comparison between 
repositories on GitHub in early 2007 and in 2014 suggests something of the 
tension between the efforts to socially code the fluxes and code traffic more 
generally. Early repositories on GitHub suggest a rather orderly and sensible 
traffic in beings. Table 6.1 (column 1), which shows the first 20 repositories 
on GitHub, dating from 2007–2008, lists repositories created and worked on 
mainly by GitHub hubbernauts themselves and a few others. These are the 
repositories that somewhat recursively host the code from which GitHub 
was being made. In the early days of GitHub, these names are largely com-
prehensible in terms of the GitHub platform itself. Repository names like 
grit, a Ruby-language version of git, git-wiki or merb-core (a Ruby 

Code traffic  83
Table 6.1  20 early and recent repositories on Github.com
2007
2014
mojombo/grit
2m1tsu3/practice
wycats/merb-core
tylerdmace/ledomme
rubinius/rubinius
yehiaelghaly/xssya
mojombo/god
istvan-antal/commandjs
vanpelt/jsawesome
JohnKrigbjorn/ObjectOne
wycats/jspec
chenx/Ci35_1
defunkt/exception_logger
mohsenbezanj/AI_Project
defunkt/ambition
Dineshkarthik/blogengine
labria/restful-authentication
sapanbhuta/Sapari
technoweenie/
restful-authentication
gwoodroof/chat-gwoodroof
technoweenie/attachment_fu
tryuichi/Hello-World
topfunky/bong
prateek0020/NepTravelMate
anotherjesse/s3
discoverfly/discoverfly.
github.io
anotherjesse/taboo
evan-007/ng-wikiful
mojombo/glowstick
sanemat/zipcode-jp
wycats/merb-more
donreamey/PJKiller
macournoyer/thin
discoverfly/discover
jamesgolick/resource_controller
jkkorean/MIUI-KK
defunkt/cache_fu
rtofacks1/ionic-app
bmizerany/sinatra
jkkorean/MIUI-JB
Web-development framework) nearly all relate to various aspects of GitHub 
as a platform under development. Other platforms and concerns are already 
present (sinatra) but they are somewhat marginal to the work of develop-
ing a platform to host git repositories.
A similar list from seven years later in 2014 reveals many complications 
(see column 2 of Table 6.1). The names of coders have become increasingly 
unrecognisable, even allowing for the internationalisation of GitHub use 
that quickly developed between 2007 and 2014. The coder names in GitHub 
become more and more like random patterns of key presses, as if coders 
have become less individual, more crowd-like in their identities. (Indeed, 
thousands of repository and actor names comprise key sequences such as 
qwerty, asdf, poiu, lkjh or 1234, all of which derive from the keyboard 
layouts.) Something similar happens to the repository names. Only a few 
components from the early days are recognisable in type (that is, things 
like a blogengine or footer-fixed-bootstrap, and, as we will soon 
see, the bootstrap Web-development framework is almost a fixation for 
GitHubbers, since it provides the look and feel of GitHub itself). Many 
other git elements of this stream are also recognisable and proliferate widely 
on GitHub: practice, Hello-World, testing and temp repositories 
occur in huge numbers on GitHub (of the order of millions or more). These 
trivial fluxes are like people starting to edge into a crowd, to form part of 

84  Adrian Mackenzie
a mass on the move. Broad swathes of generic imitation surface here too. 
We can also see here the appearance of quite disparate matters of concern: 
game-cho-android and AI_Project may have some similarities, but 
at first appearance they lie quite a long distance apart from each other. It is 
very hard to see any flux of imitation here. Like the many repositories named 
using convenient patterns of keystrokes, these repositories seem almost like 
code-noise. This might support a sense of code traffic as transient and some-
what disorderly multiplicity, but it hardly seems to reflect the coadaptation 
of imitative fluxes that, following crowd sociologists such as Tarde and Park, 
we might see as materialising code in the city.
If we start counting imitative events, things look a little different. For 
instance, in January 2013, around 200,000 repositories were forked (or copied). 
Forking, as suggested previously, is a basic imitative event in git-like prac-
tices. The most-forked repositories have a now familiar look (see Table 6.2). 
This list is reasonably familiar since it has major platforms like linux, 
android and node, as well as a popular test repository on GitHub called 
Spoon-Knife. But even the most-forked repository in this list, bootstrap, 
is not a single or homogeneous imitative flux. Look at what else was forked 
heavily in January 2013 relating to bootstrap, listed in Table 6.3.
While it was copied more often than any other repository in that month, 
the bootstrap repository itself is accompanied by many variational imita-
tions. The total count of bootstrap-related forks during January 2013 is, 
for instance, 3074, almost twice the number of the forks of bootstrap itself 
(1478). Widening the frame slightly, we can see (Figure 6.3) that since 2012, 
bootstrap has been an important imitative flux running through GitHub, 
and has been the most highly ‘starred’ code repository on GitHub for several 
years.
The stackplot of ForkEvents (or their equivalent and underlying git clone 
operations) associated with the twitter/bootstrap repository shows  
a more differentiated flux of imitation. The imitation varies over time, as we 
Table 6.2  Most-forked repositories on GitHub in January 2013
Forks
Repository
1478
bootstrap
1276
Spoon-Knife
763
dotfiles
504
rails
426
html5-boilerplate
410
jquery
375
homebrew
345
linux
343
android
291
phonegap-plugins
280
node

Code traffic  85
Table 6.3  Most-forked bootstrap-related repositories during January 2013
Forks
Repository
1478
bootstrap
109
bootstrap-datepicker
84
jekyll-bootstrap
60
bootstrap-wysihtml5
54
bootstrap-tour
48
Twitter-bootstrap-rails
48
bootstrap-sass
46
bootstrap-datetimepicker
43
jquery-ui-bootstrap
42
bootstrap-modal
40
wordpress-bootstrap
36
bootstrap-daterangepicker
31
sass-Twitter-bootstrap
31
Bootstrap-Image-Gallery
26
rails3-bootstrap-devise-cancan
26
bootstrapwp-Twitter-Bootstrap-for-
WordPress
24
metro-bootstrap
24
bootstrap-timepicker
23
bootstrap-toggle-buttons
23
MopaBootstrapBundle
19
twitter.bootstrap.mvc
16
CodeIgniter-Bootstrap
would expect, but the patterns of imitation are heavily interconnected with 
each other through repositories that juxtapose or merge different repositories 
with each other. The several thousand bootstrap-related repositories are 
much more diverse than bootstrap itself. They combine variously with 
Figure 6.3  Bootstrap repositories with more than 100 forks since 2012
bootstrap repositories with more than 100 forks since 2012
600
400
200
o
-200
-400
-600
800
-800
May 2012 
Aug 2012 
Nov 2012 
Feb 2013 
May 2013 
Aug 2013 
Nov 2013 
Feb 2014 
May 2014

86  Adrian Mackenzie
mobile devices (Android, iOS), with Web browser software (IE6), with vari-
ous Web-development infrastructures (django, rails, ASP, PHP), with media 
platforms (WordPress, Google, CodeIgniter) and server management sys-
tems (sinatra). They respond to events in the main bootstrap repository, 
but also have a life apart from that repository that relates to other platforms 
and other software projects. Here, something like the coadaptation of imita-
tive flux begins to come into view. Each of the devices, platforms or systems 
in these variations has its own code traffic, its own crowds of coders and code, 
that begin to mix here with bootstrap. In this copying, varying, merging 
and diverging, there is more than simple imitation, but encounters between 
different things taking shape in aggregate form. This convolutional change 
is not captured or controlled by the GitHub platform and its social coding 
devices. It is perhaps true, however, that GitHub, for almost the first time, 
allows these collective dispositions, expressed in confused and transient plu-
ralities, to be tabulated.
Conclusion
Code deeply shapes infrastructures, devices, services, protocols and many 
mundane capillary orderings in cities. Or does it? Might not code itself be pat-
terned by the urban, by dynamics and transients, by diagrams and vectors that 
code itself expresses and enunciates without fully controlling? I have been sug-
gesting that any response to such questions has to grapple with the changing 
character of code traffic. That traffic has many different facets, some of which 
can be architecturally reorganised and enclosed, others of which remain subtly 
diffuse and imprecise. The simple contrast between git traffic and its socially 
coded concentration on GitHub is a useful guiding thread.
There are many other dynamics on GitHub that we might analyse in terms 
of coadaptation of imitative fluxes. The very crude tracking of imitation 
based on forking and repository names could be refined in various ways. 
We could ask, for instance, what are the most-forked repositories, and how 
do changes in copying practices help us think about different directions of 
movement of code and coders. I have mentioned the profusion of dotfile 
repositories in the last few years. These repositories can be analysed in terms 
of micro-gestural and micro-perceptual differentiations at work in the writing 
of code. Choices of colour, font size, line separation, shortcuts for keystroke 
commands and the multiplicity of configurations for code development could 
be used to develop a much richer account of how people move through code, 
almost like a ‘gait analysis’ for code. Similarly, the metrics of the name space 
could, at a very different end of infrastructural dimensioning of code help us 
see how, for instance, the contemporary rescaling of computational infra-
structures through ‘Cloud’ computing or virtualisation ripple across code-
as-crowd. In all of these settings, the mergers, coalescences, branching and 
replication of bodies of code suggest that there is no single operational level 
at which code governs cities.

Code traffic  87
Regardless of these possible directions of analysis, the broader point here 
is that software today is less like a machine, a system or even an assemblage, 
and more like a crowd. That is, it has a fluxing, flowing and somewhat disor-
dered existence that generates powerful flashes and movements, that creates 
atmospherics and densely woven patches of order, but remains unstable and 
dynamic.
Notes
1	 Thrift and French’s empirical response to their own question begins with the Y2K 
bug, and the long lists of software potentially affected by it: keypad locks, pagers, 
solar panels, smoke detectors, camcorders, video cassette recorders, elevators. 
Although these lists now look dated, when a similar listing would include many 
things that did not exist in 2002, Thrift and French’s (2002) description of the effect 
of software development on urban space remains recognisable: ‘We will exist in a 
broadband world in which the Internet will be a permanently available “Cloud” 
of information able to be called up through a number of appliances scattered 
through the environment. These appliances will be something more than portals 
for information. Rather, like many other devices which will not have Internet 
connections, they will be “practice-aware”’ (315) and ‘will, through a process of 
cultural absorption into practices, sink down from the representational into the 
non-representational world, so becoming a part of a taken-for-granted set of pas-
sions and skills’ (318). The fact that these developments more than a decade later 
are still very much in train suggests that there is something quite predictable about 
the development of software and coding in organising urban life and spaces.
2	 Writing in 2014, Thrift again addressed coded cities: ‘Take just the case of coded 
cities understood as a whole’ (Thrift 2014: 13), and then proceeded to offer a 
sixfold topography of the code city – as externalisation of capitalist power, as pre-
scribed matter of concern, as care-laden responses to the demand for resilience, as 
projected-retrojected dream life, as navigational geometry and as materialised visu-
alisation. He finally suggested that something links this diversity: the possibility for 
‘these entities to learn […] to transform themselves’. Echoing the 2002 discussion of 
the geography of indeterminacy, he attributed this possibility to ‘emergent tenden-
cies arising out of complexity’ or ‘through simple happenstance which places them 
in unexpected situations which require adaptation’ (13). The sixfold evocation of 
the coded city somewhat complicates the geographies of software in the city, but it 
reiterates the transformative capacity of indeterminacy. The 2002 formulations on 
indeterminacy and ‘traffic between beings’ grow into forms of novel encounter in 
‘unexpected situations’. (While urban sociology has long understood cities in terms 
of encounters between strangers, Thrift’s account shifts the emphasis to unexpected 
encounters between other beings.) Coded cities’ ‘capacity to learn’ transpires, 
according to this account, in elementary forms of movement understood as code 
traffic. If this is the case, the ‘authoring’, the ‘learning’ and the transformations 
should not only be traceable in code, but coding itself matters greatly as a process 
where externalisations, matters of concern, geometries, projections, visualisations, 
resilience-care, etc., come together and affect each other. The volume and composi-
tion of the traffic of coding itself as a cycling and recycling might be an important 
trace of more general transformations.
3	 This, I should note, is a departure from most crowd theory, crowd psychology and 
crowd sociology. In most crowd theory, things hardly figure at all. As I will sketch, 
points of identification occur between systems, platforms, protocols and patterns 
just as much as between individuals or groups.

88  Adrian Mackenzie
4	 The GitHub team takes a strong interest in bootstrap, a set of components such 
as buttons, forms, progress bars, tables, typographic elements and colour themes 
for Web front end development. These visual elements figure heavily in the visual 
appearance of GitHub as a social media platform; hence, bootstrap already matters 
to the social coding of code that GitHub itself does.
5	 The only problem with this is that the GitHub co-founder, Tom Preston-Werner 
(aka mojombo, id = ‘1’ in the GitHub user list – in other words, the first hubber-
naut ever) has recently had to step down as CEO after much publicised allegations 
of sexist and discriminatory language and behaviour in the workplace (Newman 
2014). I largely leave the workplace dynamics of GitHub aside here, but they are 
symptomatic.
6	 This geography refers to the ‘hubbernauts’ themselves, not to GitHub users, who 
are much more dispersed.
7	 We can see some of what the GitHub team has been doing in GitHub repositories 
by running queries against the GitHub API (application programmer interface) or 
using the archived datastream of GitHub activity at GithubArchive.org. All of the 
numerical data in this paper result from queries run against the GithubArchive.org 
record of GitHub traffic. In the case of Figure 6.1, the query process went: find all 
the public repositories on which the named ‘actor’ works, and count the different 
actions they perform on those repositories. If we run this query for all hubbernauts 
(233 at the time of writing), as well as mojombo, something of the network of work 
done on GitHub itself begins to appear. I am assuming that the coding of GitHub 
can be seen in git traffic.
8	 Tracking imitative fluxes means engaging with things that inherently lack any 
full formatting or clear outline. I focus here on the names of repositories and the 
names of actors. I have argued elsewhere that naming practices and code name 
spaces offer a rich resource for thinking about recursive and imitative processes in 
software culture (Mackenzie 2014).
References
Borch, C. (2005) ‘Urban imitations: Tarde’s sociology revisited’, Theory Culture & 
Society 22(3), 81–100.
Guattari, F. and Deleuze, G. (1988) A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia, London: Athlone.
Horvath, R.J. (1974) ‘Machine Space’, Geographical Review, 64(2): 167–88.
Mackenzie, A. (2014) ‘useR!: aggression, alterity and unbound affects in statisti-
cal programming’, in O. Goriunova (ed.) Fun and Software: Exploring Pleasure, 
Paradox and Pain in Computing, New York: Bloomsbury Academic.
Newman, L.H. (2014) ‘The results of GitHub’s harassment investigation are 
vague’, Slate, 21 April 2014, available from http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_
tense/2014/04/21/github_ceo_tom_preston_werner_is_cleared_but_still_resigns_
over_harassment.html [accessed 24 August 2015].
Tarde, G. (1902) Psychologie Économique, Paris: F. Alcan.
Thrift, N. (2014) ‘The “sentient” city and what it may portend’, Big Data and Society, 
1(1): 1–21.
Thrift, N. and French, S. (2002) ‘The automatic production of space’, Transactions of 
the Institute of British Geographers, 27(3): 309–35.

Part II
Locative social media and 
mobile computing

This page intentionally left blank

7	
Digital social interactions in the city
Reflecting on location-based social 
networks
Luigina Ciolfi and Gabriela Avram
Introduction
Digital interactions are increasingly interwoven with spaces and places 
in urban settings, with such interactions mediated by and in turn shaping 
the technologies that facilitate them. In this chapter, we focus on under-
standing these interactions using location-based social media (particularly 
Foursquare) as a way to reflect on the technological support of human activi-
ties, and on the relationship between code, digital agency, and the physi-
cal world. Our perspective is that of human-centred computing, particularly 
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work – a multidisciplinary field studying 
collaborative practices in socio-technical systems, with a focus on unearth-
ing and detailing the mediational role of technology in human cooperation, 
coordination and social interaction.
Whether purposely built for mobile devices and with a focus on location 
(e.g., Foursquare; Swarm), or simply featuring in other platforms that rely on 
location data such as Facebook Places or Twitter, various LBSNs increasingly 
mediate social and interpersonal interactions in urban settings. The essential 
technological infrastructure enabling such interaction is the possibility of link-
ing data to particular places by means of mobile devices capable of detecting 
their own location through GPS or other mechanisms. Within different apps, 
location-based social media user activity takes different forms: from ‘checking 
in’ (e.g., users register their presence at a venue), to linking location data to 
digital content for sharing, to gameplay associated with occupying a location 
and performing certain activities at that site. The means of socially sharing 
these activities with contacts and other users is also constrained by the plat-
form, for example a photograph with location information, or presence at a 
location with associated content, or a map of movements and check-ins.
Such practices become coded into the platform back-end system, capturing 
both the log and content of social interactions, as well as the location to which 
they relate. Therefore, a digital ‘cloud’ of social interactions becomes embed-
ded into the physical reality of a city, of its neighbourhoods, public places, 
cafés, transportation hubs and any other locations identified by social media 
users (by user-initiated check-ins or by the content that is generated, such as 

92  Luigina Ciolfi and Gabriela Avram
photographs or textual recommendations and tips), and by the tools they use 
(for example, through automatic geotagging). Conversely, the code deter-
mining a platform’s interaction and functionality is continuously changed 
to reflect user activities and feedback, and to implement design decisions on 
how LBSN services work.
Amongst others, two sets of issues with respect to LBSNs are emerging 
that we wish to investigate further. First, how such localised interactions in 
physical spaces are triggering and feeding back into the software: how are 
various location-based social media platforms framing people’s perceptions 
and identifications of locations? How is code both facilitating and scaffolding 
a set of social interactions relating to various spatial configurations in physi-
cal spaces? Second, how such a cloud of interactions is rematerialised in the 
physical world: how are physical spaces and places affected by their digital 
counterparts and by people’s activities on LBSNs? There are already occur-
rences of rematerialisation of digital presence and interactions in the physical 
world: for example, venue owners displaying badges on their premises that 
inform customers of their online presence (e.g., TripAdvisor, Booking.com). 
Could LBSN interactions in relation to a venue be made somehow more 
perceivable or tangible in the physical world by the way in which certain envi-
ronments are designed? Could the presence and interactions that are encoded 
in LBSN software shape more distinctively the physicality and materiality of 
places? For example, should new approaches to urban planning and environ-
mental design become concerned with accommodating and facilitating LBSN 
interactions, as they do so for in-presence, analogue ones?
In the following sections we define and discuss these issues concerning 
LBSN, both drawing from and consolidating the findings of human-centred 
computing literature on physical or digital interactions using location-based 
social media, and from empirical studies of LBSN use that we have con-
ducted in two cities.
Location-based social media: identifying interactions
Since the introduction of LBSN commercial platforms in the mid-2000s, a 
number of studies have been conducted within human-centred and social 
computing to examine how they are being used by various groups of users 
(Eagle and Pentland 2005; Barkhuus et al. 2008). One of the main foci of such 
work has been Foursquare: a mobile app launched in 2009 and now with over 
50 million registered users worldwide, approximately 50% of whom are based 
within the USA.1
While the core interaction offered by the service remains that of linking 
digital activities to a particular place or commercial venue, the Foursquare 
interface, services and how it operates have changed significantly since its 
public launch. Users register their presence at a venue by “checking in”. 
Photographs can also be uploaded when checking in, and comments and tips 
added to a venue. Initially, Foursquare incorporated a game-like element, 

Digital social interactions in the city  93
where users would gain points whenever they checked in and could become 
‘mayor’ of a certain place by checking in repeatedly over time, and could also 
gain ‘badges’ by achieving a certain number of check-ins or by completing 
particular tasks (e.g., checking in at movie screenings). Users’ check-in per-
formances would be compared with those of their contacts, although users 
could compete for a mayorship against any other Foursquare user. Both 
badges and point scoring features were partly phased out in 2014 as part of 
a major redevelopment of the platform. The remaining supported activities 
were split into two separate apps, a redesigned Foursquare and a new app 
called Swarm. Foursquare now functions as a venue-finding and recommen-
dation app only – it helps users locate places of interest near them in various 
categories (food, shopping, etc.), lets them ‘like’ a place thus marking it as a 
favourite, and read and add tips and recommendations about a place. The 
platform can also be used by owners of registered businesses for promotions 
and marketing. Conversely, all the interactions relating to broadcasting one’s 
location to contacts and gaining recognition for doing so are now supported 
by Swarm, an app where users interact only with direct contacts, gaining 
certain rewards for repeated check-ins. Swarm supports some new activities, 
such as planning outings to particular venues involving contacts, and profile 
personalisation through digital ‘stickers’ that can be freely added. On Swarm 
it is not possible for users to see who else is checked in at a venue, unless it is 
one of their contacts. Activity on both Foursquare and Swarm can also be 
shared on other social networks.
While usage of Foursquare and Swarm is yet to be studied in depth as we 
write, researchers have explored the previous incarnations of the app for a 
number of years. Such studies have extended earlier work examining practices 
and motivations around social location sharing (Barkhuus et al. 2008), and 
have focused on various aspects of Foursquare, notably which interactions 
people perform on the app, how users manage their visibility, reputation and 
privacy, and how they explore physical spaces through the app.
In their empirical study of checking in behaviour, Lindquist et al. (2011) 
identified a set of motivations as to why people decide not only to interact 
with the app at a venue (e.g., finding the venue on Foursquare, reading con-
tent about it), but also to broadcast their presence to followers. People check 
in not only for social motivations, but also for personal ones, such as keeping 
an account of their own movements, of the places they visit and how often. 
However, the social motivations are more frequent and more articulate. One 
set relates to communication and coordination with friends and family: the 
desire to share personal information at a distance with contacts, and in return 
to see where friends have been. Often, Foursquare is used as a way to coor-
dinate meetings and other activities with friends. Another set of motivations 
relates to the wider Foursquare community: people enjoy discovering new 
people frequenting similar venues to themselves, and reading their recom-
mendations. In some cases people check in at a venue just before they leave 
for safety reasons – leaving a ‘false trail’ to avoid potential stalkers.

94  Luigina Ciolfi and Gabriela Avram
As for deciding which places to check in at, people make distinctions 
between routine and non-routine places: some decide not to check in at 
routine places because they are seen as uninteresting, and instead check in 
at places that are seen as special or exciting (e.g., large events, entertainment 
venues). Others check in at routine places either to gain Foursquare points 
or because they were bored and checked in for something to do. Other con-
siderations are made by users when deciding to check in at private places, 
such as a private residence or their own homes: there are privacy concerns 
regarding revealing such locations, and people often refrain from checking 
in at somebody’s home in order to keep its location private. Checking in at 
one’s own home is often done as a way to tell friends that one is home safely, 
or is available for calls or visits. Interestingly, privacy concerns also come 
into play when deciding not to check in at certain public venues, such as 
at the doctor’s, the bank, etc. Moreover, impression management concerns 
emerge in these decisions as well, for example, deciding not to check in at 
a fast food restaurant because it might create a bad impression for others 
(Lindquist et al. 2011).
Cramer et al. (2011) further explored aspects of privacy and self-presen-
tation focusing on the performative effects of checking in. They identified 
instances of purpose-driven (Tang et al. 2010) motivations (similar to those 
detailed in Scellato et al. 2011), such as obtaining discounts, discovering new 
places, gaming (gaining mayorships), as personal bookmarks, and for amuse-
ment when bored. Instances of social-driven (Tang et al. 2010) check-ins were 
motivated by networking with friends or recommending a venue, but also by 
wanting to learn about the people frequenting a venue who were unknown to 
them otherwise.
However, Cramer et al. (2011) observe how LBSN activity goes beyond the 
two categories of purpose-driven and social-driven. Their data shows instances 
driven by self-presentation, lifestyle choices and identity. Self-presentation 
requires a finer understanding of the audience that a check-in will be shared 
with. Furthermore, Cramer et al. examine the perspective of the check-ins 
audience: people saw check-ins from friends as a way to obtain recommenda-
tions on things to do and places to visit, or as a motivation to attend an event 
or place. They were also annoyed by friends who checked in too frequently 
(thus sending repeated notifications) or without a clear motivation. Cramer 
et al. (2011) found that motivations can change for every instance of checking 
in (and for each venue), and that certain motivations can sometimes conflict 
with others, for example, wanting to check in for the purpose of gaining 
gaming points might contrast with not wanting to annoy others with too 
many notifications.
Guha and Birnholtz (2013) have further explored the ways people think 
about location sharing and how impressions are formed and managed. They 
identify a blurring between public and private spheres of life when sharing a 
location and viewing a check-in: for example, one’s presence at certain places 
is kept private (e.g., the gym) although such places are, strictly speaking, 

Digital social interactions in the city  95
public. Conversely, certain places are private (e.g., a friend’s home); however, 
people decide to check in there and to reveal their location (e.g., when there is 
a party going on). Such decisions are usually made depending on how visible 
the user thinks the check-in will be: people are careful about how certain con-
tacts might perceive their behaviour, and about how certain check-ins might 
create tensions within their network. An example of this is checking in to a 
restaurant to claim a discount, but at the same time broadcasting being out 
to the social circle at a time when it could be inappropriate. Tensions might 
also arise when sharing one’s location could be perceived in different ways by 
different contacts (e.g. a friend vs a parent).
Guha and Birnholtz (2013) have also detailed certain tricks that people 
employ when sharing their locations, such as checking in at locations where 
they are not in order to make a better impression. They call one phenom-
enon ‘check-in transience’, linked to the fact that Foursquare’s newsfeed to 
users only displays the latest location where their contacts have checked in. 
People who do not want their ‘real’ last check-in displayed for too long on 
their contacts’ newsfeed will check in somewhere else immediately so that 
the friends will see that latter check-in. Participants in this study admitted 
to making judgements on people they did not know well in real life based on 
their check-ins (e.g., which café they visited, etc.), and therefore were very 
sensitive about how they presented themselves to and were perceived by their 
contacts.
All these studies have highlighted the many privacy concerns surrounding 
LBSN interactions. Users tend to be aware of them, particularly regarding 
residential privacy (Jin et al. 2012), and decide to risk exposure only in par-
ticular circumstances. Foursquare public data has also been used for other 
developments, for example recommendation systems, such as algorithms for 
predicting which tips attract more attention on Foursquare and for sup-
porting the creation of marketing strategies on LBSNs (Vasconcelos et al. 
2014), and models combining cellular data and LBSN activity to infer types 
of activities in neighbourhoods and urban centres and to aid urban planning 
and management (Noulas et al. 2013).
The findings of this small but in-depth set of studies reveal much about 
people’s use of LBSN and their motivations and strategies. In relation to 
the issues we focus on in the remainder of this chapter, we have already 
seen instances of the complex relationship between the system (its code and 
other components, such as the database logging user-generated content) and 
people’s interactions, and how the two shape one another. One example of 
this is users being careful about the last location they check in at because the 
software will keep displaying it until a new one is shared. However, much 
remains to be studied. The playful and game-like aspects of LBSNs and 
their connection to real-world spaces are yet unexplored, although other 
location-based social gaming practices have been studied in depth (O’Hara 
2008). More crucial to overcome, in our opinion, is the limited attention paid 
to the way in which LBSNs contribute to the way places are made, lived and 

96  Luigina Ciolfi and Gabriela Avram
reconfigured. While other technological platforms have been investigated in 
terms of how they mediate understanding of and attachment to real-world 
environments (Farnham et al. 2009; Scellato et al. 2011), existing human-
centred computing work on LBSNs focuses mainly on individual practices, 
often without focusing on the actual locales in relation to which they occur.
It is important to pay attention to the way venues, neighbourhoods and 
cities are lived in and perceived by virtue of the cloud of digital interac-
tions and data that are tied to them: do LBSN activities impact on place 
attachment? Or on the way an area is discovered, explored and navigated? 
We have addressed some of these issues in two small-scale studies of LBSN 
interactions via Foursquare in Limerick and Sheffield. We now describe our 
­empirical explorations and the main findings arising from them.
Studying Foursquare use in two cities
The existing studies of Foursquare discussed in the previous section employed 
a methodology consisting of surveys and interviews. For our study, we have 
combined a series of interviews with online observations of interactions on 
Foursquare. The most extensive part of our study (comprising online obser-
vations and interviews) has been focused on Limerick, a regional city in the 
midwest of Ireland. A second part of the study consists of online observations 
only, and focused on Sheffield, a regional city in South Yorkshire (UK).
We conducted online observations of 15 Limerick venues – every month 
since October 2012 – and of ten Sheffield venues every month since December 
2012. We chose similar venues for observation in both cities to compare online 
activity at locations holding similar purposes. The venues included: public 
markets, museums, train and bus stations, public parks, university buildings, 
cafés, shopping malls, pubs and restaurants, cinemas, theatres and sporting 
venues. The observations consisted of monitoring mayorships and check-ins 
and the addition of content (photos, tips, etc.) for each venue. These data 
were documented through notes and screenshots. The semi-structured inter-
views of the Limerick Foursquare users were conducted between October 
2012 and May 2013 and involved 12 local participants. We combined the 
interviews with online observation of the accounts of the participants for 
2-week periods.
In their check-ins, our participants expressed support for a new business, 
shared Wi-Fi access details at venues and provided information on hidden 
gems in the city. Check-ins were also used to signal personal availability (‘I 
am at work’, ‘I am in town’, ‘I am out of town’). People checked in at certain 
venues for one-off or particularly significant happenings (performances, con-
ferences, sport events), similarly to what has been observed in previous work. 
However, many users we observed checked in regularly at a familiar place, 
where the purpose of checking in was not only to broadcast an exceptional 
or exciting occurrence (e.g., an unexpected meeting), but also to describe the 
day’s mood or ongoing activities.

Digital social interactions in the city  97
Motivations for using Foursquare that emerged echo to a large extent the 
findings from previous studies: there are personal motivations as well as social 
motivations underlying the decision to check in and provide content. As the 
respondents to our interviews included business people in the 40–60-year-old 
bracket (whereas the participants in previous studies were mostly younger 
university students), we saw motivations connected to professional activi-
ties, not only to socialisation and lifestyle. For example, people checked in 
to endorse a venue for business meetings. Another example is checking in at 
home to signal one’s unavailability for work matters. An additional motiva-
tion that we noted is civic activism: people check in to broadcast that they are 
doing something good for their city, encouraging others to join. In answer 
to our interview questions, participants thus explained their motivations to 
check in: ‘going to places so that I feel I own them’; ‘when I do check in – I spot 
people that I know’; ‘tell someone I’m up, tell someone I’m moving’.
Our online observations gave us insights on how spaces and places become 
represented on LBSNs in a way that previous work had not highlighted. 
Activities associated with venues can be surprising, or provide insights that 
are not obvious by looking at the venue description or visiting that physi-
cal location. For example, in Limerick, the Stella Ballroom is classified on 
Foursquare as a historic site and not simply as an entertainment venue (it is 
now used as a bingo hall), and many check-ins refer to the exhibition held 
there on the history of Limerick ballrooms. In Sheffield, many check-ins and 
tips at the train station refer to socialising, as one of Sheffield’s most popular 
pubs is located there and many people check in at the station, rather than at 
the pub venue (Figure 7.1).
Popular venues attract many check-ins and user-generated content. Their 
representation on Foursquare depicts their busy atmosphere: the Milk Market 
in Limerick is a hub of LBSN activity on Saturdays (the day the full market 
is held), where people check in as it is ‘the place to be’ and where friends also 
tend to converge. In this case, checking in is also a way to see if other friends 
have arrived. Foursquare activity at this location peaks at weekends, thus 
the venue’s cloud of interactions fluctuates significantly on different days. 
A similar example in Sheffield, albeit within a different temporal frame, is 
the Crucible Theatre: while attracting a steady flow of LBSN interactions 
throughout the year by theatre enthusiasts, it becomes a veritable hub during 
April when the World Snooker Championship is held there. Indeed, the 
majority of tips left by users are updated during that period and refer to the 
tournament, rather than to the regular theatrical season (Figure 7.2).
Foursquare venues used to collect a trail of banter and ‘private’ messages 
between people in the form of a venue tip, for example, between regular 
frequenters battling for a mayorship. In this case, the tips were used not 
to provide information for the larger community, but to foster the connec-
tion between particular users (Figure 7.3). The gaming aspect also gave rise 
to a proliferation of Foursquare venues: users could create new venues – 
increasing venue granularity in places where sublocations can be identified 

98  Luigina Ciolfi and Gabriela Avram
Figure 7.1  Tips for Sheffield train station
Source:  Foursquare http://4sq.com/574TDX, 25 April 2014
Figure 7.2  Tips for the Crucible Theatre, Sheffield
Source:  Foursquare http://4sq.com/aw3G01, 25 April 2014

Digital social interactions in the city  99
(for example, a platform at the train station) – to be first to check in and 
obtain points.
Our online observations also gave us insights on the content that users 
create for particular venues. Photos have a variety of subjects and purposes: 
for example, photos uploaded to a popular hotel in Limerick illustrate events 
taking place there (conferences, business meetings, etc.), recommended food 
at the hotel restaurant (a function similar to that of tips), or various corners 
of the building and the view from it. This content represents a place from 
multiple points of view: structural characteristics, but also activities taking 
place there and people frequenting it.
Our study looked at two cities and we were thus able to compare Foursquare 
interactions in both settings. While there were many similarities between them, 
some differences could also be noted. Probably as a result of the significant 
difference in geographical size and size of population between the two cities, 
Figure 7.3  Tips used as private banter at a Limerick pub
Source:  Foursquare http://4sq.com/9J9NOn, 9 June 2013

100  Luigina Ciolfi and Gabriela Avram
in Sheffield (the larger of the two), the Foursquare user group is much larger 
than in Limerick; however, there appear to be weaker ties between users 
overall (e.g., number of interactions between users), with some tight ‘packs’ 
of friends interacting with each other on Foursquare, but probably knowing 
each other well offline. More Sheffield businesses use LBSN, with venues offer-
ing special deals, discounts, etc. This goes alongside a more lifestyle-oriented 
use of tips, which are mainly directed to a general audience with recommen-
dations for good nights out, etc. The use of Foursquare in this case is more 
similar to the likes of TripAdvisor mobile and Yelp. In Limerick, the overall 
smaller community of Foursquare users translates into more frequent infor-
mal interactions between people (both offline friends and strangers).
Discussion
The insights from both previous work and our study pose a number of issues 
for discussion regarding the relationship between Foursquare, its users and 
the locations it connects to. First, there is a complex relationship between 
how the system is shaped by user interactions and user-generated content 
and, conversely, how people’s activities are mediated and shaped by the 
system’s functionalities and architecture. When a system like Foursquare 
is released, selected functionalities are included in the code and they shape 
the practices of early adopters, who initially play by the rules to see what 
the new platform can do. As the user base diversifies, new practices appear – 
not originally intended, but afforded by the code (such as users exploiting 
the fact that Foursquare displays only the last check-in on friends’ news-
feeds either to emphasise a location, or to hide their presence). The system’s 
owners can choose to close loopholes (for example, not allowing check-ins 
at faraway locations) or to support the new practices by including them in 
the next release. Very often, innovations introduced from the top down via 
new versions of the code are met with resistance by frequent users, as their 
current practices are disrupted. As a consequence, users have to go through 
a whole new sense-making cycle and appropriate the new version by altering 
their practices.
Not only the activities that the code enables but how they are enacted is 
another aspect that reciprocally shapes interactions: the code is designed for a 
specific context and so are the ways of content production. For example, tex-
tual contributions are called ‘tips’; however, as Foursquare is trying to move 
into the market occupied by Yelp, it becomes obvious that Foursquare’s tips 
are not actual reviews and could not be used as such. Users leave tips, such as 
the amount in coins you need for parking in a specific place, or recommenda-
tions, such as ‘Try the chowder’ which are not actual reviews. The field name 
‘tips’ instilled a specific behaviour – this illustrates how the design choices 
influence the content contributed by users.
From a different perspective, Foursquare makes the content generated by 
its user base available for new uses through the Foursquare APIs. All kinds 

Digital social interactions in the city  101
of mash-ups have been created to take advantage of such data, by extending 
the Foursquare code. Therefore, there is an interesting tension between the 
possibilities and the constraints offered by the platform, from the point of 
view of regulated use and of appropriation. There are also important issues 
to flag regarding the relationship between people and specific places that is 
now mediated by LBSNs. The LBSNs extend some of the possibilities that 
real-world locations offer people to link to others, to take advantage of what 
a place offers or to find privacy and quiet. The relationship between a person 
and a place is made more visible by the encoding of LBSN interactions on 
a platform such as Foursquare. Furthermore, such a relationship is also 
extended by the possibility of novel forms of digital interaction, such as shar-
ing recommendations amongst strangers. The platform also makes visible 
community relationships to a place, and their importance in an urban envi-
ronment: examples of this are the Milk Market on a Saturday (Figure 7.4), 
a rugby game in Thomond Park stadium for Limerick, the World Snooker 
Championship in April and the December Christmas Village at the Peace 
Gardens for Sheffield.
While other researchers emphasised the potential for coordination created 
by check-ins, our findings show that awareness of who else is (or was) in the 
same place is an important element and is interpreted as a recommendation 
for the place itself. Moreover, the digital buzz around a venue (many check-
ins, many tips and photographs) is an endorsement of that place’s importance 
Figure 7.4  User photographs of Limerick’s Milk Market
Source:  Foursquare https://foursquare.com/v/the-milkmarket/4bc03935920eb71309b4182c/
photos, 9 June 2013

102  Luigina Ciolfi and Gabriela Avram
for the community. Users get a glimpse into their contacts’ favourite places 
and their trajectories. Awareness of events is another interesting element that 
is a sort of side-product of Foursquare.
Through these visible clouds of interaction, Foursquare and other LBSNs 
make navigating an unknown neighbourhood or area less daunting. The 
Foursquare venues in a city constitute a crowdsourced map of places that, 
most of the time, is very different from an official one. The users’ check-in 
preferences shape each city’s list of venues that both users and non-users can 
consult for finding good places for specific purposes: coffee, Wi-Fi access, 
etc. This connects to the issue of ‘rematerialisation’ – of whether the digital 
interactions enabled by the code can be made visible or perceivable in real-
world places, either for LBSN non-users or for users by means others than 
the app. There are already instances where a venue’s connection to an LBSN 
is made visible, for example, by displaying Foursquare membership badges 
in the physical space. However, much more happens in digital form that is 
only available to the app users: being able to see photos, tips and comments, 
as well as which Foursquare friends have checked in there. Check-ins by 
friends, tips and photos make a new place feel familiar, allow users to see 
how it looked on certain occasions or when a specific event occurred. We 
think it is important for human-centred computing researchers to further 
explore whether technologies such as ambient or tangible media could be 
employed to enable some of these interactions in a way that is less confined 
to a device (the mobile phone) and more embedded into the materiality of 
the environment. This is connected to issues of physicality and performativ-
ity in interaction. The practice of checking in when arriving at a venue is 
often frowned upon by some people – as well as being considered socially 
unacceptable in certain locations or circumstances. Some people’s refined 
planning in order to make the check-in performance acceptable or discreet 
is linked also to their awareness of the visibility of this action to a general 
audience. Making check-ins and other interactions available in novel ways 
would require careful consideration of the social visibility and acceptability 
of such practices.
Conclusions
This chapter reflected on people’s interactions with the popular location-
based social media platform Foursquare and on how they are entwined with 
the code that enables them, with other users, and with the real-world spaces 
and places that they link to. We presented a summary of findings emerging 
from human-centred computing research on Foursquare, and we integrated 
these with the results from studies of Foursquare use that we have conducted 
in two cities. In our studies, we wished to characterise further the relationship 
between LBSN interactions and the places in which they occur, to extend 
previous work and to address a gap in human-centred computing research 
that has only been partially filled (Silva et al. 2013). Finally, we highlighted 

Digital social interactions in the city  103
some issues for further discussion, particularly on the relationship between 
the Cloud of LBSN interactions and the real-world places in which they 
occur, and on how code enables, shapes and is in turn shaped by users’ 
activities and instances of system appropriation. In-depth studies of other 
location-based digital activities, such as turfing (Chang and Goodman, 2004) 
and geocaching (Neustaedter et al., 2013) and their ties with the materiality 
of the city have shed light on how such certain digital practices can be better 
supported: a deeper understanding of such dynamics in LBSN can lead to 
novel contributions in this respect.
Note
1	 (Foursquare 2015)
References
Barkhuus, L., Brown, B., Bell, M., Sherwood, S., Hall, M. and Chalmers, M. (2008) 
‘From awareness to repartee: sharing location within social groups’, Proceedings of 
CHI 2008, New York: ACM Press, 497–506.
Chang, M. and Goodman, E. (2004) ‘FIASCO: game interface for location-based 
play’, Proceedings of DIS 2004, New York: ACM Press, 329–32.
Cramer, H., Rost, M. and Holmquist, L.E. (2011) ‘Performing a check-in: emerging 
practices, norms and “conflicts” in location-sharing using Foursquare’, Proceedings 
of MobileHCI 2011, New York: ACM Press, 57–66.
Eagle, N. and Pentland, A. (2005) ‘Social serendipity: mobilizing social software’, 
IEEE Pervasive Computing, 4(2): 28–34.
Farnham, S.D., McCarthy, J.F., Patel, Y., Ahuja, S., Norman, D., Hazlewood, W.R. 
and Lind, J. (2009) ‘Measuring the impact of third place attachment on the adop-
tion of a place-based community technology’, Proceedings of CHI 2009, New York: 
ACM Press, 2153–6.
Foursquare (2015) Foursquare, available from https://foursquare.com/about [accessed 
19 November 2015].
Guha, S. and Birnholtz, J. (2013) ‘Can you see me now? Location, visibility and the 
management of impressions on Foursquare’, Proceedings of Mobile HCI 2013, New 
York: ACM Press, 183–92.
Jin, L., Long, X. and Joshi, J.B.D. (2012), ‘Towards understanding residential privacy 
by analyzing users’ activities in Foursquare’, Proceedings of BADGERS’12, New 
York: ACM Press, 25–32.
Lindquist, J., Cranshaw, J., Wiese, J., Hong, J. and Zimmerman, J. (2011) ‘I’m 
the mayor of my house: examining why people use Foursquare – a social-driven 
location sharing application’, Proceedings of CHI 2011, New York: ACM Press, 
2409–18.
Neustaedter, C., Tang, A. and Judge, T.K. (2013), ‘Creating scalable location-based 
games: lessons from geocaching’, Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 17(2): 335–49.
Noulas, A., Mascolo, C. and Frias-Martinez, E. (2013) ‘Exploiting Foursquare and 
cellular data to infer user activity in urban environments’, Proceedings of MDM 
2013, IEEE 14th Int. Conference on Mobile Data Management, 1–10.

104  Luigina Ciolfi and Gabriela Avram
O’Hara, K. (2008), ‘Understanding geocaching practices and motivations’, 
Proceedings of CHI 2008, New York: ACM Press, 1177–86.
Scellato, S., Noulas, A., Lambiotte, R. and Mascolo, C. (2011) ‘Socio-spatial proper-
ties of online location-based social networks’, Proceedings of ICWSM’11, 1–10.
Silva, T.H., Vaz de Melo, P.O.S., Almeida, J.M., Salles, J. and Loureiro, A.A.F. 
(2013) ‘A comparison of Foursquare and Instagram to the study of city dynamics 
and urban social behavior’, Proceedings of UrbComp 2013, Article no 4, 1–8.
Tang, K., Lin, J., Hong, J., Siewiorek, D. and Sadeh, N. (2010) ‘Rethinking location 
sharing: exploring the implications of social-driven vs. purpose-driven location 
sharing’, Proceedings of UbiComp’10, New York: ACM Press, 85–94.
Vasconcelos, M., Almeida, J. and Conçalves (2014) ‘What makes your opinion popu-
lar? Predicting the popularity of micro-reviews in Foursquare’, Proceedings of SAC 
2014, New York: ACM Press, 598–603.

8	
Feeling place in the city
Strange ontologies and location-based 
social media
Leighton Evans
Introduction
Modern cities are infused with code, and the operations of systems and gov-
ernance are dependent upon code. Kitchin and Dodge (2011: 22) describe the 
operations of software as bound up in, contributing to and altering the con-
ditions through which society, space, time and spatiality are produced. The 
view of the city as a site of urban informatics (Thrift 2014: 1263) is the logical 
outcome of a view of the city as not only constituted by coexisting software 
and code, but also of a city that is made up of sensors and devices designed to 
relay governance through operations of algorithms and code (see Greenfield 
2013; Batty 2013). However, accounts of urban governance rarely focus on 
the everyday mundane nature of technology, code and software (Thrift 2014: 
1264). Nonetheless, people adopt technology as part of their everyday prac-
tices and adapt to it. Moreover, digital computational technologies operate 
largely beyond the circumspection of their users.
This ‘withdrawal’ of the functioning of code can be understood as a ‘vicar-
ious causation’ (Berry 2011: 153) that encapsulates the way in which the 
world is presented through devices. The process of understanding the world 
is vicarious in the way that digital devices are continually emerging and 
withdrawing from circumspection given their internal hidden computational 
state. However, while code is withdrawn from conscious experience, it none-
theless plays a part in the co-creation between individual and technology in 
producing an understanding the world. For example, smartphone applica-
tions, such as LBSNs, involve an interaction with code that shapes the expe-
rience of place in the modern city. Berry (2011: 146) thus argues that new 
digital technological devices are becoming embedded in our way-of-being, 
such that a computational mode of being emerges. Consequently, new social 
ontologies and computational social epistemologies become dependent on 
and mutually constituted through code (Berry 2012: 381). Berry (2011: 152) 
uses the term ‘computational image’ to describe the cultural techniques used 
to select, store, process and produce data to computationally process the 
world, which is then presented back to the user. This process must neces-
sarily involve a translation from the physical to the computational (what 

106  Leighton Evans
Kitchin and Dodge (2011) term transduction) and a translation from code 
to interface.
Understanding code in this way is important because of the rise in ubiqui-
tous computational technologies for mediated interaction with the physical 
environment. This embodied interaction with computers centres around ‘the 
creation, manipulation and sharing of meaning through engaged interac-
tion with artefacts’ (Dourish 2001). Tangible computing is allied to social 
computing (social networking) and location-based services embedded in 
devices. Using these devices results in the production of an embodied agent, 
an intelligent agent that interacts with the environment through a physical 
or virtual body in that environment. Mackenzie (2010) develops a similar 
line of thinking in discussing the phenomenon of wirelessness, arguing that 
the continual engagement with computational devices and gadgets leads to a 
tendency to seek and make continuous network connections. This tendency is 
an embodiment of an attunement to living in a world with a proliferation of 
networked computational devices. Mackenzie’s work links a phenomenologi-
cal approach, with studies and theories of urban space that emphasise how 
computational devices alter and mediate the experience of space. For exam-
ple, Kitchin and Dodge (2011) emphasise the importance of computer code in 
the transduction of urban spaces; Shepard (2011) argues that the ‘dataclouds 
of the twenty-first century’ increasingly shape experiences of the city; and de 
Souza e Silva and Gordon (2011) use the concept of ‘networked locality’ to 
show how particular usage of networked devices, and the information they 
can provide from delocalised storage, can increase nearness to places rather 
than increase distance in a phenomenological sense.
Other work has explored the use of LBSNs from an explicitly phenomeno-
logical position (see Evans 2015). Following notions that the mobile com-
putational devices that we carry (e.g., smartphones, tablets) are involved in 
both embodied and hermeneutic relations with the user (Ihde 1990), and are 
also in a position of alterity with regards to their functioning and execution 
of code (see Evans (2014) for a discussion of the execution of code in LBSN), 
this chapter conceptualises what role code plays in shaping understandings 
of place. The partially immaterial and withdrawn collection of instructions, 
algorithms and commands, it is argued, is critical to how users experience the 
world, yet users move in and out of contact with code and enjoy a relation-
ship with code that is vicarious and beyond circumspection.
By engaging Peter Sloterdijk’s theory of spheres (1998; 1999; 2004) to 
conceptualise the presence of code in the modern city, the chapter contributes 
to the debate on the interaction between code and its users. A framework for 
explaining both the presence of code in the city, and its importance in gaining 
understanding and sociality in the city, will be drawn from an exposition of 
Sloterdijk’s Sphären. This framework will be exemplified using ethnographic 
data from a critical case study on the LBSN Foursquare. The examples used 
are indicative of users engaging with devices, code, data and social media 
to establish a familiarity and phenomenological feeling of place in novel 

Feeling place in the city  107
environments. The ‘worlding’ (Heidegger 1962) of users by code, accessible 
through devices, is therefore positioned as a key element in understanding 
place and as a critical aspect of the post-phenomenology of being in the smart 
city.
Sloterdijk: spheres, bubbles, foam and code
Sloterdijk’s Sphären project can be seen as a trilogy of works that answers 
the question ‘Where is man?’ rather than ‘What is man?’ (Schinkel and 
Noordegraaf-Eelens 2011: 11). This is an engagement in a Heideggerian pro-
ject concerning the nature of being in relation to place rather than time 
(Elden and Mendieta 2009: 6). Like Heidegger, Sloterdijk makes much of 
the thrownness of man into the world (Sloterdijk 1998: 275). This thrown-
ness or not being comfortable in the world makes man a restless creature 
who is always remaking worlds, fashioning dwellings and dwelling as a phe-
nomenological being-in-the-world through connection with the other (Elden 
and Mendieta 2009: 7). Essentially, man is always looking to normalise 
his spatial existence and find comfort (van Tuinen 2009: 299). Sloterdijk’s 
project establishes being-in-the-world as being-in-spheres, in that being is 
always spatial and social (in that it is always being-with). The concept of 
the sphere refers to the da of Heidegger’s Dasein in that it refers to ‘there’. 
For Sloterdijk, spheres are the original product of human being-together, in 
other words shared spaces of perception and experience. Sloterdijk’s project 
moves from microspheres (or bubbles), which are the most intimate spheres 
of coexistence,  such as the intra-uteral relationship between unborn child 
and mother, to the macrosphere level of globes, and to the globalised level of 
foam. It is the last type of spherical relationship, foam, which is of interest 
when considering the worlding of human beings using code, but understand-
ing foam is dependent upon an understanding of the spheres that historically 
precede it.
A sphere is a shared psycho spatial immunological edifice (Schinkel and 
Noordegraaf-Eelens 2011: 13): a shared, lived-in space. This is a way to 
conceptualise social life as consisting of the continual building up and leav-
ing of spatial connectives, from the basic dyad to complex swarms of people. 
Sloterdijk’s historical project traces the development of these spheres from 
the microscopic level of the interpersonal, to the macroscopic level of the 
globe and terrestrial conquest, to the multiplicity of simultaneous connec-
tions that overcome spatial and temporal barriers in the globalised, ‘foam’ 
sphere. The ‘where’ conceptualised is a protective sphere that can be virtual, 
but is nevertheless always meaningful and reassuring as a place distinguished 
from the infinite and fragmentary world (Schinkel and Noordegraaf-Eelens 
2011: 22). Societies themselves consist of these ‘turbulent and asymmetrical 
associations of space-multiplicities’ or spheres (Sloterdijk 2004: 57).
The spheres are, therefore, what being-in-the-world structurally is, in 
that the sphere is being-with. Foam as a sphere of being is ‘an interlocking 

108  Leighton Evans
and multiple set of cells’ that are representative of connection and relation. 
Klausner (in Elden 2012: 8) identifies four attributes of foam: it is made 
up of variable shapes and sizes; it lacks a clear centre; it is both fragile and 
interconnected; and it is part of a process of creation. Foam, then, is a 
metaphorical attempt to conceptualise the ever-changing places of being-in-
the-world, from the smaller, more intimate, to the networked and globalised. 
Foam is not centred on the person; it is a place that is characterised by 
particular connections. These connections are not just fragile in that they are 
impermanent, but necessarily fragile as the sphere is creative and old connec-
tions (and therefore old bubbles) are constantly being replaced by the new 
in foam. Elden (2012: 8) draws parallels between this view and Deleuze and 
Guattari’s concept of the rhizome but, unlike the rhizome, foams are loosely 
structured and not reducible to complex arrangements and networks. Foams 
are made of bubbles that are connected but always separate. Sloterdijk’s bub-
bles, therefore, enter a process of osmotic integration with other bubbles, and 
this multitude of bubbles (enabled by networked communications as well as 
physical proximity) makes up foam. Importantly, the bubbles are both con-
nected and isolated. This vicarious connection indicates that while the bubble 
is connected to others it is not reducible to its connections, and, therefore, is 
not just a node brought into being by virtue of a network of connections and 
extinguished accordingly at the dissolution of that network.
The Mitsein (being-with) that is a bubble is always being-amongst-others 
or a dwelling amongst others. Like Heidegger’s concept of dwelling as a 
freedom from the world of das Man and a technologically enframed mode 
of being, Sloterdijk’s dwelling is a bringing-forth of the world rather than a 
standing-forth or technological mode of being that is forced upon man. As 
Morin (2009: 58) argues, this is an attempt to theorise contemporary soci-
ety through a reworking of Heidegger’s existential analytic of Dasein, and 
draws on a detailed narrative of the historical development of humankind 
and human society to reach this aim. Sloterdijk interprets the development 
of humanity as a development of different forms of spatiality and under-
standing space. The move from microsphere to plural-sphere is a move that 
is from strong, close relationships to weaker, looser, distant relationships 
facilitated by technology that allows for such ties to exist. The stage of foam 
goes beyond Heidegger’s own analysis of technology as Gestell or standing 
reserve. The third phase of foam addresses the global reach and information 
saturation associated with networked society (Morin 2009: 59).
To understand the relevance of Sloterdijk to understanding place through 
LBSNs, it is necessary to trace what kinds of world-forming praxis ‘global 
foams’ allow for and allow to be conceived (Morin 2009: 60). Foams are 
processes that lend themselves to stability and inclusiveness (Sloterdijk 2004: 
50). With regards to the social, the basic component of the social is the dyadic 
sphere, and the social itself is composed of intersubjective relations between 
autonomous subjects. The human being never exists alone, but only in the 
world of co-subjectivity, where the human being is animated by the presence 

Feeling place in the city  109
and gaze of others (Laermans 2011: 115). The possibility and realisation of 
this coexistence is possible through the communication networks that link 
people to known and unknown others (Laermans 2011: 116). With regards 
to everyday praxis, one can consider the use of media and computational 
devices as praxis of world making and sphere creation. Traditional broadcast 
media produce a constantly renewed and fleeting cohesion-effect through the 
production of common news themes and common interests (Laermans 2011: 
117). Mass media communications arouse temporary interests that produce 
an affective involvement in the topic, and which are therefore responsible for 
the construction of spheres. Thus, media produces instant cohesion through 
a bombarding of the ‘foam’ bubbles that make up contemporary society 
(Laermans 2011: 118). This mass media information is not stored, but simul-
taneously produced and used up in its reception, and while there is a surplus 
of information in modern society, there is still a process of making and repro-
ducing to attract and sustain attention (Laermans 2011: 120).
The mass media has power through the centralised position and ability 
to synchronise the attention of many individuals and other ‘ego-spheres’ 
(Laermans 2011: 126), thus creating a common sphere of interest or atten-
tion. However, the digital and social media environment lacks this cohesion. 
Merrin (2014) contextualises the presence of digital computational devices 
or gadgets within a rise of hyperludic media – hyperfunctional gadgets that 
produce media streams centred on the individual. This kind of media pro-
duces a highly personal media experience that is dependent on the execution 
of code and contributes to the subjective experience of the world of the user. 
When considering social media, the common sphere is the medium (device or 
platform), but the messages on platforms such as Twitter are more numerous, 
diverse, personalised and fragmentary than on any broadcast medium and 
are reliant on code to function. In considering the impact of social media and 
LBSNs, it is attentiveness or mindfulness that is critical. The media messages 
(posts, tips, tweets) that create attention in the user create a ‘bubble’ of atten-
tion from the ‘foam’ of messages carried through digital media. In the praxis 
of social media use, place and location act as determiners of attention that 
allow for receiving and engaging with particular media messages provided 
by other users. Through the execution of code, LBSNs can harness social 
gazetteers, location information and personally relevant data for users in 
a location to represent the world in a particular manner. That is place as 
place – a meaningful location where meaning is co-created by code, user and 
device. To exemplify this, the notion of place-specific messages being critical 
to forming Sloterdijk’s bubbles of dwelling in foam will now be explored with 
reference to the use of the LBSN Foursquare.
Code in praxis: Foursquare and understanding place
The following analysis draws on an ethnographic study – conducted in 2011 
and 2012 using mixed methods, including online surveys and face-to-face, 

110  Leighton Evans
Skype and e-mail interviews – of 65 users of the LBSN Foursquare. The 
purpose for this ethnography was to investigate what Foursquare was 
being used for and what effect on the understanding of place practices of 
Foursquare use have for users. A hermeneutic phenomenological analysis 
(van Manen 1997) as a derivative analytic method from critical discourse 
analysis (Fairclough 1995) was employed to analyse the data with regards 
to how usage affected an understanding of place for the user. Some brief 
excerpts are used here to exemplify the formation of world-revealing bubbles 
in the use of the LBSN.
Foursquare allows users to make check-ins to places within its database of 
places, create check-in spots and explore comments on places made by other 
users. The following is an example of familiarising oneself with an unfamiliar 
place through the application:
In specific circumstances, the service has made me aware of places around 
me. The majority of check-ins I make are for places I already know, but 
there are a few times when I have used Foursquare to find new places. In 
York, I used Foursquare to find a pub that was showing a football match 
I wanted to see by looking for pubs and tips, and then using the map 
facility. When in places that I don’t know, unquestionably Foursquare 
has helped make me more aware of places.
‘James’, Foursquare user
‘James’ used the LBSN to find a place, and to locate himself relative to 
that place. The definition of place being used here, in conjunction with 
Sloterdijk’s concept of the bubble, is somewhere that is meaningful for the 
user as he or she dwells in that place. Here, ‘James’ is employing the LBSN 
to locate and ground himself in that locale. This transforms the meaningless 
space of unfamiliarity into a place of familiarity based on the function of 
code to  provide  hyperlocal information. The user creates a ‘bubble’ from 
the information available through Foursquare and then inhabits the place 
created.
There is evidence that the device can, through the provision of data on 
places in the databanks of the LBSN, replace learnt processes of finding one’s 
way in the world and navigating places. Being without the device creates a 
feeling of homelessness or an inability to dwell:
Being deprived of this extra sense wouldn’t affect my desire or ability 
but would perhaps make me feel ‘underpowered’, perhaps in a similar 
way that a heavy cold affects people’s senses of taste or smell. It feels an 
enhancement of my own capabilities, extending my knowledge about my 
immediate environs. The GPS abilities of my iPhone do indeed feel like 
an extra sense; perhaps not one as important as seeing or hearing, but 
definitely on a par with smell or taste.
‘Lars’, Foursquare user

Feeling place in the city  111
‘Lars’ identifies the device as an augmentation of his senses, heightening 
understanding of the world when used and being conspicuous in absence. 
The device is an addition to the existing means of collecting information 
about the world that is the foundation of understanding. In navigating the 
media-saturated world, if the device is a necessity then the code that allows it 
to function is too. The device is in effect a gateway to the ‘foam’ (connections 
to information and other users) that is necessary to create the ‘bubble’ of 
dwelling. The following comment is also useful in this context:
When I drive down the road with my phone docked, I see that little blue 
and white dot on the screen. I realise that’s me, and I see all the cars 
around me, and realise they have dots too. I’m just another face in the 
world. I suppose programs that are aware of where I am have given me a 
bit of a drive to explore this big world. I have a guide that I can fall back 
on, and that lets me go out and explore a bit more. I mean, what’s that 
strange landmark on Foursquare called Stabber’s Alley? Just how dark 
and foreboding is it? Better go see during the day.
‘Kirk’, Foursquare user
‘Kirk’ identifies with the denotation of the device on the digital map (the 
‘blue dot’) as himself, so the distinction between user and device withdraws in 
use (as per Heidegger’s tool analysis; Heidegger 1962: 406–412). The device, 
which is doing the work of locating oneself in the world in this instance, is 
not considered separately as an entity. In the Sloterdijk-influenced analysis 
proposed here, the device and user coexist in the bubble that is the experience 
of place. The experience of the device as one with the user – withdrawn when 
used as a tool – is one of absence, but as the device is continually updat-
ing, representing the world as one moves through the world physically, it is 
becoming present, demanding attention and thinking. The device links with 
other things (servers, databases, other devices) beyond conscious experience 
and continually feeds back to the user. Ihde (1990: 86) explains this as a 
hermeneutic relation between technology and human being, where the tech-
nology acts as an immediate referent to something beyond that device. While 
the focus of the user is on the device and interface, the user’s experience is not 
with the device itself but the world that it is referring to and the landscape 
suggested by the gazetteers. In this case, the device withdraws (while still 
performing the work it is tasked with in revealing the world) to become part 
of the world. This is reinforced by this comment:
I think my view of the world has changed by using these services – or at 
least how I view the world. When visiting new places, I used to stick to 
small areas, which I could achieve familiarity with quite easily, whereas 
now using location-based services means that I can use the device with 
confidence to locate myself and familiarise myself with the place. I am 
aware that there is a contradiction in that, in that I am only familiarising 

112  Leighton Evans
myself with the representation of the place from the service, and so there 
is a tension between familiarity with place and service – and in consider-
ing how I see the world, I suppose I am seeing it more through the device 
than through exploring it physically.
‘James’, Foursquare user
‘James’ is aware that he familiarises himself with the device, interface and 
service, and that the result of this is a familiarity with place that is dependent 
upon the device and software. The real-time information is given unobtru-
sively and so the device is always ready-to-hand (continuing its presence as 
a co-constructing element in the understanding and revealing of place) and 
always operational and ready to disrupt with information. The device is never 
fully withdrawn as it interacts with the foam that is the code and networked 
information the device accesses. The co-presence of the code in the ‘bubble’ 
shapes this understanding of world.
Continual information given in real time by the device affects understand-
ing of the world, and changes orientation to the world in a practical way for 
place and location:
Suddenly the ability to ask for directions is lost! In the past I’d often end 
up wandering around new places relatively aimlessly but it was just as 
good as going somewhere specific because that kind of wandering can 
lead to making new discoveries. If you are headed in a very specific direc-
tion with a very clear aim, you might risk missing things along the way, 
which is a shame.
‘Joan’, Foursquare user
With the device (assuming connectivity is a given), the existential possibility 
of being lost is reduced, and if the technological conditions are optimal then 
being lost could be something that is impossible. The chance discovery, the 
valuable new place found, the orienting oneself in the unfamiliar place that 
leads to a new familiarity and the creation of an existential locale through 
orienting oneself to the objects and entities in the new locale are replaced by 
computational coexistence. The feeling of place is dependent on the device, 
as being lost or ‘placeless’ is not a possibility if one uses LBSN as a part of 
everyday navigating the world. If this has been done, then place as a familiar 
existential locale is always possible through the use of the device as a co-
constructor of the sense of place in the world. As such, the bubbles that we 
dwell in, according to Sloterdijk, can always be created if one can access that 
information through code in the ‘foam’.
Conclusions
The examples taken from the ethnography of Foursquare users illustrate an 
understanding of the networked world where code, data and information 

Feeling place in the city  113
shape everyday understanding of place. Although this chapter has used a 
relatively narrow illustration of this, information may come from the pleth-
ora of screens in the modern city, other social media platforms or traditional 
media. ‘Dwelling-in-bubbles’ in the networked world occurs as applications 
(through the execution of code in devices and through network connections) 
provide people with information that is used in the everyday practices of life. 
Code is an actor in the functioning of these critical elements (application, 
device); without the functioning of code these bubbles would not exist.
In the modern, networked world code – as a withdrawn actor in the func-
tioning of devices – is necessary to the possibility and actuality of the crea-
tion of what Sloterdijk calls ‘bubbles’. The feeling of place can be achieved 
through the use of applications that inform on place: giving information, 
relative location, and cues and information from others that provides a social 
dimension to the praxis of use. Code, in this view, acts as a membrane that 
allows for flows of data, information and social activity through the foam 
and into bubbles. Code is the membrane that allows for the information that 
characterises the networked society to flow and influence. The presence of 
code foregrounds our presence in the modern world, affording the possibili-
ties of dwelling and understanding while being withdrawn and opaque to the 
users of computational devices.
Heidegger’s great fear of technology (1977) was the flattening effect that 
occurs through the use of modern technology: the erasing of temporal and 
spatial dimensions of being leading to a worldview, where all entities are 
seen as a resource to be used. The view of networked behaviour in this paper 
illustrates a de-distancing (van Tuinen 2009: 111) that comes from the use of 
code-dependent devices and applications to understand places. Users may 
pick up information left many years before by users they will never meet, 
and use this to establish a dwelling in place. The de-distancing that occurs is 
not seen as a danger but as a condition of the loose and fragile connections 
of bubbles that make up the plural-spherology of modern life. Place and the 
feeling of place is, in these examples, a co-constituent between the device, 
the application and the mood of the user in the bubble that has been created 
through digital and computational praxis.
Acknowledgement
The research for this paper was conducted under The Programmable City, 
a project funded by a European Research Council Advanced Investigator 
award (ERC-2012-AdG-323636-SOFTCITY).
References
Batty, M. (2013) The New Science of Cities, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Berry, D.M. (2011) The Philosophy of Software: Code and Mediation in the Digital 
Age, London: Palgrave/Macmillan.

114  Leighton Evans
Berry, D.M. (2012) ‘The social epistemology of software’, Social Epistemology, 
­26(3–4): 379–98.
Dourish, P. (2001) Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied Interaction, 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
de Souza e Silva, A. and Gordon, E. (2011) Net Locality: Why Location Matters in a 
Networked World, Chichester: Wiley Blackwell.
Elden, S. (2012) ‘Worlds, temperaments, engagements: introducing Peter Sloterdijk’ 
in S. Elden (ed.) Sloterdijk Now, Cambridge: Polity.
Elden, S. and Mendieta, E. (2009) ‘Being-with as making worlds: the “second coming” 
of Peter Sloterdijk’, Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 27(1):1–11.
Evans, L. (2014) ‘Maps as deep: reading the code of location-based social networks’, 
IEEE Technology and Science Magazine, 33(1): 73–80.
Evans, L. (2015) ‘Being-towards the social: mood and orientation to location-based 
social media, computational things and applications’, New Media and Society, 
17(6): 845–60.
Fairclough, N. (1995) Critical Discourse Analysis: The Critical Study of Language, 
London: Longman.
Greenfield, A. (2013) Against the Smart City (The City is Here for You to Use), 
London: Verso.
Heidegger, M. (1962) Being and Time, trans. J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson, Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Heidegger, M. (1977) The Question Concerning Technology, and Other Essays, trans. 
W. Lovitt, New York: Harper Perennial.
Ihde, D. (1990) Technology and the Lifeworld: From Garden to Earth, Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press.
Kitchin, R. and Dodge, M. (2011) Code/Space: Software and Everyday Life, 
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Laermans, R. (2011) ‘The attention regime: on mass media and the information 
society’, in W. Schinkel and L. Noordegraaf-Eelens (eds) In Media Res: Peter 
Sloterdijk’s Spherical Poetics of Being, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Mackenzie, A. (2010) Wirelessness: Radical Empiricism in Networked Cultures, 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Merrin, W. (2014) ‘The rise of the gadget and hyperludic me-dia’, Cultural Politics, 
10(1): 1–20.
Morin, M.E. (2009) ‘Cohabitating in the globalised world: Peter Sloterdijk’s global 
foams and Bruno Latour’s cosmopolitics’, Environment and Planning D: Society 
and Space, 27(1): 58–72.
Schinkel, W. and Noordegraaf-Eelens, L. (2011) ‘Peter Sloterdijk’s spherological 
acrobatics: an exercise in introduction’, in W. Schinkel and L. Noordegraaf-Eelens 
(eds) In Media Res: Peter Sloterdijk’s Spherical Poetics of Being, Amsterdam: 
Amsterdam University Press.
Shepard, M. (2011) Sentient City: Ubiquitous Computing, Architecture and the Future 
of Urban Space, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sloterdijk, P. (1998) Sphären I – Blasen, Mikrosphärologie [Spheres I – Bubbles, 
microspherology], trans. W. Hoban, Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Sloterdijk, P. (1999) Sphären II – Globen, Makrosphärologie [Spheres II – Globes, 
macrospherology], trans. W. Hoban, Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Sloterdijk, P. (2004) Sphären III – Schäume, Plurale Sphärologie [Spheres III – 
Bubbles, plural-spherology], trans. W. Hoban, Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.

Feeling place in the city  115
Thrift, N. (2014) ‘The promise of urban informatics: some speculations’, Environment 
and Planning A, 46(6): 1263–6.
van Manen, M. (1997) Researching Lived Experience: Human Science for an Action 
Sensitive Pedagogy, 2nd edn, London: Althouse Press.
van Tuinen, S. (2009) ‘Air conditioning spaceship earth: Peter Sloterdijk’s ethico-
aesthetic paradigm’, Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 27(1): 105–18.

9	
Curating the city
Urban interfaces and locative media as 
experimental platforms for cultural data
Nanna Verhoeff and Clancy Wilmott
Introduction
When defining our identity and the identity of others, our sensory abili-
ties are increasingly replaced by networked surveillance and identifica-
tion technologies. How do we experience the way our body and identity 
are being ‘measured’ as functional and controllable products? Can touch 
based perception play again a role in experiencing the other’s identity? 
[…] Together you compose new, temporary, non-traceable, and non-
controllable networked identities.
(Verhoeff and Cooley, 2014)
The local set-up of Saving Face by artists Karen Lancel and Herman Maat 
(2012) comprises a large, public, urban screen and an application with facial 
recognition software for a smaller screen, housed in a kiosk. The work invites 
participants to touch and trace their faces and thereby ‘paint’ themselves 
on the smaller screen in front of them, thus contributing their image to the 
database (see Figure 9.1). Meanwhile, the individual’s face on the large screen 
transforms into a composite image of the larger community of participants, 
past and present, who have traced their faces. Between these various mecha-
nisms, screen-to-screen communication across spaces, databases of tracings 
and interactive touchscreen technology, software and code work to bring 
together the urban interface of the artwork, structuring its relations and per-
formativity as they arise. Yet, this interface structure is not accidental – such 
urban interfaces are coded and designed to experiment with their affordances, 
bringing to the fore discussions about contemporary public space, networked 
urban culture and the relationship between code and space. Furthermore, in 
the intersection between the datafication and the proliferation of digital inter-
faces for ‘culture’, artworks like Saving Face can help establish theoretical 
and analytical tools for the critical evaluation of these interfaces of cultural 
curation.
This article establishes three main arguments centred on these themes. First, 
we propose that the analysis of media artworks, installations and other loca-
tive-based media projects brings different conceptual and theoretical tools to 

Curating the city  117
the already growing fields of software studies (Manovich 2013) and the rela-
tionship of code and algorithms to cities and the built environment (Kitchin 
and Dodge 2011). As multiscreen, site-specific, social and participatory eco-
systems, which work according to the dual principles of physical touch and, 
what Verhoeff and Cooley (2014) have called elsewhere, haptic, gestural ‘look-
ing’, Saving Face, specifically, and other artworks, more generally, offer a con-
text for reflecting on the movements of people and the circulation of data and 
images across platforms, the urban context as living and layered archive, and 
the activity and gestures that are elicited by a variety of screen-based, cultural 
interfaces. Because it allows the mobile subject in a public space to engage in 
the process of creation and dissemination of images, the artwork enables us to 
consider the specificities of current uses of mobile, interactive and networked 
media. It presents these as a process, an operation, working with technology, 
on the one hand, and as a communal, collaborative, public engagement on 
the other. As such, the work is what it does, or, if you prefer, it does what it is.
Second, the concerns of software studies and the programmable city are 
reflected into media artworks themselves, as they offer the potential to test the 
limitations of affordances, play with possibilities and engage embodiment and 
performativity at a stage of temporary reflexive impasse – wherein the artwork 
occupies a theoretical as well as material space. In this way, as a theoretical 
object – or object to ‘think with’, Saving Face can be used to interrogate how 
urban projects can be understood as (curatorial) laboratories for embodied 
criticality. It is an allegorical example of design, and an example of theoretical 
analysis. Indeed, the work is reflexive. It proposes itself as embodied thought, 
not only on interactive screen media, but also on a cultural understanding of 
Figure 9.1  Saving Face installation
Source and copyright: 2013 Ruthe Zuntz, reproduced by permission.

118  Nanna Verhoeff and Clancy Wilmott
the physical or material, as well as networked connectivity. It experiments with 
its technological affordances (Gibson 1979). It conducts such an experiment 
in that it works to critically expose how these affordances operate in the act of 
working with them. At the same time, Saving Face experiments with ways of 
addressing the social questions about subjectivity and visibility within a con-
nected and participatory framework raised by the potential of its individual 
affordances. Thus, Saving Face can also be considered as performative and 
experimental, in the sense that it makes that which it analyses. This performa-
tive potential is the ‘message’, one could say, in McLuhan’s terms (1964) – or, 
arguably: the medium is the method (Verhoeff 2013).1
The value of media analysis becomes evident when the relative trans-
parency of these artworks is counterposed by the blackboxing of more 
pervasive, although no less curated, digital networked systems. As 
Kitchin and Dodge (2011) have argued, the countervalent nature of code/
space is directly linked to urban systems, embedded within the built envi-
ronment, regulating the flows and rhythms of the city. Furthermore, the 
proprietary status of many of these algorithms, and the way in which they are 
shrouded with a peculiar curtain of governmentality (Rouvroy and Stiegler 
2015) means that they are often treated with (perhaps, rightful) suspicion 
because they are impossible to unpack without prior access to behind-the-
scenes information. This limits the way in which we can understand these 
spaces. For example, this blackboxing  means that, for the most part, the 
algorithms and geotracking software that govern space are both protected 
(copyrighted) and hidden away from scrutiny and criticism. However, rather 
than attempting to untangle what may well be an impossibly complicated 
web, it may be possible for artists and critics to grapple with the realities of 
code/space by using (small-scale) media projects that reconstruct such urban 
dispositifs and take them as examples to think with.
Departing from the specificities of the work Saving Face, such media or 
performance installations allow us as scholars (in the words of the artists) to 
understand and theorise particular sets of relations, including those of pro-
grammability, urban environments and algorithmic cultures. In fact, it is pre-
cisely because of their diversity – a diversity common in artistic and innovative 
design – that such tactical media projects (though in some cases they may 
be framed as educational projects), which want to positively and creatively 
embrace those technologies, can be used to help us think through their coun-
terpart contemporary concerns: geolocative tracking and algorithmic power 
in code found in the digital cartography and database-logic that provides 
the grid for our urban mobility. While often unclear as to how or to what 
end these mobile technologies seem to inspire social and critical ambitions to 
not only call up location-specific data (whether trivia, commercial messages, 
entertaining or ‘educational’ content) but also allow for performative and 
‘awareness’ enhancing, participatory forms of civic engagement or agency.
This leads to our third objective. This chapter addresses some theoretical 
underpinnings of an analytical approach to understanding how location-based 

Curating the city  119
media, or urban interfaces, layer urban spaces. It sketches some thoughts 
about a potentially critical–analytical approach to the ‘cultural interfaces’ 
(Manovich 2001) of current urban projects that use location-based media, and 
it offers an approach to understanding these projects as curatorial machines 
for cultural data. To do this, we zoom in on efforts such as Saving Face to pro-
vide access to data and their collections – whether or not instigated by museal 
and archival institutions or whether more bottom-up civic collaborative pro-
jects. These works, as theoretical objects, allow us to investigate layering as a 
design principle for urban interfaces as navigational laboratories.
These three issues foreground a long-standing interest in the way in which 
mobility shapes our visual practices: in the way we act, experience and think 
with mobility. This thinking-with is what underlies creativity and experimen-
tation. To be precise: in design we find this thinking-with at the intersection 
of technology and practice. As such, navigation and mobility entail more 
than the portability of devices, the principles of ubiquitous computing or the 
temporality embedded in what we can call performative digital cartography. 
Mobility and navigation are cultural in the sense that they not only bring 
forward process as a cultural form, and emphasise not only the experiential 
and performative but also the philosophical nature of being-in-the-world, but 
they also shape our thinking in and as a process. This emphasis on thinking-
with accompanies an ongoing dialogue with figures that function as tropes: 
figures or spatiotemporal visualisations which bring together a metaphoric 
and systemic logic of using and thinking about media – for instance, the 
navigational as trope of mobility in the visual culture of the moving image. 
A powerful, pervasive, yet sometimes uncritically used metaphor of layering 
can be useful to describe the experience of using mobile and location-based 
screen technologies, but it needs to be specified in analytical terms, in our 
opinion, in order to become a true concept.
Here, we focus on the logic of layers and layering that we can recognise 
in our use of and thinking about media technologies as cultural interfaces – 
interfaces that bring us tools to reflect on culture. In this sense, it means 
moving beyond systems and relations to explore the performativity of inter-
face technologies, which occurs in the reciprocity of creativity and reflexivity. 
How does design work with what we can do with technologies and how does 
this become a thematic in itself: how does design work with, and, by this, 
also reflect on these affordances? It is the critical implication of questioning 
by doing in design that we wish to address in the context of the role of code 
in urban experience: in what way can we embrace code as a critical means to 
interrogate urban culture?
The curatorial in dispositifs
In the face of fast-paced innovation and transition, it is necessary to develop 
concepts that may help us to approach the diversity and fugitivity of projects 
as urban interfaces; to frame them in a coherent conceptual universe in order 

120  Nanna Verhoeff and Clancy Wilmott
to better grasp the details, their comparative specificity and to assess their 
historicity.2 The dispositif – the arrangement that encapsulates technology, 
subject and image – is particularly useful as a heuristic device that is scal-
able for the comparative analysis of any systemic or composite object (van 
den Boomen 2014). It allows us to historicise and situate, synchronically or 
diachronically, differences and similarities between media forms.
The concept of dispositif is wide-ranging and far-reaching. Michel de 
Certeau (1980) offered a critique of Foucault’s famous ‘panoptic’ conception 
of the dispositif as a formation for surveillance and control, and has inspired 
an approach to dispositif as that which opens up ‘possibilities of contact, 
participation, play, as well as bodily and sensual experiences’ (Kessler 2007)3 
This reconsideration of dispositif as a networked arrangement that allows for 
various forms of agency and performativity is useful for a pragmatic, ana-
lytical approach to interactive and locative interfaces.4 Media dispositifs can 
thus be understood as the arrangements that establish relations and processes 
between, and organise spatial and temporal settings of, technologies and 
practices that produce subjects and shared meanings. We take the location-
based projects under discussion, with Saving Face as the primary example, as 
installation-dispositifs that comprise a layered interface – layeredness here 
understood as the spatiotemporal relations designed in, and organised by, the 
interface. The notion of layering is designed to be productive for the analysis 
of hybrid compositions of interfaces, of images and of spatial constructions 
of navigation, which are produced in the act of interfacing.
Moreover, the concept of the curatorial puts a specific spin on that concept 
of dispositif; one that begs for an analysis of this layering, and enables us 
to analytically tease out the relationship established by the installation and 
the larger urban dispositif that encapsulates the work. Dispositifs, or any 
kind of spatiotemporal spectatorial and participatory arrangement, entail 
a form of curatorial design. The curatorial is here understood as a broader 
conceptual framework for the design of, and programming within, cultural 
spaces – whether virtual, social, geographical or conceptual – than the more 
narrow sense of curation as the professional practice of designing museum 
exhibitions. It constructs a reflexive positioning of elements, it is constituted 
in its operation (in the vein of curatorial machines) and is embodied in the 
experience of the possibilities of contact, and of playful and participatory 
engagement invoked by this design. It is this coming together of thought and 
experience that is at stake in curatorial design: an embedded and embodied 
criticality below the surface.
For our understanding of the curatorial, as derived from the word cura-
tion used for museum and other exhibition practices, we may bring together 
the English ‘to expose’, which includes the meaning of ‘laying bare’ and the 
French verb ‘exposer’ – to display, as well as to argue (Bal 1996: 8). It is this 
specific combination of analysis and argument, or the analytical and the 
rhetorical, that we can recognise as main principles of ‘the curatorial’ across 
disciplines and in different cultural contexts. Indeed, within our mediatised 

Curating the city  121
culture, we speak more and more of curatorial practices outside of institu-
tional walls. The city has been conceptualised as urban, curatorial space, for 
example. The authors of Digital_Humanities define curation in analytical and 
rhetorical terms in the context of digital, networked culture, as: ‘the selection 
and organisation of materials in an interpretive framework, argument, or 
exhibit’ (Burdick et al. 2012: 17).
Whatever the medium, platform or institutional context, curation can be 
seen as care for the constellation of elements – their selection and ­organisation – 
and their interpretative framework. Indeed, as Burdick et al. (2012: 18) con-
tinue: ‘Rather than being viewed as autonomous or self-evident, artefacts can 
be seen being shaped by and shaping complex networks of influence, produc-
tion, dissemination, and reception, animated by multilayered debates and 
historical forces.’ To curate, then, is: ‘to filter, organise, craft, and, ultimately, 
care for a story composed out of – even rescued from – the infinite array of 
potential tales, relics, and voices’ (Burdick et al. 2012: 34). Or, in the concise 
summary by Marc James Leger, curation is ‘a practice that creates a space 
for discourse and critique’ (Leger 2013: 12) – a space-making, discursive, and 
critical endeavour. When we speak of interactive and networked installations 
or systems, this discursive and framing aspect of curation is part of the design 
of creative engagement between artefact and public in interaction. This per-
formative potential of media-based dispositifs involves curatorial design.
Interestingly, a similarity with media has inspired work on museums and 
exhibition practices as well. For example, Kossmann et al. (2012) have a sym-
metrically opposite perspective and argue for an understanding of museum 
exhibitions as media in a McLuhanian sense, including their essential ‘trans-
forming potential’. The authors point out how the ‘open, associative nature 
of the format’ fits the cultural moment (Kossmann et al. 2012: 33). They 
consider the exhibition as an ‘interface with a critical function, directing 
the view and transforming the message into a manifest interpretation’. For 
an interest in interactive mobile or location-based media, the analogy with 
exhibitions as spatial media through a concept of interface is inspiring for 
the development of a critical approach to these practices. In this comparison, 
we would include tours (audio tours, mapped tours, GPS-based, augmented-
reality applications, etc.) as mobile forms of exhibition.5 A necessary step in 
this comparison of curation of museum exhibitions and curation in media 
projects is to discern the distinction between curation by the project itself – 
the curatorial at work, so to speak – and the institutionally embedded prac-
tice of curation of these projects within, for example, a collection, a museum, 
or an archive.
Taking the curatorial as a heuristic concept, we can move from the technical 
principles of exhibition and programming practices in institutional contexts, 
and focus in our analysis of the underlying curatorial logic within dispositifs 
of public, urban installations or media projects in the broadest sense. This 
can contribute to a conceptualisation of a notion of cultural curation that 
brings together the multiple levels on which the curatorial logic is at work.

122  Nanna Verhoeff and Clancy Wilmott
Dispositifs as curatorial machines
Within a culture that so privileges innovation, urban interfaces are much like 
‘laboratories for experimentation’, to borrow a term from science and tech-
nology studies. An experimental system, a laboratory can be conceived of as: 
‘a heterogeneous constellation of theories, objects, instruments and practices 
redefining each other constantly and whereby this redefining is the result of a 
play with possibilities and, ultimately, a form of problematisation’ (Keilbach 
and Strauff 2012: 83). Indeed, these urban interfaces explore and question 
their own possibilities. While we creatively invest in these projects and herald 
them as new interfaces for civic engagement, playful learning and participa-
tory culture, we need to develop tools for analysis, comparison and criticism.6 
However, traditional evaluative criticism struggles in understanding qualities 
that are also, precisely, inherent vulnerabilities of urban interfaces. When 
it comes to concerns about meaning and sustainability, our thinking about 
innovative and experimental interfaces must take into account the fact that 
such interfaces are inherently short-lived, that they enable but also require 
participatory engagement, and that they have a transformative potential that 
may or not be effectively deployed.
So, let us start with the specificity of urban, location-specific media ‘pro-
jects’. We consider these as dispositifs, in the sense of spatiotemporal situ-
ations or assemblages that bind together the image, the interface and the 
interfacing subject. We make a distinction, here, between the interface such 
as the device, installation, or screen as the site of input and output (when we 
speak of what we see and use) and the apparatus when we refer to the wider 
machinic assemblage of which it is part, which comprises, for example, also 
software, network protocols, GPS, online connectivity, etc. We speak of 
dispositif when we are concerned with the arrangement or relational system 
of interface and subject. This entails a perspective on the performativity of 
urban interfaces characterised by connectivity, participation and navigation, 
and brings to the fore the transformative, and thus, inherently critical poten-
tial of urban interfaces. This transformative potential is the locus of experi-
ence and meaning and, hence, cultural significance of design.
Central to this argument, and what we will consider here, is a concern 
with what we understand as critical and how curatorial ambitions of criti-
cality and care can be analysed in the context of these urban projects. This 
concern is augmented by often uncritical interpretations of criticality – ones 
which assume a simple deconstructionist approach or are pseudo-political 
yet do not allow us to theorise and reconceptualise its foundations. Central, 
then, in this context, is the concept of dispositif, for it allows us to con-
sider both the specificity of arrangements or assemblages – the design of 
elements and set-up that includes a participatory subject – and a critical per-
spective for how this subject is encapsulated and constructed by this design.
Many use the term ‘critical’ often but what do they mean by it? How does it 
work? What does it do? In the case of performative, interactive, participatory 

Curating the city  123
urban media interventions, it is perhaps productive to approach this as an 
embedded and embodied criticality. Criticality, in Irit Rogoff’s (2006) termi-
nology, refers to a performative function of critique, which is experienced in 
encounter, which ‘takes places’ at the interface:
[…] in a reflective shift, from the analytical to the performative function 
of observation and of participation, we can agree that meaning is not 
excavated for, but rather, that it ‘takes place’ in the present. The latter 
exemplifies not just the dynamics of learning from, of looking at and of 
interacting with, works of art in exhibitions and in public spaces, but 
echoes also the modes by which we have inhabited the critical and the 
theoretical over the recent past. It seems to me that within the space of a 
relatively short period we have been able to move from criticism to cri-
tique, and to what I am calling at present criticality. That is that we have 
moved […] to criticality which is operating from an uncertain ground of 
actual embeddedness.
(Rogoff 2006: 2; emphasis added)
It is there, outside the regime of representation and in the realm of per-
formativity, that, according to Rogoff, active and critical participants are 
produced. Indeed, interactive media design often explicitly addresses the 
connection between thinking and doing. By bringing together the creative, 
experimental and critical, philosophical underpinnings of the social-politi-
cal ambition of design, this reflection underscores the way in which design 
works with a layering of urban space – a layering that allows for a participa-
tory and critical engagement with urban culture; a layering that is designed 
and curated. As such, it is possible to approach urban interfaces, or loca-
tion-specific ‘media projects’, as curatorial machines; they are designed as 
techno-social assemblages that practise curation – the verb ‘practise’ under-
stood here to indicate process, rather than product – as they filter, select, 
order, shape content and meaning, and position the public as spectator or 
participant.
Saving Face as a curatorial machine
Let us now sketch two sets of aspects that we can develop in the analysis 
of curation: the earlier coupled analytical and rhetorical aspect of cura-
torial design (curatorial vision), and the overarching mission of care and 
critical potential (criticality) inherent in what we can call cultural cura-
tion: the care for and critical investment in the relationship between these 
three levels of curation. We do this by looking at the way Saving Face, in 
a reflexive gesture, demonstrates, questions, and, as such, critiques these 
aspects.
As a laboratory for experimentation, this work thematises the way in 
which its design establishes new connections, allows for forms of interaction 

124  Nanna Verhoeff and Clancy Wilmott
and encourages forms of haptic and participatory engagement. It asks for a 
critical–analytical perspective on its status: to make visible and to question 
the project as a form of design that, itself, makes statements about its own 
inherent critical potential, its criticality, that stems from the reciprocity of 
analysis and argument.
Saving Face explicitly addresses three aspects of the layered and location-
based interface that are brought together within a dispositif of urban inter-
faces: the participatory agency of the individual in the act of interfacing, the 
installation as public event, and the questioning of traceability of the image in 
the composite, networked collection or database. There lies its performativ-
ity.7 Significant about Saving Face is the centrality of the face in this layering 
– as the central image on the urban screen, in the intimacy of the participant’s 
gesture of stroking one’s own face in order to conjure up the screen image as 
a networked composition: a collage of the different faces of other, earlier par-
ticipants. The title of the work with the double entendre of recording one’s 
face and not losing face in front of (or facing) a public, brings to the fore 
the question of individuality and public identity. The face as quintessential 
communicative element in interaction provokes us to probe the notion of 
‘interface’ as central to curatorial design.
The interface of the installation works with the principle of touch and a 
haptic and material form of looking as a gesture of making, saving and trac-
ing the image, and, as such, seems to comment on several issues at stake in 
our argument. As an artwork, it puts technology and connectivity between 
the hand, the screens, and the archive, database or network centre stage. 
It is an interface par excellence and literalised by visualising the way it func-
tions as technological arrangement and the touch of the user that activates 
its operation. On the one hand, the artwork reminds its participants that 
they are being seen; that to be in urban, public space means to be visible. On 
the other hand, it endeavours to intervene in how visibility operates, how 
visibility – the public face – signifies. The gesture of touching one’s own face 
in order to visualise one’s self in relation to others points to the processual 
character of navigational gesture in the context of location-aware technolo-
gies. In this way, it harkens back to a long history in which photography (art) 
and policing (governance) are mutually informing. The artists themselves 
acknowledge this connection:
In a visual, poetic way Saving Face shows our emotional and social 
encounter with trust, visibility, privacy in our ‘smart’ cities. When 
­defining our identity and the identity of others, our sensory abilities 
are increasingly replaced by networked surveillance and identification 
­technologies. How do we experience the way our body and identity 
are being ‘measured’ as functional and controllable products? Can 
touch  based perception play again a role in experiencing the other’s 
identity?
(Lancel and Maat, 2012)8

Curating the city  125
As the artists indicate, Saving Face counters the abstraction we frequently 
encounter in public places. It gives significance to an activity – navigation 
and its gesture – that is routine, everyday and, presumably, inconsequential. 
By returning the ‘face’ to ‘interface’, the project raises questions about pres-
ence, subjectivity, visibility and the anonymity often attributed to being in 
public. The work is highly personal, yet combines the private intimacy of 
auto-touch – a gestural selfie – with a highly public and collaborative, yet 
very temporary, visibility on screen.
The collage of different faces displayed on screen is a tracing – as well as 
a tracking – of multiple actions by multiple participants accumulating and 
metamorphosing across multiple moments. A composite image, it speaks 
symbolically to the multiplicity of subjectivity and to the temporal layering 
of various individual presences. The processuality of the navigational gesture 
does leave a trace – albeit an untraceable one. An iconic image of individual 
faces – fractured and reassembled into a new whole – it says: ‘we were here’ 
rather than who we are. The image testifies to past gestures, the image’s mor-
phing evolution inviting further interaction and gesturing. At the same time, 
each live update of this visualisation keeps record of – or tracks – the to-be-
future traces (uploaded in a Flickr stream). The installation bears witness to 
and renders visible the processual layering that is the semiotic process of the 
navigational gesture: a trace of the act of tracing.
The way in which the urban, public context is a layer in the design that 
requires curating, becomes clear when we consider the way this installation 
– like so many locative media or artworks – travels. Its location specificity 
is one that is, paradoxically, flexible. Elsewhere, Verhoeff (2012) has spoken 
about the ambulant locatedness of mobile media; here, migrating locatedness 
may be more appropriate. Indeed, each location-specific installation entails 
curatorial design, as not every public place is the same. While both are urban 
spaces, on a well-known square in Amsterdam, the work functions differently 
from, say, within the walls of a museum.
For example, a different version of Saving Face, named Master Touch 
(Lancel and Maat 2013), was set up in the then-newly opened Rijksmuseum 
for the special occasion of the Museum Night in 2013. There, the images of 
participants merged with faces of paintings. The similarity between the two 
installations allows us to consider what makes them different. If we depart 
from an analysis of dispositif, this comparison between both works hinges, 
we would say, very much on both the level of the location specificity of the 
spatial context and the level of its networked connectivity – in the second 
case, comprising a dataset of images from the museum collection rather than 
other participants from other locations or other moments.
The description the artists give highlights some interestingly different key-
words: ‘Master Touch is an engaging and innovative way to open up data 
from the digital museum collection for the audience’ (Lancel and Maat 2013). 
This mission sounds different from the earlier cited descriptor of Saving 
Face: ‘In a visual, poetic way, Saving Face shows our emotional and social 

126  Nanna Verhoeff and Clancy Wilmott
encounter with trust, visibility, privacy in our ‘smart’ cities’. We do not 
have space to go further into the specificity of these differences in vision 
and mission – nor into the theoretical question about whether and how to 
consider these as either different installations or different instalments of the 
same installation – but the juxtaposition of their similarities and differences 
hopefully demonstrates our point about the levels of the curatorial design of 
layered interfaces of networked, locative dispositifs.
The design of the interface can be considered a form of curation-at-work, 
as it makes visible the layers of curation as process. It reflects on the layering 
of the cultural dispositif that comprises the in-situ installation, the local urban 
and public context and the spatiotemporal interlocal network it is embedded 
in. Curation on this level entails the design of the possible interaction with 
technology to generate images, to contribute them to a collection, to create 
compositions, to disseminate for an engaging, local public. It is curation of 
curation – so to speak – an embodied self-reflexivity. By working with these 
principles, the installation demonstrates its principles. This opens up to the 
critical potential inherent in the curatorial.
Conclusion: care and criticality
But what of the curatorial ambition of care? Let us remind ourselves that 
curation comes from the verb ‘to care’. This may seem like a detour from the 
concept of the curatorial and of software, code and the built environment, 
but in fact, care is indispensable in all times and places to allow life to be 
sustained, including the life of social ensembles we call cultures. But care is 
necessary in many respects, not just in the sense of sustainability. The need 
to care for objects includes what is usually called conservation in the context 
of collections, but also the quality of their presentation. It includes the inter-
relations amongst objects and the enhanced meanings that may generate in 
their dialogue.
Moreover, care is needed for the objects’ dialogue with the public, includ-
ing but not limited to physical interactivity. All this may seem to suggest that 
we must hold the objects’ hand, in an affective relationship. But rather than 
such a chaperone model, curation can also be thought of as the design of a 
laboratory. Then, it is not so much in relation to this more nostalgic notion 
of care in conservation, but rather as care for the arrangement of possibilities 
and experimentation.
Let us conclude with some thoughts about the implications of the model 
of curating as an analytical framing concept and frame the features, poten-
tial and consequences for a broader notion of cultural curating. Through 
the notion of curating, we can reflect on urban media with the question 
about what we may take as the consequences of performativity as central to 
dispositifs of networked, location-based, interactive technologies: the ques-
tion of care and criticality in design. The curation of culture is the agency 
and creativity that connects the making with the dissemination of images. 

Curating the city  127
The agency is, then, thought of in terms of affordances and responsibilities; 
the creativity as productive, personal and critical; making, contributing and 
assessing.9
This conclusion is also a proposal to think of design in terms of care. In 
what way can we embrace and make use of those technologies that poten-
tially change (or have changed) the status of the image? Our key word, care, 
can be seen to be embodied, or practised, in the installation Saving Face. 
There, the central and intimate act of stroking one’s face becomes a contribu-
tion to a shared collage, or composite image. This gesture is literally, as well 
as figuratively, care-ful: the visibility of the subject being on a public screen, 
adding to the community, underscores the personal and hence responsible 
nature of the act of participating. One becomes visually part of the image, 
adding one’s face to the otherwise anonymous image.
Networked culture and technological innovation demand changing the 
principles and the philosophy of the design of public engagement. New plat-
forms outside of the institutions provide new curatorial spaces, and technolo-
gies offer new tools for public interventions. Moreover, curation in and of 
urban space necessarily involves multiple levels of (spatiotemporal) design: 
of the dispositif of the location-based project, of the urban dispositif, as well 
as the more distributed and interlocal networked dispositif. The principles of 
current networked, urban culture and our fast-changing media technologies 
not only demand critical thinking about, or better, within design, but also 
offer the tools to change practices of engaging publics. Indeed, transforma-
tion and change require and enable a fundamentally critical stance: not a 
critique outside of it, but a criticality embedded or embodied within design. 
Changing technologies demands not only for critical reflection on design but, 
perhaps more urgently, a criticality within design – a design of the interac-
tion with technology that allows for a closer experience of the processes of 
its framing as a poetic act. As interactive projects, or curatorial machines 
such as Saving Face exemplify, it is by being in touch with the work that we 
participate in its examination, by tracing its criticality below the surface.
Notes
1	 Elsewhere, Verhoeff (2013) has invoked McLuhan’s (1964) famous dictum in the 
title of an essay on the performative nature of interactive technologies and the 
agency involved in using interfaces for navigation.
2	 Lev Manovich’s (2001) conception of cultural interfaces is a dialogue of software 
operation and human activity in their operation, in a working together of cultural, 
technological and ‘human’ registers.
3	 See Kessler (2007). Kessler is specifically referring here to a special issue of Hermès 
(no 25, 1999).
4	 Inspired by similar questions is a more ‘science–technology–society’ approach to 
networks that focuses on processes in which human and non-human actors oper-
ate. Similar is the network-based thinking, but in contrast with perspectives of 
‘science–technology–society’ or ‘actor–network theory’, dispositif analysis is more 
concerned with questions of subjectivity, discourse and power.

128  Nanna Verhoeff and Clancy Wilmott
5	 But then, exhibitions are already inherently mobile, if we consider their performa-
tivity as I have unpacked it at the beginning of this chapter. The spectator, visitor 
or participant is, after all, mobile in the exhibition. The tour, then, is only a geo-
graphically wider net to capture what is at stake in exhibition.
6	 Civic learning can be considered ‘a form of engagement that combines participa-
tion with the act of reflection’. See Gordon and Baldwin-Philippi (2014).
7	 As argued elsewhere, the notion of ‘layering’ is meant to be productive for the 
analysis of hybrid compositions of interfaces, images and spatial constructions of 
navigation, as a product of interfacing (Verhoeff 2012).
8	 For moving images of Saving Face see Lancel and Maat (2011).
9	 Others have made a plea for the connection between critique and analysis, and 
the making of images. Laura Marks (2002), for example, has developed a notion 
of haptic visuality to conceptualise a more intimate form of critique, and Kember 
and Zylinska (2012: xvii) speak of media production and enactment and plead for 
a form of doing media studies – a creative mediation – that is critique ‘accompanied 
by the work of participation and invention’.
References
Bal, M. (1996) Double Exposures: The Practice of Cultural Analysis, London: 
Routledge.
Burdick, A. Drucker, J. Lunenfeld, P. Presner, T. and Schnapp, J. (2012) Digital_
Humanities, Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
de Certeau, M. (1980) L’Invention du Quotidien, 1: Arts de Faire, Paris: Éditions du 
Cerf.
Gibson, J. (1979) The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception, Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin.
Gordon, E. and Baldwin-Philippi, J. (2014) ‘Playful civic learning: enabling reflec-
tion and lateral trust in game-based public participation’, International Journal of 
Communication, 8: 759–86.
Keilbach, J. and Strauff, M. (2012) ‘When old media never stopped being new: televi-
sion’s history as an ongoing experiment’, in M. de Valck and J. Teurlings (eds) After 
the Break: Television Theory Today, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Kember, S. and Zylinksa, J. (2012) Life after New Media: Mediation as a Vital 
Process, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kessler, F. (2007) ‘Notes on dispositif’, Utrecht Media Research Seminar, available 
from http://www.hum.uu.nl/medewerkers/f.e.kessler/Dispositif%20Notes11-2007.
pdf [accessed 25 August 2015].
Kitchin, R. and Dodge, M. (2011) Code/Space: Software and Everyday Life, 
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Kossmann, H., Mulder, S. and den Oudsten, F. (2012) Narrative Spaces: On the Art 
of Exhibiting, Rotterdam: 101 Publishers.
Lancel, K. and Maat, H. (2011) Saving Face, available from https://vimeo.
com/28499178 [accessed 24 November 2015].
Lancel, K. and Maat, H. (2012) Saving Face, available from www.lancelmaat.nl/
work/saving-face/ [accessed 17 May 2015].
Lancel, K. and Maat, H. (2013) Master Touch, available from www.lancelmaat.nl/
work/master-touch [accessed 20 November 2015].
Leger, M.J. (2013) ‘Homo academicus curatorius: millet matrix as intercultural para-
digm’, On Curating, 19(June 2013): 14–22.

Curating the city  129
McLuhan, M. (1964) The Medium Is the Message, Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Manovich, L. (2001) The Language of New Media, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Manovich, L. (2013) Software Takes Command, New York: Bloomsbury Academic.
Marks, L. (2002) Touch: Sensuous Theory and Multisensory Media, Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Rogoff, I. (2006) ‘Smuggling’ – An Embodied Criticality, available from http://­
curatorial.net/resources/Rogoff_Smuggling.pdf [accessed 25 August 2015].
Rouvroy, A. and Stiegler, B. (2015) ‘Le régime de vérité numérique: de la gou-
vernementalité algorithmique à un nouvel État de droit’, Socio, 4: 113–40, available 
from https://socio.revues.org/1251 [accessed 25 August 2015].
van den Boomen, M. (2014) Transcoding the Digital: How Metaphors Matter in 
New Media, Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures.
Verhoeff, N. (2012) Mobile Screens: The Visual Regime of Navigation, Amsterdam: 
Amsterdam University Press.
Verhoeff, N. (2013) ‘The medium is the method: locative media for digital archives’, 
in J. Eckel, B. Leiendecker, D. Olek and C. Piepiorka (eds) (Dis)Orienting Media 
and Narrative Mazes, Bielefeld: Transcript.
Verhoeff, N. and Cooley, H. (2014) ‘The navigational gesture: traces and tracings 
at  the mobile touchscreen interface’, Necsus #5: Traces, available from http://
www.necsus-ejms.org/navigational-gesture-traces-tracings-mobile-touchscreen-­
interface/ [accessed 25 August 2015].

10	 Moving applications
A multilayered approach to mobile 
computing
James Merricks White
Introduction
Smartphone applications (or apps) are a relatively recent but already near-
ubiquitous media for engaging with the city, particularly in the global north. 
A search for ‘Dublin’ on Apple’s App Store and Google Play reveals a rich 
marketplace of apps for, amongst other things: catching up on local news, 
monitoring flight arrivals, navigating tourist attractions, negotiating bus 
timetables, finding bicycle or car hire services, paying for parking, discov-
ering events and finding the right restaurant. Smartphone applications are 
a common, everyday way of exploring the city. For an urban geographer 
interested in the intersection of code and the city, smartphone applications 
offer a rich seam of research, but one that is not without its challenges. On the 
surface, applications offer a quite simple representation of information about 
a particular subject. But to perform this task they rely on a vast network of 
interlocking technologies with a complex spatial topology. This chapter offers 
a multilayered model, to open the black box, and provide a heuristic for criti-
cally examining mobile applications. The aim of this model is clear enough to 
be readily graspable, but not so reductive as to limit empirical engagement.
This chapter is organised in three parts. I begin by looking at different 
approaches to computational technology in the city from within the disci-
pline of geography. I make the argument that previous research has tended 
to focus on one particular layer of what I am calling the socio-technical 
stack and so fetishise that layer at the expense of others. I next present a 
multilayered model and chart its conceptual origin within media studies and 
science and technology studies. This is then used to think through two apps, 
Hailo and Moves, with particular attention given to their points of intersec-
tion with urban politics. This discussion is based on my own experience 
with the applications, on informal discussions with friends and colleagues, 
and on encounters with people using the applications in Dublin. I will – not 
unproblematically – refer to a ‘normal use’ of Hailo and Moves. I conclude 
by touching on what a multilayered approach might mean for geographical 
enquiry into code and the city, and by highlighting some of the literature that 
might prove useful in developing a more fully conceived ontology.

Moving applications  131
The geography of mobile computing
While geographers have theorised the spatialities of hardware (Graham and 
Marvin 2001), software (Kinsley 2014) and data (Wilson 2011), there remains 
little concerted effort within the discipline to explore mobile computing as a 
socio-technical system that incorporates all of these aspects.
In their development of the concept of splintering urbanism, Graham and 
Marvin (2001) emphasise the control that private and publicly listed compa-
nies increasingly have over networked infrastructure. They contend that the 
liberalisation and privatisation of the welfare state has led to an unbundling 
and stratification of utility provision and an overshadowing of its role within 
everyday life. While their exploration of the politics of infrastructure has 
motivated proper attention to the materialities of technology in the city, 
Graham and Marvin focus on political economic forces. As a result, they 
leave unexplored two questions important to a study of mobile computing. 
How do networked devices move? And how can computationally enabled 
agency be properly accounted for?
The geography of software offers some ways to begin to address these ques-
tions. For Thrift and French (2002), software is both a hybrid human-object 
network and a performative textuality. In the first instance, the modelling of 
algorithms after biological systems has imbued in software a semi-artificial 
life. Software is understood as a non-human actor, capable of its own agency 
but contingent upon its contextual relations. In the second instance, software 
is presented as a way of doing by writing; ‘a new kind of cultural memory’ 
(Thrift and French 2002: 310). Code is thus able to write new geographies, of 
which Thrift and French draw attention to geographies of software produc-
tion, geographies of power and geographies of play. While making an impor-
tant theoretical contribution, Thrift and French tend to elide the very real 
spatial inequalities within which software is produced and in turn reproduces.
Stephen Graham (2005) addresses the politics of computation in the city by 
introducing the concept of software-sorted geographies. A software-sorted 
geography is any space that has been produced through automated analysis 
and regulation. Graham focuses on three kinds of geography: (1) urban 
access and mobility, controlled by automated traffic and transportation sys-
tems; (2) planning and construction, mediated through the use of geographi-
cal information and geodemographic systems; and (3) the use of algorithmic 
closed circuit television systems to record, and then sort, order and classify 
people and objects in the city. The concealment of the decision making pro-
cesses that produce such geographies leads Graham to argue that software 
must be understood as thoroughly political.
Through the introduction of the concept of code/space, Kitchin and Dodge 
(2011) have endeavoured to show how software and space are mutually con-
stituted. A code/space is a processual transduction of space produced to solve 
a specific problem – one example they give is of the code/space produced in an 
airport when one seeks to check in; if the computers are not working, then the 

132  James Merricks White
space is not transduced as intended and instead acts as a waiting room. Code/
spaces owe their existence to correctly functioning software; if the software 
program crashes or encounters fatal errors, the code/space cannot be formed 
or sustained. This allows Kitchin and Dodge to illustrate that the experi-
ence of everyday life in the city is determined by software (which is, itself, 
dependent on a coming together of contested technologies, subjectivities and 
practices) acting in a range of capacities and across a variety of scales.
Taking up the theoretical work of Kitchin and Dodge, Wilson (2011) 
argues that data, through processes of standardisation and objectification, 
have both material form and significance. Data, metadata and their storage 
in databases are standardised as methods of organising, storing, transporting 
and retrieving information. Held together by geographically situated prac-
tices, a data set might then be understood as an assemblage of different actors 
and institutions, contingent but distinct from software: a data infrastructure 
(Lauriault 2012; Kitchin 2014).
While geographies of software and more recent work on data infrastruc-
tures help account for the mobility and secondary agency of mobile comput-
ing, these approaches often downplay the contested materialities of computer 
hardware. There is, in effect, a collapsing of the actual into the virtual (Kinsley 
2014). If researchers are to properly examine the ways in which computation 
is articulated through its normal use, it will be necessary, as Gabrys has 
argued (2014: 39), to consider the way in which software is interwoven with 
other material aspects of the computational apparatus. To this end, I will 
now offer a model of interdependent technologies, what might be called 
a socio-technical stack, for the examination of mobile computing (Losey 
2014). By giving hardware, data(bases) and media interfaces an equivalent 
ontological attention to software, I hope to reveal previously unaccounted 
for intersections of computation and the city.
The hardware–code–data(base)–interface stack
The production of computation is generated, I contend, through four inter-
locking and hierarchically organised components: hardware, code, data(base) 
and media interfaces (see the right-hand part of Figure 10.1).1 This is not pre-
sented as a realist conceptualisation of smartphone applications, but rather 
in the hope that it might serve as a useful heuristic in critical examinations of 
mobile computing systems. Before applying these concepts to the apps Hailo 
and Moves, I will outline the origin of the stack model within media studies, 
and science and technology studies.
Legal scholar Yochai Benkler offers a model of the Internet (see the left-
hand part of Figure 10.1) composed of three discrete layers (2006: 391–392): 
physical, logical and content. The physical layer consists of the material 
infrastructure, which connects people together. The content layer includes 
both the meaningful representations, which people use to communicate, and 
the mechanisms by which people filter, accredit and interpret that content. 

Moving applications  133
Finally, the logical layer connects the physical and content layers through 
codified algorithms, standards and protocols of interaction. All three layers 
are necessary for communication and all three layers form the locus of dis-
tinct policy debates.
Jonathan Zittrain (2008) adapts Benkler’s model, to explore the genera-
tive nature of communicative computational technologies. His model (see 
the centre part of Figure 10.1) is best represented as a technological layer 
(which is itself composed of physical (material) and protocol (translative) 
layers), an application layer, and then more tentatively asserted content and 
social layers (Zittrain 2008: 67). The physical layer includes the wires or air-
waves through which data move. Above that is the application layer, which 
encompasses all of the various and multifaceted work performed by people 
with computation. Between these two layers is a mediating protocol layer. 
Zittrain likens the protocol to the neck of an hourglass through which every-
thing flows. As counterpoint to the underdeveloped content and social layers 
(which consist of the information exchanged in a network and the embodied 
practices enabled by the model respectively), I propose that the technological 
and the application layers might better be understood as embedded socio-
technical assemblages, which are continually being produced in a citational 
manner by human and non-human actors operating at diverse capacities and 
scales. Such a framing repositions the protocol as open to contestation, but 
also acknowledges the role it plays within a larger computational apparatus 
as an instrument of governance.
While the models developed by Zittrain and Benkler suitably emphasise 
the fixing of mobile computing’s various components into hierarchies of tech-
nological interdependence, their concepts fail to align with those experienced 
by, and co-productive of, normal use. In her deconstruction of popular social 
media platforms, media and communications scholar José van Dijck (2013) 
weds science and technology studies with a critical approach to political 
economy. Drawing on the aims of actor–network theory ‘to map relations 
between technologies and people and […] to explain how these relations are 
hardware
code
data(base)
media interface
physical
protocol
technological
}
application
content
social
physical
logical
content
Figure 10.1  From left to right: Benkler’s model, Zittrain’s model and the proposed 
model

134  James Merricks White
both material and semiotic’ (2013: 26), van Dijck proposes five concepts 
to trace the socio-technological relations of online social networking plat-
forms. These are: meta(data), algorithms, protocols, interfaces and defaults. 
Data are the quantitative and qualitative information used for computation 
and metadata the information used to order and understand those data. An 
algorithm is a list of instructions a computer follows to produce a certain 
output from a specific input. Protocols are codified behaviours and norms 
of computational interaction. Interfaces, both internal and customer-facing, 
mediate interaction, effectively translating the desires of the user to code 
and vice versa. Finally, defaults are settings that are automatically assigned 
within a piece of software. This framework is specific enough to examine 
the materialities and power networks of mobile computing, and it refrains 
from reducing the social to an effect of the technological. By not focusing on 
hardware, however, it uproots computational technology from its material 
geography. While this may allow van Dijck to examine social media as a 
global and globalising technology, it renders the model unsuitable for analy-
ses where the local is significant.
By focusing on hardware and restricting interfaces to media interfaces (see 
the right-hand part of Figure 10.1), I am attempting to allow for the way in 
which the flows of code and data are, in the first instance, reliant upon geo-
graphically distributed technology and, in the second, reterritorialised at the 
point of their consumption. Rather than include all of van Dijck’s concepts, 
I reposition protocols and defaults as supporting scripts, which intertwine 
with the four layers of the model and enable them to come together. It is 
my  hope that the hardware–code–data(base)–interface model allows not 
only for the mobility of mobile computing, but also the way in which it 
is processually articulated in specific and situated ways. In the next sections, 
I present two examples of how the model can be used to make sense of the 
taxi service application, Hailo, and the personal life-logging application, 
Moves.
Hailo and the externalisation of fixed capital
Hailo is the market-leading smartphone taxi app in Ireland. Launched in July 
2012, the service is currently used by around half of Dublin’s 12,000 taxi driv-
ers. In this section, I use the proposed socio-technical stack to explore how 
Hailo does work in the world and argue that its business model is dependent 
upon infrastructure that is external to its operating costs.
When using the Hailo app (Figure 10.2), the immediate and most obvious 
hardware that a person interacts with is the piece in their hand. The smart-
phone is an instantly recognisable artefact, at once a cohesive, singular object 
and an assemblage of specific (and often rare) materials and digital compo-
nents. Just as the smartphone blackboxes its workings from a user, so too 
does its consumable form distance the user from the work contributing to its 
design, sourcing and production. While the compact form of the smartphone 

Figure 10.2  From left to right: Hailo tour feature (location refinement), taxis near Muckross Parade, tracking the driver in real time and 
automatic card payment
Source:  Hailo app screenshots. Dates: (a) 11 November 2013; (b), (c) & (d) 7 March 2014

136  James Merricks White
is fundamental to its mobility, the arrangement of hardware, code and data 
transmission protocols recruited by Hailo far exceed the media interface 
manipulated by its user. When a user orders a taxi using Hailo, the phone 
transmits data to a nearby cell tower, which then routes this data onto the 
Internet and on towards Hailo’s servers. If the user then phones the driver to 
confirm the location, instead of routing data on to the Internet, the cell tower 
passes it to the fixed-line telecommunications infrastructure. In Ireland, these 
networks are largely operated by Eircom, a formerly state-owned monopoly, 
which was floated on the Irish and New York stock exchanges in 1999. 
Individual carriers lease access to this infrastructure at a cost, which is osten-
sibly passed on to the user through fees and contracts.
Both code and (meta)data are crucial in allowing this exchange of informa-
tion to occur. While the interface is the most visible layer to the users, many 
of the communicative actions initiated through normal use are carried out 
by the code architecture upon which the application operates. For reasons of 
security, third-party access to a smartphone’s underlying hardware is strictly 
mediated by both the phone’s operating system and the firmware running on 
its baseband processor. A smartphone’s functionality is managed through 
code libraries and frameworks used in the development of an application. 
The Hailo application reveals itself as a cohesive whole but is in fact interwo-
ven with the code–hardware of the phone.
This permeability goes further. Transmitted data are bundled up with spe-
cific information about the data to ensure that they are correctly received and 
processed by the telecommunications infrastructure. The metadata, found 
in the header of a data packet, include a protocol version number as well as 
the data’s source and their destination. This information is of crucial impor-
tance to data transference – without it, communication could not occur. 
Transmission protocols are not a form of control directed by any one actor, 
but rather a commonly adopted standard. Control becomes endogenous to 
the technological system itself (Galloway 2004).
The layered assemblage that determines Hailo’s use is simultaneously 
recruited by the application and hidden by the interface at the moment of 
normal use (Chun 2004). This network-in-the-pocket capacity of mobile 
computing is generative of Hailo’s business model. Taxi hire companies in 
Dublin operate in a market of individualised licensing. In addition to plying for 
hire (being in motion and available for hire) and standing for hire (being sta-
tionary and available for hire), taxi drivers can increase their number of fares 
by enrolling the services of a taxi hire company. When a customer phones a 
taxi hire company, its radio-enabled network is then leveraged to source an 
available driver. This model is dependent upon the installation of a commu-
nications unit in driver’s vehicle. The hire of this is incorporated into the cost 
of the service – in Dublin, around €100 a week.
Hailo does not need to install any of its own radio communication equip-
ment, instead relying on external telecommunications infrastructure. In com-
parison with traditional taxi hire companies, Hailo has low fixed capital costs 

Moving applications  137
and low associated installation and maintenance costs. Where code performs 
the role of the radio operator, there are also presumably fewer attendant 
labour costs. This leads to a considerably different pricing model. Rather 
than charge a subscription fee, Hailo extracts a 12% commission – minus 
VAT and card processing costs – on every fare sourced through the app. This 
flexibility lowers the threshold on driver uptake and constitutes a significant 
threat to existing taxi hire companies.
There is, however, an important geographical caveat to be made. In cities 
such as Dublin – where there is a confluence of high population density, a 
high number of taxis per head and a high usage of smartphones – the ben-
efits of Hailo to both drivers and passengers outweigh those offered by the 
radio network of taxi hire companies. In a geographical location where taxi 
or smartphone use is more sparsely distributed, Hailo has less opportunity 
to draw upon existing infrastructure. Where I work in Maynooth – a small 
university town 25 km west of Dublin – it is very difficult to find a taxi using 
Hailo. In such locations, both spatial scarcity and community loyalty lead 
to less competition between Hailo and existing taxi hire services. In these 
instances, the volume of jobs rather than the rate of commission is the dictat-
ing competitive factor.
On the whole, it is the geographically dispersed hardware external to Hailo 
that allows it to compete favourably with existing taxi services. The ability 
to leverage an already existing general purpose hardware–code stack, rather 
than design, implement and install a bespoke infrastructural architecture, 
allows smartphone applications to grow quickly and flexibly. This mecha-
nism underlies many of the disruptive economics of apps, and poses a chal-
lenge to the necessarily slow-moving regulatory frameworks at local and 
national scales.
Moves and the automatic extraction of value
Moves was launched on the Apple App Store in January 2013 by Finnish 
developer ProtoGeo Oy. The app is a life-logger, which collects personal 
information for the analysis of physical exercise and daily activities. Rather 
than depend on a device worn on the user’s wrist (as in other commercial 
solutions, such as Nike’s FuelBand or Sony’s SmartBand), Moves runs in 
the background during everyday smartphone use, collecting information 
available to it from the phone’s hardware (the GPS receiver, the GSM and 
Wi-Fi modules and the accelerometer) to determine how a user moves in 
and through space. This information is then represented in a visually acces-
sible way. In this section, I draw on the hardware–code–data(base)–interface 
model to emphasise the importance of the graphical user interface to the 
familiarity of the application and then the extensibility of its data to its 
longevity. I argue that its acquisition by Facebook for an undisclosed sum in 
April 2014 was predicated upon the perceived value and future monetisation 
of this granular user information.

138  James Merricks White
There are essentially two modes to Moves’ user interface. The first shows 
periods of low or no movement as oval nodes and periods of movement 
between them as coloured lines (see the left-hand panel of Figure 10.3). Nodes 
are initially represented by the app as a small map; a spatial region. These 
Figure 10.3  Clockwise from top left: Moves interface mode (temporal 
representation), two views of Moves interface mode (spatial representation) and 
third-party services built using the Moves API
Source:  Move app screenshots (except 7.3(d)). Dates: (a) this is an edited composite of 
5 screenshots; 12 August 2014; (b) & (c) 12 August 2014; (d) this an edited composite of 
2 screenshots from https://apps.moves-app.com; 17 July 2014

Moving applications  139
can be designated as a place by the user (using Foursquare’s open database 
of user-generated locations) and will subsequently be shown using an icon 
intended to symbolise that place’s associated activity. The colours of connect-
ing lines represent the activity estimated to have been undertaken between 
locations: green showing walking; pink, running; grey, some other form of 
transportation. By touching on any node or line, the user enters the second 
interface mode (see the top right panels of Figure 10.3). Here, temporal rep-
resentation is sacrificed for a clear representation of spatial information by 
way of a map. In this mode, moving through time is achieved with the arrow 
buttons at the bottom of the screen. Moves’ modal interface is simple to use 
and intuitive to a regular smartphone user. There is an important sense, then, 
in which the cultural capacity of interfaces exceeds specific applications.
Visual and gestural cues accrete into norms of interactive behaviour. These 
are built-on by daily use with an application. Consider one of the most per-
sistent visual devices drawn upon by Moves: the map. Maps are produced 
in-the-moment for a specific purpose; brought into being through their read-
ing (Kitchin and Dodge 2007). In the mobile computing map, this manifests 
through a tension between the general and the specific. On the one hand, 
the map is a visual representation produced by the Moves code, which in 
turn – in my use of the application on an iPhone – relies on functions speci-
fied in iOS’s MapKit Framework. This architecture allows maps to be easily 
embedded within iOS applications and facilitates the translation of pinching 
and panning gestures between mobile applications and across Apple devices. 
On the other hand, the map is specifically produced by the code–data–inter-
face stack for an individual user at a specific moment in time. Prior to its 
visualisation on the screen, the information collected by Moves must be 
processed and reformatted. Data gathered about location (from the GPS 
receiver) and movement (from the accelerometer) are sent to Moves’ servers, 
where the various activities undertaken during a specific time are calculated. 
This is rearranged in a data format (a JSON array), which can act as input 
to the app’s code–interface, and is then sent back to the phone. Moves’ map 
interface is both general in the conventions of its use and specific in the data 
that it renders on the screen. The visual device of the map enacts a form of 
knowledge, which moves through space and time, between users and across 
devices, but is sufficiently mutable to accommodate their particular needs.
While Moves draws on an aesthetic of visual interface design, it refrains 
from locking the user into its particular media interface. The data collected 
by the application have been made potentially accessible and manipulable 
through an application program interface (API), such that Moves itself offers 
its own architecture for third-party software development (the bottom left 
panel of Figure 10.3 shows some of the services using data collected by 
Moves). For example, MMapper is a Processing sketch, offering simple filters 
for visualisations of Moves data (see the left-hand panel of Figure 10.4), and 
Move-O-Scope is a Web application allowing the data to be collated and 
compared across longer periods of time (the right-hand side of Figure 10.4). 

Figure 10.4  Left: MMapper Processing sketch. Right: Move-O-Scope Web application
Source:  (a) screenshot of a Processing sketch, MMapper; 17 July 2014 
(b) screenshot of https://move-o-scope.halftone.co/vis/user/[id anonymised]; 17 July 2014

Moving applications  141
These applications leverage different hardware–code stacks and represent 
data to the user through graphical interfaces that have different properties 
to the Moves app. The potential for its data to be open and fluid reinscribes 
Moves as a platform for life logging more generally, but begs the question: 
what is it about data in this instance that is of value beyond the other compo-
nents of the mobile computing stack?
Life logging might be understood as a mechanism for automatically extract-
ing data from users. I want to suggest that this is a kind of work, closely related 
to free labour as conceptualised by Terranova (2004), but different in that inac-
tion and sedentary behaviour are also captured, quantified and rendered as a 
source of value. There are two important ways in which data might be of value 
to companies. First, data offer immediate value as a representation of past life: 
they can be organised, processed and visualised to facilitate benchmarking, 
decision making and targeted advertising. This can be used as the foundation 
for products and services, which can be sold back to the user. Second, and 
more significantly, data act as a form of material fixity for the future realisa-
tion of profit. The expectation of as yet performed analysis and calculation 
upon data, as well as its potential for exposing the body and its movement to 
financial instrumentation, account for much of the monetary value assigned 
to data in the present. As such, the acquisition of Moves by Facebook is not 
only an effort to obtain a platform for the automatic extraction of data, but 
also serves as a fix for its surplus stores of capital. Understood through their 
present and anticipated value, data become a deeply political issue, closely 
entwined with the continual expansion of capitalism (Federici 2004).
Politics beyond software assemblages
Within media and communications studies (Galloway 2004; van Dijck 2013), 
geographies of software (Thrift and French 2002: Graham 2005: Kitchin 
and Dodge 2011), and in the emerging area of software studies (Fuller 2008: 
Manovich 2013), software, what I have been treating here as a combination 
of code and media interface is often given ontological precedence over hard-
ware and data. This is for two reasons. First, the decentralised execution of 
algorithms and protocols affords digital computation much of its agentive 
capacity. Second, code itself does work as a new kind of commodity entan-
gled with, and co-productive of, the forces of globalisation. Increasingly, to 
understand global capital, labour markets, production and everyday eco-
nomic practices, it is crucial that researchers have a solid grasp of software. 
While it is not my intention to deny the need for such engagement, I feel that 
it is important to acknowledge that the flows of software are predicated upon 
networked hardware and data infrastructures. To give ontological priority 
to software de-emphasises this stack of interdependence and the politics by 
which it is given context.
By considering the significance of hardware, the spatial is reintroduced and 
with it the local materialities with which software interacts. Hailo shows why 

142  James Merricks White
this is crucial to an understanding of mobile computing. Hardware is fixed 
capital where software is fluid. Where network infrastructure permeates the 
city, external to but spatially colocated with everyday life, potentially disrup-
tive business models can emerge and with them a suite of situated legal and 
regulatory issues. By considering the significance of data as a dynamic run-
ning transverse to software, the politics of computation can be freshly con-
ceptualised. Moves is a good example of how data can exceed the software 
configurations in which it is represented. Data are more than just a represen-
tation of reality, however. Data can also become a kind of life to those who 
analyse them and value to those seeking to acquire them. Just as software is 
significant to an understanding of the fluxes and flows of globalisation, so 
too are data. As a methodological tool, the multilayered hardware–code–
data(base)–interface model is able to express these political and economic 
entanglements in a way that research prioritising software is not always able 
to. It is only through proper examination of the ways in which these various 
assemblages are hierarchically arranged that we might properly appreciate 
how computation and the city are mutually constituted (Chapter 2; see also, 
Kitchin and Lauriault 2014).
In this examination of mobile computing, I have drawn loosely on theorisa-
tions of actor-networks and assemblages without trying to fit the proposed 
model within a theoretically fleshed-out ontology. Here, I want to briefly touch 
on what an engagement with this literature might offer the proposed model. 
The target of Bruno Latour’s actor–network theory is no less than the social 
itself – or, at the very least, the way in which sociality and social bonds are 
fetishised for their explanatory power within Durkheimian analyses (Latour 
2005). Rather than understand phenomena through these top-down forces, 
Latour urges the social scientist to slowly follow the connections between 
human and non-human actors, ‘redefining sociology not as the “science of the 
social”, but as the tracing of associations’ (Latour 2005: 5). By providing a 
rich, descriptive exploration of the ways in which local phenomena assemble, 
the social might begin to be rebuilt from the bottom up, taking proper account 
of the agency of things. In his determination to reboot the project of social 
enquiry, I worry that Latour leaves too little room for the systemic political 
and economic forces which I have drawn on in relation to Hailo and Moves.
By contrast, Foucault (1980) uses the idea of the dispositif, or apparatus, 
to draw attention to the complex arrangement of discourses and institutions 
that enables the formation and maintenance of knowledge in service to a stra-
tegic political function. Here, the social solidifies into expressions of power or 
knowledge, which are, in the first instance, political. Similarly, Deleuze and 
Guattari (1987) employ the notion of the assemblage in an effort to open up 
new forms of political engagement (Tampio 2009). Of importance in their use 
of the concept is externality – ‘relations are external to their terms’ (Deleuze 
and Parnet 1977: 41) – by which they mean that any actor in an assemblage 
has the potential to exceed that particular arrangement of its relations. This 
is in keeping with my exploration of Hailo and Moves, where hardware and 

Moving applications  143
data do considerable work beyond their configuration within the mobile 
application assemblage under review.
McFarlane (2011) and Anderson et al. (2012) have respectively explored 
what assemblage theory might mean for urban theory and social-spatial 
theory more broadly. Through an engagement with the materialist and realist 
philosophy of Manuel DeLanda (2006), they propose four areas that might 
be fruitful for geography: an experimental realism; an emphasis on relations 
within and beyond assemblages; a rethinking of agency and causality in 
distributed terms; and, an awareness of shifting capacities as assemblages 
mutate and stabilise. These have informed my approach even in my reluc-
tance to assert the realism of the hardware–code–data(base)–interface stack.
While these approaches have their various strengths and weaknesses, there 
seems to remain an issue of ontological disconnect between empirical tracings 
of socio-technical systems, on the one hand, and the political and economic 
forces at play in the city, on the other. Perhaps, as suggested in Chapter 2, 
there is an opportunity ‘to scale the socio-technical perspective up, and drill 
the urban studies focus down so that they overlap in view and epistemology’. 
As a geographer thinking about the relationship between code and the city, 
my interest is in placing urban research in dialogue with philosophy. While I 
have presented some literature to this effect, I remain cognisant of the need 
to further develop the ontological frame of this methodological approach.
Conclusion
In this chapter, I have explored the mobile applications Hailo and Moves 
through the proposed socio-technical stack: hardware–code–data(base)–
interface. This multilayered model is able to account for the way in which 
networked devices move through space and for non-human as well as human 
agency, without reifying one concept at the expense of the others. While I 
have argued for a flattening of the ontological relationship between software 
and its supporting infrastructures, I have tried to remain aware of two ten-
sions that undermine such an approach. First, that mobile computing is 
stabilised in hierarchical relationships, such that the capacity for each layer 
to access the one below it is tightly controlled. And second, that each of these 
layers is itself transduced in a citational and performative manner by human 
and non-human actors. These layers are hidden at the moment of their 
recruitment – obscured by the cohesiveness of a seamless, well-engineered 
user experience – but they inform the economics and politics of everyday 
smartphone use in the city, and so deserve proper critical attention.
Acknowledgement
The research for this paper was conducted under The Programmable City, 
a project funded by a European Research Council Advanced Investigator 
award (ERC-2012-AdG-323636-SOFTCITY).

144  James Merricks White
Note
1	 By media interfaces, I mean, following Manovich (2013), graphical, audial and 
haptic feedback mechanisms that convey information through normal use. I do 
not wish to mean graphical user interfaces exclusively, nor interfaces more broadly. 
For an exploration of interface theory see de Souza e Silva and Frith (2012), 
Farman (2012) and Galloway (2012).
References
Anderson, B., Kearnes, M., McFarlane, C. and Swanton, D. (2012) ‘On assemblages 
and geography’, Dialogues in Human Geography, 2(2): 171–89.
Benkler, Y. (2006) The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms 
Markets and Freedom, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Chun, W.H.K. (2004) ‘On software, or the persistence of visual knowledge’, Grey 
Room, 18(Winter), 26–51.
de Souza e Silva, A. and Frith, J. (2012) Mobile Interfaces in Public Spaces: Locational 
Privacy, Control and Urban Sociability, New York: Routledge.
deLanda, M. (2006) A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage Theory and Social 
Complexity, London: Continuum.
Deleuze, G. and Guattari, F. (1987) A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia, trans. B. Massumi, London: Continuum.
Deleuze, G. and Parnet, C. (1977) Dialogues, New York: Columbia University Press.
Farman, J. (2012) Mobile Interface Theory: Embodied Space and Locative Media, New 
York: Routledge.
Federici, S. (2004) Caliban and the Witch: Women, the Body and Primitive Accumulation, 
Brooklyn: Autonomedia.
Foucault, M. (1980) ‘The confession of the flesh’, in C. Gordon (ed.) Power/Knowledge: 
Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972–1977, New York: Pantheon.
Fuller, M. (ed.) (2008) Software Studies: A Lexicon, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gabrys, J. (2014) ‘Programming environments: environmentality and citizen sensing 
in the smart city’, Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 32(1): 30–48.
Galloway, A.R. (2004) Protocol: How Control Exists After Decentralization, 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Galloway, A.R. (2012) The Interface Effect, Cambridge: Polity.
Graham, S. (2005) ‘Software-sorted geographies’, Progress in Human Geography, 
29(5): 562–80.
Graham, S. and Marvin, S. (2001) Splintering Urbanism: Networked Infrastructures, 
Technological Mobilities and the Urban Condition, London: Routledge.
Kinsley, S. (2014) ‘The matter of “virtual” geographies’, Progress in Human 
Geography, 38(3): 364–383.
Kitchin, R. (2014) The Data Revolution: Big Data, Open Data, Data Infrastructures 
and Their Consequences, London: Sage.
Kitchin, R. and Dodge, M. (2007) ‘Rethinking maps’, Progress in Human Geography, 
31(3): 331–44.
Kitchin, R. and Dodge, M. (2011) Code/Space: Software and Everyday Life, 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kitchin, R. and Lauriault, T. (2014) ‘Towards critical data studies: charting and 
unpacking data assemblages and their work’, Programmable City Working Paper 2, 

Moving applications  145
Social Science Research Network, available from http://ssrn.com/abstract=2474112 
[accessed 24 August 2015].
Latour, B. (2005) Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lauriault, T.P. (2012) Data, Infrastructures and Geographical Imaginations: Mapping 
Data Access Discourses in Canada, PhD thesis, Carleton University.
Losey, J. (2014) ‘Networked entrepreneurism: how technology can shape alterna-
tive democracy’, Citizenship in the Digital Republic Workshop, IT University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 13 March.
McFarlane, C. (2011) Assemblage and critical urbanism, City, 15(2): 204–24.
Manovich, L. (2013) Software Takes Command. New York: Bloomsbury.
Tampio, N. (2009) ‘Assemblages and the multitude: Deleuze, Hardt, Negri, and the 
postmodern Left’, European Journal of Political Theory, 8(3): 383–400.
Terranova, T. (2004) Network Culture: Politics for the Information Age, London: 
Pluto Press.
Thrift, N. and French, S. (2002) ‘The automatic production of space’, Transactions of 
the Institute of British Geographers, 27(3): 309–35.
van Dijck, J. (2013) The Culture of Connectivity: A Critical History of Social Media, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wilson, M.W. (2011) ‘Data matter(s): legitimacy, coding, and qualifications-of-life’, 
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 29(5): 857–72.
Zittrain, J. (2008) The Future of the Internet: And How to Stop It, New Haven: Yale 
University Press.

11	 Exploring urban social media
Selfiecity and On Broadway
Lev Manovich
Introduction
User-generated visual media, such as images and video shared on Instagram, 
YouTube, Sina Weibo, VK, Flickr and other popular social media services, 
open up amazing opportunities for the study of contemporary visual and urban 
culture. By analysing media shared by millions of users daily, we can under-
stand what people around the world imagine and create; how people repre-
sent themselves and others; what topics, styles and visual techniques are most 
popular and most unique, and how these topics and techniques differ between 
locations, sexes, ages, and many other demographic characteristics.
In 2005, I coined the term ‘cultural analytics’ to refer to the ‘analysis of 
massive cultural datasets and flows using computational and visualisation 
techniques’ (Manovich et al. 2014a) and in 2007 we established a research 
lab (Software Studies Initiative, Manovich et al. (2014b)) to begin practical 
work. Having developed and tested our techniques and software tools on a 
variety of smaller datasets, such as 4,535 covers of Time magazine from 1923 
to 2009, and 1 million Manga pages, in 2012 we started working on larger 
social media datasets.
In our first project, Phototrails (Hochman et al. 2013a), we analysed and 
visualised 2.3 million Instagram photos shared by hundreds of thousands of 
people in 13 global cities. Given that all users of Instagram app are presented 
with the same interface, the same filters and even the same square image 
size, how much variance between the cities do we find? Are networked apps 
and their tools, such as Instagram, creating a new global visual language, 
an equivalent of visual modernism a hundred years earlier? Does the ease of 
capturing, editing and sharing photos lead to more or less aesthetic diversity? 
Do software and networks result in more repetition, uniformity and visual 
social mimicry, as food, cats, selfies, and other popular subjects seem to 
appear to drown everything else? The use of large samples of social media, 
and computational and visualisation tools, allows us to investigate such ques-
tions quantitatively.
Our analysis in Phototrails (Figures 11.1 and 11.2) revealed strong similar-
ity between cities in terms of basic visual characteristics – such as tonality 

Exploring urban social media  147
Figure 11.1  50,000 Instagram photos shared in Tokyo in 2012, organised by mean 
brightness (distance to the centre) and mean hue (angle)
Source:  Hochman et al. 2013b
Figure 11.2  50,000 Instagram photos shared in Bangkok in 2012, organised by mean 
brightness (distance to the centre) and mean hue (angle)
Source:  Hochman et al. 2013b
and colours of images – and also the use of filters. But these findings were 
partly an artefact of the method we used. We disregarded the content of 
photos, the differences in compositions and other aspects of photographic 
aesthetics, the relative popularity of various photo types and many other 

148  Lev Manovich
possible dimensions of difference. Instead, we considered the photos only 
as assemblages of colour pixels. To compensate for some of the limitations 
of this first project, in 2013 we started a new project Selfiecity (Manovich 
et al. 2014c). Rather than using an arbitrary sample of social media images 
with any content, we focused on only one kind – the popular selfies (self-
portraits captured with mobile phone cameras). In the following section, 
I discuss  how we assembled the selfie dataset, our research methods, the 
presentation of the work via visualisations and a website, and some of our 
findings.
Selfiecity
Making Selfiecity
To work on Selfiecity, we assembled a large multidisciplinary team. The team 
includes media theorists, an art historian, data scientists, visual designers 
and programmers, who work between New York, Germany and California. 
The project was coordinated by Lev Manovich, while Moritz Stefaner was 
responsible for creative direction and visualisations. Other team members 
are Dominikus Baur, Mehrdad Yazdani, Alise Tifentale, Jay Chow, Daniel 
Goddemeyer and Nadav Hochman. The project presentation online com-
bines findings about the demographics of people taking selfies and their poses 
and expressions; a number of media visualisations (imageplots), which assem-
ble thousands of photos; and an interactive application (Selfiexploratory), 
which allows visitors to explore the whole set of 3,200 selfie photos, sorting 
and filtering it to find new patterns. In addition, the website selfiecity.net 
also includes three essays about the history of photography and the selfie 
phenomenon, the functions of images in social media, and the media visuali-
sation method.
The first stage in working on this project was the creation of a selfie data-
set. This involved many steps. When you browse Instagram, at first it looks 
as though it contains a large proportion of selfies. A closer examination 
reveals that many of them are not selfies, but photos taken by other people. 
For our project, we wanted to use only single-person ‘true selfies’. The team 
partnered with Gnip, a third-party company, which at that time was the 
world’s largest provider of social data (gnip.com). After developing software 
that interfaces with the Gnip service in September 2013 we started to collect 
Instagram photos in different locations. After many tests, we focused on the 
central areas in five cities located in North America, Europe, Asia and South 
America. The size of an area used for the Instagram image collection was 
the same in every city. Since we wanted to collect images and data under the 
same conditions we selected a particular week (5–11 December 2013) for the 
project. The numbers of photos shared on Instagram inside the chosen areas 
of our five cities during this week, according to Instagram data provided 
by Gnip (sorted by size) were: New York City, 207,000; Bangkok, 162,000; 

Exploring urban social media  149
Moscow, 140,000; Sao Paolo, 123,000; and Berlin, 24,000; with a total sample 
of 656,000 photos.
The next step consisted of randomly selecting 140,000 photos (20,000 
or 30,000 photos per city) from the total set of photos. We then used the 
Amazon Mechanical Turk service to identify selfie photos from this set. 
Each of 140,000 photos was tagged by between two and four workers. We 
experimented with different forms of a question the workers had to answer, 
and found that the simplest form – ‘Does this photo show a single selfie?’ – 
produced best results.
We then selected the top 1,000 photos for each city (i.e., photos which at 
least two workers tagged as a single-person selfie). We submitted these photos 
to Mechanical Turk again, asking the three ‘master workers’ not only to verify 
that a photo showed a single selfie, but also to tag the sex and guess the age of 
a person. As the final step, at least one member of the project team examined 
all these photos manually. Most photos were tagged correctly (apparently 
every Mechanical Turk worker knew what a selfie was) but we did find some 
mistakes. We wanted to keep the dataset sizes the same, to make analysis and 
visualisations comparable; therefore, our final set contains 640 selfie photos 
for every city (eliminating the mistakes), for a total of 3,200 photos.
This sample set of 3,200 selfie photos was analysed using state-of-the-art 
facial analysis software from Orbeus Inc. (rekognition.com). The software 
analysed the faces in the photos, generating over 20 measurements, including 
face size, orientation, emotion, presence of glasses, presence of smile, whether 
eyes are closed or open. We used these measurements in two ways. We com-
pared the measured face characteristics between cities, sexes and ages. We 
also included some of the measurements in the Selfiexploratory interactive 
application to allow website visitors to filter the selfie database by any com-
bination of selected characteristics (see Selfiexploratory). The software also 
guessed the sex and age of a person in each photo. We found that both sex 
and age estimates were generally consistent with the guesses of Mechanical 
Turk workers.
Visualising the selfie photos
Typically, a data visualisation shows simple data such as numbers. However, 
a single number cannot fully represent everything a photo contains. A single 
photo is not a ‘data point’ but a whole world, rich in meanings, emotions and 
visual patterns. This is why showing all photos in the visualisations (along 
with the graphs or by themselves) is the key strategy of the project. We call 
this approach ‘media visualisation’. In the words of Selfiecity artistic director 
and visualisation designer Moritz Stefaner:
Showing the high level patterns in the data – the big picture – as well as 
the individual images has been an important theme in our project. How 
can we find summarisations of big data collections, which still respect 

150  Lev Manovich
the individuals, and don’t strip away all the interesting details? This has 
become a quite central question to us, not only with respect to selfies.
(Gorey 2014)
Moritz Stefaner created a few different types of visualisation for the project, 
including blend video montages, imageplots and Selfiexploratory.
Blended Video Montages presents 640 selfies in a video for each city 
(Stefaner 2013). It runs through all the images, but not in a simple sequence. 
Instead, a few selfies are superimposed on the screen at a time, with new 
ones fading on top of the old ones. The faces are aligned with respect to eye 
position and sorted by the head tilt angle. This visual strategy is designed to 
create a tension between individual selfie photos and patterns across many 
images. We do not show each face by itself. But we also do not superimpose 
all faces together – which would only produce a generic face template, the 
same for every city. Instead, we show something else: a pattern and individual 
details at the same time.
Manual inspection of photos one by one can reveal many interesting 
details, but it is difficult to quantify the patterns observed. We created histo-
gram-type visualisations, Imageplots (Figure 11.3), which show distributions 
Figure 11.3  Imageplot showing distribution of selfie photos in five cities according 
to sex (vertical axis) and degree of smile (horizontal axis). The degree of smile was 
measured by facial analysis software; it can take any value between 0 (no smile) and 
100 (strong smile)
Source:  Manovich et al. 2014c

Exploring urban social media  151
of sexes, ages and smiles in different cities. Like normal data visualisation, 
they allow you to immediately see patterns expressed in the shapes of the 
graphs. But, because these graphs are composed of individual photos, they 
also provide a different way to explore the interplay between the particular 
and the general.
A key part of the project is Selfiexploratory (Manovich et al. 2014d), an 
interactive visualisation app, which allows website visitors to explore the 
selfie dataset in many ways. Visitors can filter the photos by city, sex, age 
and a number of facial measurements extracted by facial analysis software. 
The application allows visitors to explore the photos using data from both 
human judgements and computer measurements – two ways of seeing the 
photos. The sex and age graphs (on the left of the Web page) use human 
tags and guesses (from Mechanical Turk workers). All other graphs (to 
the right of the Web page) use software face measurements. Whenever a 
selection is made, the graphs are updated in real time, and the bottom area 
displays all photos that match the selection (Figure 11.4). The result is an 
innovative, fluid method of browsing and spotting patterns in a large media 
collection.
In addition to presenting the selfie dataset though visualisations, videos 
and the interactive Selfiexploratory application, we also decided to pre-
sent selected findings in a more conventional format as statistics. Out of a 
larger set of findings, here we have selected some representative examples:
(1)	 Depending on the city, only 3–5% of images we analysed were actually 
selfies.
(2)	 In every city we analysed, there were significantly more female than male 
selfies (from 1.3 times as many in Bangkok to 1.9 times more in Berlin). 
Moscow is a strong outlier – here, we have 4.6 times more female than 
male selfies. (In the USA the ratio of female to male Instagram users is 
close to 1.29:1, according to the Pew Research 2015 survey (Anderson 
2015)).
(3)	 Most people in our photos are fairly young (estimated median age 23.7). 
Bangkok is the youngest city (21.0), whereas New York City is the oldest 
(25.3). Men’s average age is higher than that of women in every city. 
Surprisingly, more older men (30+) than women post selfies on Instagram.
(4)	 Computational facial analysis revealed that you can find lots of smiling 
faces in Bangkok (0.68 average smile score) and Sao Paulo (0.64). People 
taking selfies in Moscow smile the least (only 0.53 on the smile score 
scale).
(5)	 Women’s selfies have more expressive poses; for instance, the average 
amount of head tilt is 50% higher than for men (12.3° vs 8.2°). Sao Paulo 
is most extreme – there, the average head tilt for women is 16.9°!
These findings present only some of the patterns we found. In general, review-
ing all the patterns, we discovered that each of our five cities is an outlier in 

Figure 11.4  Screenshot from Selfiexploratory application: the user selected some of the youngest selfies from our data of 
3,200 selfies using the age graph (left column, second row)
Source:  Manovich et al. 2014d

Exploring urban social media  153
a unique way. However, when we combine many dimensions, Moscow and 
Bangkok stand out from other cities.
Perhaps our overall most interesting finding is the following. Even though 
people use the same photo app and service (Instagram), which also allows 
them to easily see how others photographs themselves around the world, the 
selfie photos we analysed have significant local specificity. The types of pose 
change from city to city, and between sexes and ages. So while Instagram 
may be contributing to the emergence of a uniform ‘global visual language’, 
at the same time it still reveals cultural and social differences in how different 
groups of people represent themselves.
On Broadway
In Phototrails, we compared photos from 13 global cities, without filter-
ing them by type or location. In Selfiecity, we filtered photos to only compare 
a single type of photos (selfies), also across multiple cities. For our next pro-
ject On Broadway (Figures 11.5 to 11.7), we decided to zoom closer into the 
Figure 11.5  Data and image layers used to create the interface to navigating a city 
street in On Broadway project
Source:  Goddemeyer et al. n.d.

Figure 11.6  Screenshot from On Broadway application, showing a zoomed-in view centred on Time Square
Source:  Goddemeyer et al. n.d.

Exploring urban social media  155
universe of social media by focusing on the posts along a single city street. 
At the same time, we expanded our data sources, going beyond Instagram 
and adding Twitter, Foursquare, Google Street View, taxi pick-ups and drop-
offs, and economic indicators from the US Census Bureau.
Representing the city
Modern writers, painters, photographers, filmmakers and digital artists have 
created many fascinating representations of city life. Paintings of Paris boule-
vards and cafés by Pissarro and Renoir, photomontages by Berlin’s Dada 
artists, Broadway Boogie-Woogie by Piet Mondrian, Spider-Man comics 
(Stan Lee and Steve Ditko), Playtime by Jacques Tati and Locals and Tourists 
data maps by Eric Fischer are classic examples of artists encountering the 
city. The artwork that directly inspired our project is Every Building on the 
Sunset Strip by Edward Ruscha (1996). It is an artist book that unfolds to 
25 feet (8.33 metres) to show continuous photographic views of both sides of 
a 1.5 mile section of Sunset Boulevard.
Today, a city ‘talks’ to us in data. Many cities make available datasets 
and sponsor hackathons to encourage the creation of useful apps using their 
data. (For example, the New York City Mayor’s Office’s sponsored New 
York City Open Data website offers over 1,200 datasets, covering everything 
from the trees in the city to bicycle data). Locals and tourists share massive 
Figure 11.7  Interaction with On Broadway installation at New York Public Library 
(Public Eye exhibition)
Source:  Goddemeyer et al. n.d.

156  Lev Manovich
amounts of visual geocoded media using Twitter, Instagram and other net-
works. Services such as Foursquare tell us where people go and what kind of 
venues they frequent. How can we represent the twenty-first century using 
such rich data and image sources? Is there a different way to visualise the city 
besides using graphs, numbers or maps?
Constructing Broadway
The first step in our project was to precisely define the area to analyse, and 
assemble data from this area. Like a spine in a human body, Broadway runs 
through the middle of Manhattan Island, curving along its way. We wanted 
to include a slightly wider area than the street itself, so that we could also 
capture nearby activities. To define this area, we selected points at 30-metre 
intervals going through the centre of Broadway, and defined 100-metre wide 
rectangles centred on every point. The result is a spine-like shape that is 
21,390 metres (13.5 miles) long and 100 metres wide. We used the coordinates 
of this shape to filter Instagram, Twitter, Foursquare, Google Street View, 
taxi and economic data.
Instagram
Using the services provided by Gnip, we downloaded all geocoded Instagram 
images shared publicly in the larger New York City area between February 
26 and August 3, 2014. The dataset contains 10,624,543 images, out of which 
661,809 are from the Broadway area.
Twitter
As a part of a Twitter Data Grant awarded to Software Studies Initiative, 
we received all publicly shared tweets with images around the world from 
2011 to 2014. We filtered this dataset, leaving only tweets shared inside the 
Broadway area during the same time period that we used for Instagram (158 
days in 2014).
Foursquare
We downloaded Foursquare data from March 2009 to March 2014 (1,826 
days) through the Foursquare API. Overall, we counted 8,527,198 check-ins 
along Broadway.
Google Street View images
We experimented with our own video and photo captures moving along 
Broadway. However, our results did not look as good as Google Street View 
images, so we decided to include these images as another data source. We 

Exploring urban social media  157
wrote a script and used it to download Google Street View images (one image 
for each of our 713 points along Broadway), looking in three directions: east, 
west and up. The first two views show buildings on both sides of the streets. 
The view up is particularly interesting, since it shows the amount of sky 
visible between buildings to the Google Street View wide angle lens. In the 
downtown and midtown areas, most of the images in these views are taken 
near high-rise buildings and only a small part of the sky is visible. However, 
in the northern part of Broadway, buildings are lower, and this is reflected in 
larger parts of sky visible in the images.
Taxi
Chris Whong obtained data for 2013 taxi pick-ups and drop-offs from New 
York City Taxi and Limousine Commission (Whong 2014). In 2013, there 
were 140 million trips in Manhattan. Filtering this dataset using Broadway 
coordinates left us with 22 million trips (10,077,789 drop-off and 12,391,809 
pickup locations).
Economic indicators
We used the latest data available through the American Community Service. 
This is a yearly survey of the sample of the US population by the US Census 
Bureau. The American Community Service reports the data summarised by 
census tracks. These are areas that are much larger than the 30 × 100 metre 
rectangles we used to define the Broadway area. Our Broadway consists of 
713 rectangles that cross 73 larger US census tracks. Because of these two 
different scales, any census population statistics available will only approxi-
mately apply to the smaller Broadway parts. Given this, we decided to only 
use a single economic indicator from the American Community Service, esti-
mated average household income. This information was shown as one of the 
layers in the application.
Navigating the data street without maps
We spent months experimenting with different possible ways to present all 
these data using a visual interactive interface. The result of our explorations 
is a visually rich image-centric interface, where numbers play only a second-
ary role and no maps are used. The project proposes a new visual metaphor 
for thinking about the city: a vertical stack of image and data layers. There 
are 13 such layers in the project, all aligned to locations along Broadway. As 
you move along the street, you see a selection of Instagram photos from each 
area, left, right and top Google Street View images and extracted top colours 
from these image sources. We also show the average numbers of taxi pick-ups 
and drop-offs, Twitter posts with images and average family income for the 
parts of the city crossed by Broadway. To help with navigation, we added 

158  Lev Manovich
additional layers showing names of Manhattan neighbourhoods crossed by 
Broadway, cross-streets and landmarks.
This interactive interface is available online as part of the project website 
(Goddemeyer et al. n.d.). We also displayed it on a 46-inch interactive touch-
screen as part of the exhibition Public Eye at the New York Public Library 
(December 2014 to January 2016). Since the exhibition was free and open 
every day to the public, with dozens of people inside at any given time, we 
were able to see how ordinary New Yorkers and city tourists interacted with 
the interface. It became clear that focusing on the visual layers – Instagram 
photos and Google Street View images – was the key to making the inter-
face meaningful and useful to the public. We saw many times how visitors 
would immediately navigate and zoom in on a particular block of the city 
meaningful to them: perhaps a place where they were born, or where they 
lived for a long time.
This personalisation of the ‘big data’ was one of our main goals. We 
wanted to let citizens see how many types of urban data relate to each other, 
and let them relate massive and sometime abstract datasets to their personal 
experiences – places where they live or visit.
Conclusion: aesthetics vs politics of big data
Today companies, government agencies and other organisations collect mas-
sive data about the cities. These data are used in many ways invisible to us. 
At the same time, as I already mentioned, many cities make available some of 
their datasets and sponsor competitions to encourage creation of useful apps 
using this data. But these two activities – collection of data, and release of 
the data to the public – are not symmetrical. The data released by cities only 
covers what city administers and controls – parks and streets, infrastructure 
repairs, parking tickets, etc. These are data about the city as an entity, not 
about particular individuals or detailed patterns of their activities. In con-
trast, the data collected and analysed by social media services, surveillance 
camera networks, telecom companies, banks and their commercial clients 
(or government agencies if they are able to get access to parts of this data) 
are about the individuals: their patterns of movement, communications, 
expressed opinions, financial transactions.
Some of the data from social media services are easily available via API to 
anybody with a basic knowledge of computer programming. These data are 
used in numerous free and commercial apps (for example, when I use Buffer 
to schedule my posts to Twitter and Facebook, Buffer interacts with them via 
their APIs to place these posts at particular times on my account pages). The 
same data have already been used in thousands of computer science papers 
and conference talks. Many thousands of students in computer science or 
design classes also routinely download, analyse and visualise social media 
data as part of their assignments. But ordinary people are not aware that 
the tweets, comments, images and video they share are easily accessible to 

Exploring urban social media  159
anybody via these free API tools. While articles in popular media routinely 
talk about how individuals’ data are collected, aggregated and used for a 
variety of purposes, including surveillance or customisation of advertising, 
they typically do not explain that these data are also available to individual 
researchers, artists or students.
Artists can certainly play their role in ‘educating the public’ about the 
access and use of people’s data. In our project websites, we have carefully 
explained where we obtained the data for both Selfiecity and On Broadway. 
But our main goal was ‘aesthetic education’ as opposed to ‘political educa-
tion’. I grew up in a totalitarian society – USSR in the 1970s – where public 
discussion of art was always geared towards its political use, and art with-
out a clear political message was looked on with suspicion. This experience 
made me very sensitive to any attempts to reduce art and culture to issues 
of politics, including currently frequent discussions of big data only in terms 
of surveillance, copyright, access and political and economic issues.
‘Big data’, including visual social media, is our new artistic medium, and 
the projects discussed here investigate its possibilities. In fact, we wanted to 
combine aesthetic questions and research questions: not only what we can 
learn from social media, but how we use it to create aesthetic representations 
and experiences. How should we imagine our cities and ourselves in the era of 
massive data collection and its algorithmic analysis? How can visualisations 
of such data combine bigger patterns and individual details? What alternative 
interfaces for exploring and relating to this data are possible, in addition to 
standard maps, timelines, grids of images and scrollable walls of Facebook, 
Twitter, YouTube and other large companies? In short: how we can see dif-
ferently – not only the world around us (this was the key question of modern 
art) but also our new ‘data reality’?
Acknowledgements
Each of the projects described is a collaboration between a team:
Phototrails	
Nadav Hochman, Lev Manovich, Jay Chow.
Selfiecity	
Lev Manovich, Moritz Stefaner, Dominicus Baur, Daniel 
Goddemeyer, Alise Tifentale, Nadav Hochman, Jay Chow.
On Broadway	 Daniel Goddemeyer, Moritz Stefaner, Dominikus Baur, 
and Lev Manovich. Contributors: Mehrdad Yazdani, 
Jay Chow, Nadav Hochman, Brynn Shepherd and Leah 
Meisterlin; PhD students at The Graduate Center, City 
University of New York: Agustin Indaco (Economics), 
Michelle Morales (Computational Linguistics), Emanuel 
Moss (Anthropology), Alise Tifentale (Art History).
The development of Phototrails, Selfiecity and On Broadway was supported 
by The Graduate Center, City University of New York, California Institute 
for Telecommunication and Information (Calit2) and The Andrew W. Mellon 

160  Lev Manovich
Foundation. We are grateful to Gnip for their help with Instagram data col-
lection. The part of this article about the Selfiecity project was adapted from 
Tifentale and Manovich (2015).
References
Anderson, M. (2015) ‘Men catch up with women on overall social media use’, Pew 
Research Center, available from http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/08/28/
men-catch-up-with-women-on-overall-social-media-use/ [accessed 25 November 
2015].
Goddemeyer, D., Stefaner, M., Baur, D. and Manovich, L. (n.d.) On Broadway, avail-
able from http://on-broadway.nyc/ [accessed 21 November 2015].
Gorey, C. (2014) ‘Major study of selfies finds major demographic differences 
between countries’, siliconrepublic, available from https://www.siliconrepublic.
com/life/2014/02/24/major-study-of-selfies-finds-major-demographic-differences-
between-countries [accessed 21 November 2015].
Hochman, N., Manovich, L. and Chow, J. (2013a) Phototrails, available from http://
phototrails.net/ [accessed 21 November 2015].
Hochman, N., Manovich, L. and Chow, J. (2013b) ‘Instagram cities’, Phototrails, 
available from http://phototrails.net/instagram-cities/ [accessed 21 November 
2015].
Manovich, L., Douglass, J., da Silva, C.I., Yazdani, M., Chow, J., Tifentale, A., 
Indaco, A., Hochman, N., Crockett, D., Navas, E., Reyes, E. and Huang, C. 
(2014a) ‘Cultural analytics’ Software Studies Initiative, available from http://lab.
softwarestudies.com/p/cultural-analytics.html [accessed 21 November 2015].
Manovich, L., Douglass, J., da Silva, C.I., Yazdani, M., Chow, J., Tifentale, A., 
Indaco, A., Hochman, N., Crockett, D., Navas, E., Reyes, E. and Huang, C. 
(2014b) Software Studies Initiative, available from http://lab.softwarestudies.com/ 
[accessed 21 November 2015].
Manovich L., Stefaner M., Yazdani M., Baur, D., Goddemeyer, D., Tifentale, A., 
Hochman, N. and Chow, J. (2014c) Selfiecity, available from http://selfiecity.net/ 
[accessed 21 November 2015].
Manovich L., Stefaner M., Yazdani M., Baur, D., Goddemeyer, D., Tifentale, A., 
Hochman, N. and Chow, J. (2014d) ‘The selfiexploratory’, Selfiecity, available 
from http://selfiecity.net/selfiexploratory/ [accessed 21 November 2015].
Stefaner, M. (2013) Selfiecity — Five Cities (Short Edit), available from http://vimeo.
com/moritzstefaner/selfiecity-five-cities [accessed 21 November 2015].
Tifentale and Manovich (2015) ‘Selfiecity: exploring photography and self-fashioning 
in social media’, in D.M. Berry and M. Dieter (ed.) Postdigital Aesthetics: Art, 
Computation and Design, London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Whong, C. (2014) ‘FOILing NYC’s taxi trip data’, Chris Wong, available from http://
chriswhong.com/open-data/foil_nyc_taxi/ [accessed 21 November 2015].

Part III
Governance, politics and 
knowledge

This page intentionally left blank

12	 Digital urbanism in crises
Monika Büscher, Xaroula Kerasidou, Michael 
Liegl and Katrina Petersen
Introduction
As software is becoming ‘everyware’ (Greenfield 2006; Kitchin and Dodge 
2011), it is embedded not only in the rhythms of everyday life, but also in the 
disruptions of the exceptional. Greater vulnerabilities, created by popula-
tion growth, urbanisation and austerity, ill-equip societies for an increase in 
extreme weather and political conflicts in a twenty-first ‘century of disasters’ 
(Vidal 2012). However, at this juncture, people also enact a hopeful digital 
urbanism. With 6.8 billion mobile subscribers worldwide and double-digit 
growth (Vinck 2013), they have become generators of big data, documenting 
their lives in intimate detail, which can be highly valuable during crises. Such 
digital documentations were used, for instance, to connect individuals, com-
munities, emergency agencies, the media and governments locally and glob-
ally, to seek and provide information to organise, coordinate and collaborate 
in the crises in Mumbai, Port au Prince, Tokyo, Oslo, New York, Boston, 
Tacloban, Gaza and many others.
The most commonly encountered stories of such innovative use of ICT in 
crises celebrate its potential to increase the efficiency of disaster responses 
(Katsumi 2013; Morrow et al. 2011). But there are also critical voices, drawing 
on analyses of detrimental effects of surveillance, ‘qualculation’ or automa-
tion in information societies (Graham 2010; Thrift 2004; Suchman and Weber 
2014), which are exacerbated under the exceptional circumstances of crises 
(Büscher et al. 2014). This chapter is motivated by the fact that such binary 
framings fail to adequately open up the ambiguities of socio-technical trans-
formations for adequate analysis. To study the disruptive dynamics of digital 
urbanism in crises in a way that documents their complexities and opens up 
alternatives, we have joined design teams who produce ICT architectures for 
more interoperability and information sharing in disaster responses.1 This 
allows us to enter into ‘the open’, ‘where what is to come is not yet … and 
might still be otherwise’ (Haraway 2010). Examining crises as sites of disrup-
tive innovation (Chesbrough 2003) makes it possible to see how technologies 
and practices of crisis response and digital urbanism are shaking up taken-
for-granted social and organisational conventions, economic and political 

164  Monika Büscher et al.
models, and notions of humanity and justice. These transformations reveal 
in new ways that ‘we have never been human’ (Haraway 2008; Hayles 1999) 
nor singular (Nancy 2000) and open up new approaches to the ‘beast’ that is 
situated socio-technical practice.
We investigate how digital urbanisms in crises are experiments with an 
‘ethics for non-unitary subjects’ (Braidotti 2013: 190) that involve reconfigu-
rations of lived experiences of distributed responsibilities as well as practices 
of noticing and caring about distant others. We argue that by understanding 
and designing for some of these practices we can define and design ‘better’ 
IT for crisis response, which also supports new modes of resistance to more 
generally problematic aspects of surveillance, qualculation and automation.
Disaster mobilities: from Haiti into the Cloud
On 12 January 2010, a 7.0 Mw earthquake that lasted 35 seconds killed 
over 160,000 people, and displaced close to 1.5 million Haitians. 60% of 
hospitals, government and administrative buildings, and 80% of schools were 
destroyed.2 For many people, life came to revolve around loss and survival. 
But how they mobilised socio-technical affordances also marks a turning 
point in humanitarian disaster response and digital urbanism (Figure 12.1). 
Digital, mobile and networked technologies made this crisis an exceptional 
site of emergent informational interoperability.
Figure 12.1  A displaced Haitian fixes mobile phones in a tent city near Port au 
Prince, Haiti (24 January 2010)
Source:  https://www.flickr.com/photos/usairforce/4304491014/in/album-72157623087518481/. 
(The image is US Gov Work and in public domain).

Digital urbanism in crises  165
Sharon Reader, beneficiary communications delegate for the Red Cross 
and Red Crescent, who worked in Haiti at the time, explained in a news 
interview how:
One of the things that was fairly unique about Haiti was how much of an 
urban disaster [it] was. You know, it hit Port au Prince and Leogane very 
heavily … so you were dealing with a fairly, you know, dense population 
who do have access to different technologies – Internet, mobile phone … 
even [in] countries that like Haiti and right across Africa, this is technol-
ogy that we can’t afford to ignore as humanitarians …3
Her delivery reflects a strong sense of urgency. Many disaster response 
agencies and policy-makers currently feel pressured to respond to social inno-
vation in ICT use during crises. Despite the widespread use of GIS and other 
geolocation technologies in formal disaster response, the scale and speed of 
this exceeds formal response agencies’ ability to adapt their processes and 
regulatory frameworks (Shanley et al. 2013). For example, a member of the 
German Federal Agency for Technical Relief described to us how search and 
rescue is normally organised by mapping out a grid and carrying out a sys-
tematic search. When victims used mobile technologies to call for help after 
the Haiti earthquake they could precisely locate their needs, which changed 
the priorities of deployment and disrupted a process designed to ensure the 
impartiality and rigour of search and rescue.4
Mobile ICT practices then disruptively open up new futures. People’s abil-
ity to put themselves on a global map through social media amplifies the 
voices of those affected and has the potential to augment formal response 
efforts by fostering a more relational ethic that allows everyone involved 
to consider the politics, morality and effects of their actions more broadly 
(Whatmore 1997). At the same time, it can destructively interfere with formal 
response practices, undermining distributive justice (as in our example) or 
challenge the security of command and control communications (Oh et al. 
2010). In the following, we trace how experiences from Haiti and the sub-
sequent earthquake in Japan inspired attempts to utilise the ‘big data’ of 
everyday life for disaster response. In doing so, we also begin to link our 
discussion of posthuman phenomenologies, socialities and ethics to debates 
about surveillance, qualculation and automation.
On 11 March 2011, Japan was hit by a 9.0 MW earthquake and tsunami, 
killing almost 20,000 people and displacing more than 160,000 (Samuels 
2013). The fact that the fourth most powerful earthquake in human his-
tory harmed thousands fewer people than the earthquake in Haiti highlights 
that there is no such thing as a natural disaster (Steinberg 2000). Wealth 
can hugely affect capacity to prepare and mitigate damage. Amongst other 
things, it allows technological innovation; the Tohoku earthquake is seen to 
have proven that ‘The Cloud works!’ (Katsumi 2013). ‘Next-generation ICT 
services underlying the resilient society’ (Kinoshita et al. 2012) connected 

diverse databases, containing citizens’ mobility data, life-logging entries, tax 
and healthcare records. Even though some of the data centres were damaged, 
such as the IBM centre in Tokyo,5 they remained operational. This enabled 
corporations like Amazon and IBM to share their customer management 
software as a free service to help orchestrate supply and demand matching 
of relief goods (Katsumi 2013). Inspired by the efficacy of such technologi-
cal flexibility, a global wave of investment into cloud computing for disaster 
response is bringing in unprecedented interoperability between diverse agen-
cies and information systems.
The 2013 Geospatial Community Cloud Concept Demonstration orches-
trated by the Network Centric Operations Industry Consortium (NCOIC), 
for example, reflects investment of 1.2 million US dollars to integrate services 
and information systems globally. NCOIC brought together major transna-
tional industries, including Boeing, defence technology suppliers, IT firms, 
government and non-government emergency response agencies, culminating 
in a re-enactment of the international response to the Haiti earthquake to 
demonstrate the interoperability enabled by their cloud technologies.
In one of the videos that document the event, Kevin Jackson, Vice President 
of NJVC – an ICT provider for the United States Federal Government and 
Department of Defense – illustrates how the Cloud allows international 
response agencies to analyse Twitter and ‘what is happening across social 
media’.6 In another, Tip Slater, Director of Business Development, NCOIC, 
calculates the benefits of employing the Cloud.7 His analysis promises an 
international federated Cloud system that can be set up ‘in hours instead 
of months’. The cost of IT for emergency agencies is said to be reduced by 
between 10–80%, much of it because the Cloud enables short-term subscrip-
tions to ‘software as a service’ rather than requiring permanent investments 
(NCOIC Rapid Response 2013).
Such ascription of enhanced control and efficiency to technology is common, 
but questionable, because it hides deeper socio-technical transformations. 
Ellebrecht and Kaufman (2015), for example, show how the adoption of net-
worked e-triage devices enables efficiencies through delegation of responsibility 
from physicians to paramedics under conditions of strict control and surveil-
lance, which curtails professional discretion. Technological determinism and 
a-priori assumption of an ethics of efficiency make it harder to see the ambigu-
ous unintended consequences of such change. For instance, in the context of 
cloud-supported interoperability between international government agencies, 
emergency services and non-governmental organisations, data security and 
privacy issues arise (MacAskill et al. 2013), and many experts are even more 
concerned about automated probabilistic prediction (Mayer-Schönberger, in 
Heaven 2013) and social sorting because they can lead to a ‘splintering’ of 
societies and undermine societal virtues of humanity, equality and solidarity 
(Graham and Marvin 2001). Kafkaesque accumulations of error, indifference, 
lack of accountability and abuse (Solove 2011; Büscher et al. 2014) could 
undermine the beneficence of interoperable emergency response.
166  Monika Büscher et al.

Digital urbanism in crises  167
Digital urbanism in crises
In this section, we exhibit practices of an emergent digital urbanism. Digital 
technologies were used in new ways by Haitians and a global group of ‘digital 
humanitarians’ or ‘voluntweeters’, reconfiguring distributed responsibilities 
and practices of caring for distant others. We develop some concepts that 
can provide analytical purchase on these practices and how they perform 
digitally augmented ‘posthuman’ experience and agency. We argue that the 
­phenomenologies, socialities and ethics that emerge in these reconfigura-
tions can not only help us understand the ambiguities of disruptive digital 
innovation more deeply, but also inspire design that can more constructively 
address some of the problematic aspects of surveillance, qualculation and 
automation.
After the earthquake, 60–80% of Haitians had access to a mobile phone 
and network. In parallel, as the first news swept the globe, a group of students 
working with Patrick Meier in Boston set up the Ushahidi Haiti Project – 
a digital humanitarian initiative (Figure 12.2). A collaboration developed 
between Haitians on the ground, the students in Boston, the developers of the 
Ushahidi mapping platform, the globally distributed Haitian diaspora com-
munity, and a group of ‘voluntweeters’ (Starbird and Palen 2011; Meier 2012; 
Munro 2013). A freephone number, 4636, which had already been in use to 
obtain weather reports was appropriated as ‘Mission 4636’ – an initiative that 
repurposed the number to receive, process and respond to situation reports 
from people affected by the earthquake (Table 12.1).
Table 12.1 shows a message sent by people affected by the earthquake. 
Most of the messages were in Kreyòl and referred to places in slang terms, 
which were hard to match to places on a map. The international emergency 
response agencies, who were assisting the almost entirely collapsed local 
administration, could not use such messages directly to enhance situational 
Table 12.1  Example of messages sent by Haitians, which were translated, 
categorised as ‘actionable’ or not, and augmented with location name and 
coordinates and emergency categorisations
Haitian Kreyòl
Nou bezwen aide nan Morija Diquini 63 pa gen dlo ni tente 
pou nou domi.yo pa pote anyen pou nou lot kote yo jwen,f
English
‘We need help in Morija Diquini 63. There is no water nor 
tents for us to sleep in. They have not brought anything for 
us. Other places have gotten things. Do what you can to send 
aid for us.
God will bless you. – Additional Notes: This area is near the 
Adventist Hospital of Diquini.’
Intel type
Actionable
Coordinates
−72.3793,18.5355
Location Categories
Morija Diquini 63
Date received
1/25/2010 17:06
(adapted from Munro 2013: 217)

awareness. To add to these challenges, there were no detailed shareable digi-
tal maps available, on which to plot such data.
A group of ‘Mission 4636’ volunteers, non-governmental organisations 
and Ushahidi Haiti Project participants mobilised help, including 600 volun-
teers from all over the globe:
•	
to translate the messages into English;
•	
to decipher location information and georeference the reports;
•	
to categorise the information as actionable;
•	
to map needs.
When they started, the OpenStreetMap of Port Au Prince only detailed 
main roads and basic infrastructure. A few days later, there were street 
names, details of land use and the damage caused by the earthquake, and 
locations of field hospitals and shelters (Meier 2012). Standards like ‘Tweak 
the Tweet’ (Starbird and Stamberger 2010) emerged, which provided uniform 
formats to report needs, locations and contact information and facilitated 
computational parsing and mapping of tweeted information (Figure 12.2). 
The ways in which the affordances of this novel assembly of people, mobile 
phones, the Internet, GIS and social media were grasped supported new ways 
of self-organising disaster response. But before we discuss these, it is impor-
tant to briefly explore the significance of this effort.
One marker of the value of crowdsourced information is the fact that the 
US Department of State analysts and US marines used maps like the one 
seen on Patrick Meier’s laptop screen in Figure 12.2, to identify ‘centres of 
gravity’ for the deployment of field teams (Morrow et al. 2011). Moreover, 
the distributed collaborative effort also put people who were not on the 
relief agencies’ radar on the map. For example, a number of messages were 
sent from Diquini 63 (Table 12.1), which refers to a street address. Several 
persons reported that this district had received no aid 13 days after the 
­earthquake. Mapping these messages drew attention to this area, one of 
many places that were difficult to reach. The World Food Program later 
made an aid delivery and reported that there were about 2,500 people at this 
location.
The globally connected volunteers self-organised the mobilisation of digital 
and physical material resources. Starbird and Palen (2011) analysed almost 
300,000 Twitter messages that enabled this, and offer several examples. In 
one case, a local person reported that they were running out of credit on 
their phone, impeding their ability to send situation reports, and a US-based 
volunteer, MelyMello (Table 12.2) realised that the Haitians’ phones could 
be credited from afar. The voluntweeters set up a PayPal account that could 
accept donations. In another case, a collaboration between people in Turkey, 
the USA and Haiti mobilised a supply truck and confirmed its arrival 
(Starbird and Palen 2011).
But things did not always go so smoothly. For example, when Ushahidi 
Haiti Project volunteers looked for translators amongst the global Haitian 
168  Monika Büscher et al.

Digital urbanism in crises  169
Figure 12.2  Ushahidi Haiti Project situation room in Boston
Source:  www.flickr.com/photos/digitaldemocracy/4379912183/in/photolist-7F3chv-7F3cjk-
7F74CU-7F3cii-7Aqcrn. Reproduced by permission of Emily Jacobbi on behalf of Digital 
Democracy. 
Table 12.2  Crowdsourcing funding for Haiti ‘first responders’
Exchange of tweets
MelyMello (Jan 15 24:26): @ayitiJo we can top up your phone, can’t we? add more 
minutes to it for you? Just need your phone #
…
deJacmel (Jan 16 ~19:00): @MelyMello Please Add min 2 ths cell numbers for me. 
They R helping Amer families to contact their Haiti relatives.
MelyMello (Jan 17 13:11): @janeSM want to help? Help me add minutes to a 
WACK of phone numbers I have been sent!
(adapted from Starbird and Palen 2011: 1076)
diaspora on Facebook, automated spam detection mechanisms identi-
fied their actions as suspicious. Robert Munro, one of the volunteers at 
Mission  4636, shows a log of how they discovered this and dealt with it 
(Table 12.3).

When the issue was flagged in this chat, Munro contacted Facebook and 
provided them with the name of one of the Kreyòl language groups that Claire, 
one of the volunteers, was addressing to elicit help with ­translation – ‘Nasyon 
Kreyol’. Thus prompted, Facebook engineers were able to track what had 
happened and whitelist these activities (Munro 2013).
Before we move to our concluding conceptual discussion, we must high-
light three important lines of analysis that critically highlight some ambigui-
ties in this ‘digital humanitarianism’. First, while these efforts clearly made 
some difference, some professional responders called it a ‘shadow operation 
that was not part of the emergency response plan’ (Morrow et al. 2011: 16). 
Second, studies have shown that these success stories neglect wider implica-
tions and effects. Mimi Sheller (2013) highlights the asymmetries of power re-
enacted through the activities. She shows that the physical and digital influx 
of highly mobile international responders, from the World Bank to the vol-
untweeters, with their birds-eye maps, coincided with a local population who 
mostly had neither the means nor the right to move outside the danger zone. 
Third, many Haitians were unaware of the digital humanitarian response or 
did not have a voice in evaluating its usefulness (Clémenzo 2011).
Bearing these lines of critique in mind, we now trace how ‘posthuman’ 
phenomenologies, socialities and ethics come together to understand how 
the information practices we have described have real-world effects on lived 
experiences that do not have to stop at placating forms of participation, but 
can engender true spaces of collaboration. They open up opportunities for 
Table 12.3  Excerpt from a chat running alongside the Mission 4636 effort
Facebook message exchange
Message logs
‘Facebook just told me I’ll be banned for 
spamming if I keep trying to get the word out 
to Kreyòl speakers.’
Claire, 21 Jan 2010, 16:14:36
(chat-log:4338)
‘@Claire – I am talking to FB right now. Can 
you please give me the exact details of what 
happened? The message; the group; your FB 
id (just copy the URL on your profile page).’
Robert_Munro, 21 Jan 2010, 
20:53:09-27 (chat-log:4397-40)
‘The message was a pop-up, sorry, not 
showing up in my history, saying that I was 
engaging in abusive behaviour; presumably 
because I was sending the same message to 
many group admins.’
Claire, 21 Jan 2010, 20:55:47-59
(chat-log:4405-6)
‘Nasyon Kreyol’
Claire, 21 Jan 2010, 21:00:37
(chat-log:4420)
‘Support the Victims of the Earthquake in 
Haiti, etc.’
Claire, 21 Jan 2010, 21:01:24
(chat-log:4422)
‘Thank you – that is enough for them to go 
on!’
Robert_Munro, 21 Jan 2010, 21:03:16
(chat-log:4424)
(adapted from Munro 2013: 237)
170  Monika Büscher et al.

Digital urbanism in crises  171
more ‘carefully radical’ design (Latour 2008) and act as a potential nucleus 
for a hopeful, ‘better’ socio-technical ‘beast’.
Discussion: designing IT ‘better’
A few years back, Donna Haraway echoed Latour’s statement, ‘We have 
never been modern’ (1993) by saying, ‘We have never been human’ (2008). 
From fire, to shoes, to IT, technologies have always been an integral part 
of what it means to be human. There simply is no purely human or techno-
logical. We are, though, exceptionally good at denying this, intellectually 
and in practice, with quite problematic effects. Binary analyses of IT-based 
transformations of urban living, which, on the one hand, focus on efficiency 
gains (Kinoshita et al. 2012) and, on the other, warn that new, digitally 
enhanced modes of surveillance, qualculation and automation put cities and 
citizens ‘under siege’ (Graham 2010), do not challenge the users, designers 
and developers of technology, social, organisational and policy innovations 
effectively enough. Even though more critical voices draw out socio-technical 
entanglements, they rarely offer alternatives to dominant IT use and design 
philosophies, which enable disembodied surveillance that transcends human 
scale limits of volume, space and time (Solove 2004). They do not question 
how novel probabilistic quantitative and qualitative calculation, or ‘qualcu-
lation’, which is alien to – and some argue, incomprehensible for – human 
reasoning (Thrift 2004, Heaven 2013), could be designed differently, and 
they do not pursue far enough how automation could be designed to enable 
a better understanding of how responsibilities are distributed across situated 
human-machine configurations and contexts.
Making critique more constructive does not have to blunt its teeth. On the 
contrary, an orientation towards the hopeful can deepen analysis. Crises are 
an opportune setting for the development of critique that enables ‘radically 
careful’ and ‘carefully radical’ design (Latour 2008), because they bring 
productive ambiguities to the surface. As people are forced to worry about 
being physically safe, and where their loved ones are, necessity makes for 
socio-technical innovation. In the process, people’s responses to crises reveal 
some of the seams that hold the human and the technological together in 
ways that may allow us to design for a more richly sensory perception of 
digital seams and extensions. A journalist’s photograph of three Haitians 
searching for a mobile phone signal in the Bel Air neighbourhood in Port au 
Prince, taken on 16 January 20108 mundanely but emblematically captures 
this. They are holding their phones in the air, looking quizzically at their 
screens, witnessing others talking on their phones, which documents that, at 
least for some, networks are available. From such observations, inspiration 
for more ‘seamful’ design that makes network availability more explicitly 
perceivable can be drawn (Chalmers 2003). This would really help people 
understand what is or is not available to them. With our analysis, we seek 
to exhibit existing and emergent practices like these to inspire design that 

notices where people sense their ‘posthuman’ phenomenologies, or engage 
in posthuman socialities and ethics and tries to design for ‘better’ sensory, 
cognitive, social and material practices that could support this. Three exam-
ples will illustrate this.
First, the social practices of self-organising collaboration between local 
and global actors, are so deeply enmeshed with technology as to make sepa-
ration between the human and the technological impossible. The use of the 
‘Tweak the Tweet’ standard, for example, shows how people thought and 
acted through the capabilities of computational technologies to map ‘needs’ 
and invented social and technical mechanisms that allowed new ways of 
representing how people had been affected (Starbird and Palen 2011). This 
lived posthuman sociality drew some volunteers into an intense involvement 
and sense of relational ethical obligation, which suggests a technologically 
enmeshed ‘cyborg’ phenomenology that is not experienced as singular, but 
relational. For some participants, this extended phenomenology, ­sociality and 
ethics constituted an overwhelming experience. ‘Discovering social media’s 
soul’ as one participant puts it (Starbird and Palen 2011:1077), created, on 
the one hand, an exhilarating ‘buzz’ of sociability and solidarity, and satis-
faction at being able to help rather than just watch, but the sheer number of 
cries for help also haunted some volunteers and led them to exit the social 
media sphere, at least for some time. One might wonder, with Susan Sontag, 
whether such engagement enabled the voluntweeters to:
set aside the sympathy […] for a reflection on how our privileges are 
located on the same map as their suffering and may – in ways we might 
prefer not to imagine – be linked to their suffering
(Sontag 2003: 91–92)
While there is some indication that experiences of relational ethics through 
mapping Haiti collectively led to more long-term collaborations, such as the 
Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team’s Haiti Project,9 four years after the 
earthquake, the United Nations found that 817,000 Haitians still needed 
humanitarian assistance (Oxfam 2014). How could technologies be designed 
to support more sustained practices of relational ethics?
Second, the collectively organised activity of getting one’s needs put on 
a map makes it possible to record absolute space qualitatively, in a way 
that is quite different from commercial forms of ‘qualculation’, which, for 
example, utilise the big data of everyday life to calculate qualitative profiles 
and tailor personalised advertising for Web-browsing or mobile customers. 
The collective mapping for Haiti made it possible to see space and time as 
relative in specific ways. The process by which the geolocation of specific 
people and needs had to take place, the lived experience of doing it, the very 
perception of its possibility, and the way that it was initiated by the locals 
and their technological experience with the freephone number 4636 reveals 
opportunities for design that supports such grassroots qualculation. This 
also offers a productive path forward for supporting sensory perception and 
172  Monika Büscher et al.

Digital urbanism in crises  173
thinking creatively through commercial and government forms of qualcula-
tion and surveillance. As citizens appropriate such techniques for themselves, 
these are no longer just top-down activities, but a way of learning about self-
positioning and self-placing, singularly and collectively.
Third, the way in which the Mission 4636 team noticed and addressed 
the operation of ‘blacklisting’ algorithms in Facebook reveals how 
people perceive the seams of posthumanity by pushing technological limits 
in crises. The collective found a social channel to address the obstacles this 
produced, leveraging social networks to make contact with Facebook devel-
opers. This circumvented a much longer administrative process that would 
normally be needed to change ‘blacklisted’ activities to ‘whitelisted’ activi-
ties. However, it also taught people something about how these algorithms 
operate, fine-tuning their perceptual apparatus for such operation in other 
socio-technical contextures.
Together, these observations document an emergent digital urbanism, 
sharpened and made more creative under the duress of crisis. Our observa-
tions resonate with analyses that see people increasingly acting like human 
pantographs, ‘measuring out the world and themselves at once’ in what 
threatens to become ‘Lifeworld Inc.’ (Thrift 2011: 9), contributing to the digi-
tal city as a shared nervous system (Bratton 2008). Our observations show 
how people develop new senses that understand in new ways their displaced 
or multiplied embodiment, their addressability or ‘awhereness’ (Thrift 2011), 
their connected presence (Licoppe 2004) and comobility (Southern 2012), as 
well as their subjection to new forms of surveillance, qualculation and auto-
mation. In the analysis of digital urbanism in crises, we see emergent practices 
that appropriate these techniques and thereby strengthen people’s rational 
and sensory capabilities to notice and understand their agency in relation to 
these digital seams and extensions, and to creatively exploit them for their 
own purposes. At least in part, this seems to turn them into more ‘hopeful 
monsters’ (Richards 1994) in the sense that they also unfold more benign 
socio-technical evolutionary paths. Addressability, for example, is often seen 
as a worrisome affordance, because it makes it possible to pinpoint and locate 
people precisely, for purposes of profiling, personalised advertising, govern-
ance, or surveillance (Thrift 2011). However, the examples we have discussed 
show that addressability also allows dialogue. In many cases, the voluntweet-
ers and Mission 4636 translators contacted the people reporting, to confirm 
information, receipt of aid or resources, to get more information or engage in 
conversation. So addressability could be two-way. How to design for this is 
one of the key questions that arises from our analysis.
Acknowledgements
The research is part of research funded by the European Union 7th 
Framework Programme in the BRIDGE project (Grant no 261817) and the 
SecInCoRe project (Grant no 261817).

Notes
1	 EU projects: BRIDGE (BRIDGE Project 2015) and SecInCoRe (SecInCoRe n.d.)
2	 (Disasters Emergency Committee 2015; Turine et al. 2015)
3	 Transcribed from CBC Radio Canada (2012)
4	 Personal communication
5	 See IWGCR (2011)
6	 NCOIC (2013a; minute 12:16)
7	 NCOIC (2013b; minute 3:42)
8	 (Thew, S. 2010)
9	 (Chavent n.d.)
References
Braidotti, R. (2013) The Posthuman, Cambridge: Polity.
Bratton, B.H. (2008) iPhone City, available from http://www.bratton.info/projects/
texts/iphone-city/pf/ [accessed 1 April 2015].
BRIDGE Project (2015) Bridge, available from http://www.bridgeproject.eu/en 
[accessed 21 November 2015].
Büscher, M., Perng, S-Y. and Liegl, M. (2014) ‘Privacy, security, liberty: ICT in crises’ 
International Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 
6(4): 76–92.
CBC Radio Canada (2012) Jan 26 & 29: from Port au Prince, Haiti – Kingston, 
Jamaica – Butare, Rwanda – Nicaragua – Bas Me Limbe, Haiti, available from 
http://www.cbc.ca/dispatches/episode/2012/01/26/jan-26-29-from-haiti---kingston-
jamaica---butare-rwanda---nicaragua/ [accessed 25 August 2015].
Chalmers, M. (2003) ‘Seamful design and UbiComp infrastructure’, Proceedings of 
UbiComp Workshop, ‘At the Crossroads: The Interaction of HCI and Systems Issues 
in UbiComp’, available from http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10
.1.1.61.6779&rep=rep1&type=pdf [1 April 2015]
Chavent, N. (n.d.) ‘Haiti’, Humanitarian Open Street Map Team, available from 
https://hotosm.org/projects/haiti-2 [accessed 25 August 2015].
Chesbrough, H.W. (2003) Open Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating and 
Profiting from Technology, Boston: Harvard Business Press.
Clémenzo, J-Y. (2011) Ushahidi Project and Mission 4636 in Haiti: Participation, 
Representation and Political Economy, MA thesis, London School of Economics, 
available from http://jeanyvesclemenzo.ch/Nouveausite/Recherches/DFA24093-
B92E-4A34-9746-564DE2E4BC0A_files/ResearchUshahidi.pdf [accessed 1 April 
2015].
Disasters Emergency Committee (2015) Haiti Earthquake Facts and Figures, available 
from http://www.dec.org.uk/articles/haiti-earthquake-facts-and-figures [accessed 
21 November 2015].
Ellebrecht, N. and Kaufmann, S. (2015) ‘Boosting efficiency through the use of 
IT? Reconfiguring the management of mass casualty incidents in Germany’, 
International Journal of Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 
6(4): 1–18.
Graham, S. (2010) Cities under Siege: The New Military Urbanism, London: Verso.
Graham, S. and Marvin, S. (2001) Splintering Urbanism, London: Routledge.
174  Monika Büscher et al.

Digital urbanism in crises  175
Greenfield, A. (2006) Everyware: The Dawning Age of Ubiquitous Computing, San 
Francisco: Peachpit Press.
Haraway, D.J. (2008) When Species Meet, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press.
Haraway, D.J. (2010) ‘Staying with the trouble: xenoecologies of home for compan-
ions in the contested zones’, Cultural Anthropology Online, July 27, available from 
http://www.culanth.org/fieldsights/289-staying-with-the-trouble-xenoecologies-of-
home-for-companions-in-the-contested-zones [accessed 1 April 2015].
Hayles, N.K. (1999) How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, 
Literature, and Informatics, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Heaven, D. (2013) ‘Not like us: artificial minds we can’t understand’, New Scientist, 
2929(8 August 2013): 33–5.
IWGCR (2011) ‘Japan earthquake puts data centers and Cloud services at risk’, 
International Working Group on Cloud Computing Resiliency, available from http://
iwgcr.org/japan-earthquake-puts-data-centers-and-cloud-services-at-risk [accessed 
25 August 2015].
Katsumi, B.T. (2013) ‘The resiliency, dependability and “survivability” of Cloud com-
puting’, CloudScape V, available from http://www.cloudscapeseries.eu/Content/
Agenda.aspx?id=264 [accessed 1 April 2015].
Kinoshita, K., Yukio I., Hideaki K. and Maeda, Y. (2012) ‘Technologies and emer-
gency management for disaster recovery – with focus on the great east Japan earth-
quake’, IEICE Transactions on Communications, E95.B(6): 1911–4.
Kitchin, R. and Dodge, M. (2011) Code/Space: Software and Everyday Life. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Latour, B. (1993) We Have Never Been Modern, Boston: Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. (2008) ‘A cautious Prometheus? A few steps toward a philosophy of 
design (with special attention to Peter Sloterdijk)’, in F. Hackney, J. Glynne, and 
V. Minton (eds) Networks of Design, Proceedings of the 2008 Annual International 
Conference of the Design History Society: 2–10.
Licoppe, C. (2004) ‘“Connected” presence: the emergence of a new repertoire for man-
aging social relationships in a changing communication technoscape’, Environment 
and Planning D: Society and Space, 22(1): 135–56.
MacAskill, E. Borger, J. Hopkins, N. Davies, N. and Ball, J. (2013) ‘GCHQ taps 
fibre-optic cables for secret access to world’s communications’, The Guardian, June 
21, available from http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2013/jun/21/gchq-cables-secret-
world-communications-nsa [accessed 1 April 2015].
Meier, P. (2012) ‘How crisis mapping saved lives in Haiti – News Watch’, National 
Geographic Explorers Journal, 2 July 2012, available from http://newswatch.nation-
algeographic.com/2012/07/02/crisis-mapping-haiti/ [accessed 1 April 2015].
Morrow, N., Mock, N., Papendieck, A. and Kocmich, N. (2011) ‘Independent evalua-
tion of the Ushahidi Haiti Project’, Development Information Systems International 
Ushahidi Haiti Project, available from www.alnap.org/pool/files/1282.pdf [accessed 
1 April 2015].
Munro, R. (2013) ‘Crowdsourcing and the crisis-affected community: lessons learned 
and looking forward from Mission 4636’, Information Retrieval, 16(2): 210–66.
Nancy, J-L. (2000) Being Singular Plural, Redwood City: Stanford University Press.
NCOIC (2013a) NCOIC Cloud Computing Demo – Video 2, available from https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=lydf9xGOfHQ [accessed 25 August 2015].

NCOIC (2013b) NCOIC Cloud Computing Demo – Video 1, available from https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wkeha_GKkAU [accessed 25 August 2015].
NCOIC Rapid Response (2013) NCOIC Rapid Response Capability Process – 
NCOIC, available from http://www.ncoic.org/10-technology/41-tech-prod-­process-
nrrc [accessed 1 April 2015].
Oh, O., Agrawal, M. and Rao, H.R. (2010) ‘Information control and terrorism: track-
ing the Mumbai terrorist attack through Twitter’, Information Systems Frontiers, 
13(1): 33–43.
Oxfam (2014) ‘Haiti earthquake: 4 years later’, Oxfam International, available from 
http://www.oxfam.org/en/haitiquake [accessed 1 March 2014].
Richards, E. (1994) ‘A political anatomy of monsters, hopeful and otherwise: teratog-
eny, transcendentalism, and evolutionary theorizing’, Isis, 85(3): 377–411.
Samuels, R.J. (2013) 3.11: Disaster and Change in Japan, Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press.
SecInCoRe (n.d.) The SecInCoRe Project, available from http://www.secincore.eu/ 
[accessed 21 November 2015].
Shanley, L., Burns, R., Bastian, Z. and Robson, E.S. (2013) Tweeting up a Storm: The 
Promise and Perils of Crisis Mapping, Washington, DC: Wilson Centre, available 
from https://www.wilsoncenter.org/sites/default/files/October_Highlight_865-879.
pdf [accessed 1 April 2015].
Sheller, M. (2013) ‘The islanding effect: post-disaster mobility systems and humani-
tarian logistics in Haiti’, Cultural Geographies, 20(2): 185–204.
Solove, D.J. (2011) Nothing to Hide: The False Tradeoff between Privacy and Security, 
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Sontag, S. (2003) Regarding the Pain of Others, London: Penguin Books.
Southern, J. (2012) ‘Comobility: how proximity and distance travel together in loca-
tive media’, Canadian Journal for Communications, 37(1): 75–91.
Starbird, K. and Palen, L. (2011) ‘“Voluntweeters”: self-organizing by digital volun-
teers in times of crisis’, Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, 1071–80.
Starbird, K. and Stamberger, J. (2010) ‘Tweak the Tweet: leveraging microblogging 
proliferation with a prescriptive syntax to support citizen reporting’, Proceedings of 
the 7th International ISCRAM Conference, 1–5.
Steinberg, T. (2000) Acts of God: The Unnatural History of Natural Disaster in 
America, New York: Oxford University Press.
Suchman, L. and Weber, J. (2014) ‘Human-machine autonomies’, Symposium: 
Autonomous Weapons Systems – Law, Ethics, Policy, Florence, European University 
Institute, 24–25 April.
Thew, S. (2010) ‘Hatian [sic] earthquake photo preview 01991418’, European 
Press 
Photo 
Agency, 
available 
from 
http://www.epa.eu/disasters-photos/
earthquake-photos/hatian-earthquake-photos-01991418 [accessed 25 August 2015].
Thrift, N. (2004) ‘Movement-space: the changing domain of thinking resulting from 
the development of new kinds of spatial awareness’, Economy and Society, 33(4): 
582–604.
Thrift, N. (2011) ‘Lifeworld Inc – and what to do about it’, Environment and Planning 
D: Society and Space, 29(1): 5–26.
Turine, G., Gabriner, A., Bicker, P. and Laurent, O. (2015) ‘Haiti earthquake: five 
years after’, TIME, 12 January 2015, available from http://time.com/3662225/haiti-
earthquake-five-year-after/ [accessed 21 November 2015].
176  Monika Büscher et al.

Digital urbanism in crises  177
Vidal, J. (2012) ‘Earth faces a century of disasters, report warns’, available from 
http://www.rawstory.com/2012/04/earth-faces-a-century-of-disasters-report-
warns/ [accessed 1 April 2015].
Vinck, P. (2013) World Disasters Report: Focus on Technology and the Future of 
Humanitarian Action, Geneva: International Federation of Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Societies, available from http://www.ifrc.org/PageFiles/134658/WDR 
2013 complete.pdf [accessed 1 April 2015].
Whatmore, S. (1997) ‘Dissecting the autonomous self: hybrid cartographies for a 
relational ethics’, Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 15(1): 37–53.

13	 Coding alternative modes of 
governance
Learning from experimental ‘peer-to-peer 
cities’
Alison Powell
Introduction
Coded infrastructure impacts city life, in ways that can largely be uncon-
scious. Codes do not necessarily have to be imposed on the city from outside 
of it. They may emerge from within the city, and by doing so demonstrate dif-
ferent ways of constructing urban experience. Coding can be sense making, 
and building coded infrastructures can in turn require sense making – includ-
ing decisions about how the code work should fit into a particular urban 
space, and how it ought to be managed and sustained. This chapter develops 
a perspective on peer-to-peer engagements on the coded city by analysing 
how coding practice is related to the development of other social and cultural 
‘codes’ that propose alternative ways of integrating technology into space. It 
argues that peer-to-peer coded cities are most significant because they suggest 
alternative ways of governing the interface between technology, the social 
and the spatial.
Dominant visions of ‘smart’ or ‘coded’ cities reinforce top-down govern-
ance via centralised control. Bottom-up visions stress participatory engage-
ment in urban space and politics through the use of information, sensors 
and data processing as part of citizen engagement. This chapter identifies 
how ICT projects of the past were imagined as providing opportunities for 
collaborative development and governance of particular urban spaces, in 
opposition to top-down efforts at urban communication governance taking 
place at the same time. We will see how these past projects, which often 
focused on providing access to communication enact a ‘politics of the minor’ 
(Feenberg 2011; Osborne and Rose 1999) and introduce new possibilities for 
governance of augmented urban spaces that are relevant for today’s ‘smart 
city’ proposals.
This understanding of governance includes ‘all processes of governing, 
whether undertaken by a government, market or network, whether over 
a family, tribe, formal or informal organisation or territory and whether 
through laws, norms, power or language’ (Bevir 2013: 1). In this case, the 
object of such governance is the city – or more precisely the code-mediated 
city – and the governance itself consists of a set of norms, frameworks or 

Coding alternative modes of governance  179
decisions that configure how ICTs ought to be integrated into city space and 
life. While a narrow view of civic governance might focus on the role of a 
formal organisation (the government), our broader view of governance here 
is concerned with the role of informal organisations, including loose organi-
sations who use peer-to-peer methods to develop coded infrastructures that 
they establish in city space.
Previous attempts at creating peer-to-peer urbanism suggest that ICT-
enabled cities need meaningful governance of the integration of technologies 
into cities – which encompasses how projects are conceived and discussed 
(discourse), how they are established in space (practice) and how they are 
built (architecture). These three elements are simultaneously co-produced, 
and all of them have an impact on the ability of people who live in cities to 
speak and be heard. I examine how peer-to-peer urbanism, as represented 
by community wireless networks, establishes alternative governance modes 
through discourse, practice and architecture. The analysis, I contend, is a 
step towards constructing a framework for good governance that can then be 
applied to future coded or ‘smart’ cities.
The top-down ‘smart city’
‘Smart’ systems are intended to augment urban spaces: as Aurigi and De 
Cindio (2008: 1) write: ‘The gradual development of an enriched media envi-
ronment, ubiquitous computing, mobile and wireless communication tech-
nologies, as well as the Internet as a non-extraordinary part of our everyday 
lives, are changing the ways people use cities and live in them.’ These aug-
mentations include blending mediated data with built spaces, presenting 
media on large screens or on personal devices, and providing ways to visu-
alise movements, decisions and contextual information. Dodge and Kitchin 
(2005) describe the ways that these projects layer software-controlled spaces 
over physical and geographical spaces, providing interfaces and data process-
ing layers that become embedded into the experience of particular kinds of 
space. These software elements sort and control the people and things that 
move through spaces, altering their relationships. The software-controlled 
layer is often perceived as being able to provide information and calculations 
that are of broad social benefit, such as community sensing (Salim 2012) and 
data visualisation (Moere and Hill 2012).
These technological layers create data that are available for use by various 
actors in various ways. Smart cities are seen, on the one hand, as being able 
to enact more efficient control of the complex systems of cities by creating 
more data for cybernetic control systems (Townsend, 2013) and, on the other 
hand, to improve the day-to-day decision making of individuals through 
‘street computing’ that allows everyday users to take advantage of otherwise-
hidden computational interfaces within the city. This is achieved by building 
or gaining access to sensor networks, tapping into publicly collected open 
data, or employing APIs to capture, use and remix data collected by mobile 

180  Alison Powell
phone companies. This apparent opposition between smart cities facilitating 
better cybernetic management and smart cities providing more opportuni-
ties for citizens to improve their own experiences seems straightforward, but 
both the dominant paradigm of centrally governed cities and the alternative 
paradigm of emergent citizen use of data-collecting ICTs depend on strong 
interlinkages with commercial infrastructure and processing power. The ethic 
of ‘street computing’ is, on one level, participatory and empowering, as it 
seeks a way for individuals to make sense out of data flows. On another level 
though, it is deterministic and celebratory – for example, Moere and Hill 
(2012: 28) write, ‘Recent advances in sensing devices, wireless network con-
nectivity, and display hardware have made the ultimate vision of ubiquitous 
computing finally possible, in which the “computer” as we know it becomes 
embedded in physical objects and surfaces of everyday life.’ Not only does 
this framing imply a technologically driven vision for the city, it also implies 
some linear, forward motion towards that vision, which is evoked as being 
not just desirable but inevitable.
Dominant perspectives: technology and cities as neutral
Dominant smart city rhetoric and smart city projects imply a neutral, if not 
straightforwardly positive role for technology within the city. The city aug-
mented by technology is an improved city, with efficiency of service provision 
created as a result of data collection architectures and without too much of 
the messiness and dynamism otherwise associated with city life. This means 
that smart cities are often commercial cities or cities of privatised technology, 
when vendors deploy particular systems into urban spaces. In his critique of 
the dominant imaginary of smart cities, urban scholar Adam Greenfield sug-
gests that one problem with smart city narratives is that they seem to refer to 
cities as if they were not real, actual, varying places. He writes, ‘The canonical 
smart city almost has to be staged in any-space-whatever; only by proposing 
to install generic technologies on generic landscapes in a generic future can 
advocates avoid running afoul of the knotty complexities that crop up imme-
diately any time actual technologies are deployed in actual places’ (Greenfield 
2013). Greenfield notes how the discourses used to describe smart city pro-
jects encode a hypothesis that the contemporary urban environment is too 
difficult for ordinary, unaided human beings to understand and manage, and 
that some higher power (in this case, information processing and computer-
aided decision making) is required.
One of the consequences of this is that the dominant vision for smart cities 
imagines them as ‘clean’ and ‘legal’ places where data calculation systems 
pre-empt disruptive or illegal activity. Data collection thus functions like 
centralised surveillance systems: as a system of discipline in which the fear of 
being observed drives exemplary behaviour. Idealising cities as entities that 
can be abstracted and rationalised has a long history that encompasses but 
extends past modernity. Expectations of both abstraction and rationality 

Coding alternative modes of governance  181
characterised imaginings of the nineteenth century city – the industrial, well-
ruled and orderly city – as the model for government, even while represen-
tations of the time returned over and over to the actual city’s problematic 
immanence; its ungovernability, crime, destitution, vice, gambling and drunk-
enness (Foucault 1984; Osborne and Rose 1999). But because there is more 
than one way of imagining the data city, and more than one way of structur-
ing the systems that are part of it, there are alternative visions for smart cities 
too – much as there were alternative visions for previous visions of exemplary 
city life.
Alternative perspectives: a coded city of ‘minor politics’
These alternative visions focus on the capacity of citizens to leverage features 
of new technologies to experience urban life differently. Urbanist Anthony 
Townsend suggests that sensor networks and mobile technologies (especially 
smartphones) have made it possible for ‘a motley assortment of activists, 
entrepreneurs, and civic hackers’ to tinker with technology as a means to 
‘amplify and accelerate the natural sociability of city life’ (2013: 9). Townsend 
focuses on how these people imagine a different kind of data city – one that 
builds mechanisms to share data and creates interfaces that allow different 
perceptions and navigations of city spaces. This creates a ‘lattice’ intercon-
necting local space and technology. This architectural layer forms one element 
of peer-to-peer urbanism. Beyond these technological capacities, however, 
peer-to-peer alternatives establish alternative organisational practices, and 
promote different kinds of spatial engagement, essential components of an 
expanded concept of peer-to-peer urban governance.
Peer-produced or grassroots ICT projects suggest that instead of a cen-
tralised ICT-enabled city with established top-down governance, it might be 
possible to develop a peer-to-peer smart city featuring heterarchical organi-
sational practices and distributed modes of architecture. These notions lev-
erage a ‘minor politics’ of urbanism (Osborne and Rose 1999) that stresses 
the local and contingent nature of urban experience (Thrift 2014). The real 
variation of experiences at the point where technology, organisation, culture 
and place combine suggests that the small, messy or unsustainable interven-
tions enacted through peer-to-peer urban projects like community wireless 
networks have significant value in rethinking ideas of governance in the era 
of the smart city.
Peer-to-peer: from coding practice to governance norm?
‘Peer-to-peer’ refers to a relational dynamic based on equipotency between 
members. Originally referring to a modification of client-server information 
processing architecture that partitions processing work between a number of 
interlinked nodes, the concept has been extended into social and economic 
fields, reflecting the influence of ideas about society’s networked organisation 

182  Alison Powell
(Castells 2001). ‘Peer-to-peer’ came to describe the relational dynamics at 
work in distributed networks within organisations or communities of prac-
tice. Yochai Benkler (2006) develops the concept of commons-based peer 
production to refer to the economic and social impacts of collaborative and 
contributory projects, including free and open source software production 
and the development of Wikipedia. He claims that the network form and 
peer production practices create a networked information economy where 
freely given peer-to-peer contributions also contribute to markets. Such a 
networked information economy supports individual autonomy and other 
liberal values. In the wake of Benkler’s work, theoretical and empirical 
critiques have focused on the relationship between peer-to-peer processes, 
economic and organisational shifts, and the value systems of liberal and 
neoliberal capitalist systems. Peer-to-peer contribution systems have been 
perceived as more democratic than other systems of production for software 
code or knowledge in general, as oppositional to contemporary neoliberal 
information orders, or as disruptive to existing intellectual property regimes. 
They have also been imagined as intrinsically linked with a minor or ‘mic-
ropolitics’, which are ‘distinguished from such large-scale interventions as 
elections and revolutions that aim at state power’ (Feenberg 2011). How 
might peer-to-peer urbanism unfold, and would it create a different locus 
of control for the coded informational layers of the city – perhaps even an 
opposition to centralised data collection and control?
The legacy of community wireless networks illustrates how F/OSS (free 
and open source software) modes of peer production expand from coding 
to other practices and how coded architecture illustrates alternative ways of 
conceiving space.
History and legacy of community wireless networks – peer-to-peer 
coded urbanism
Community wireless networks (CWNs), based on local experimentation with 
wireless radio technology, emerged around the world in the years following 
the drop in price of radio communication equipment that used unlicensed or 
license-exempt radio, which could be reconfigured using F/OSS. These pro-
jects exemplify the interplay of culture, organisation and technical produc-
tion that characterise the potential importance of peer-to-peer coded cities 
and their minor politics of governance.
In 2002, the first ‘free information advocates’ met in Berlin to talk about 
free information infrastructures. In 2003, Freifunk (‘free radio’) was founded 
with the goal of providing Internet connectivity across underserved areas 
of East Berlin. In the following decade, hundreds or perhaps thousands of 
these community based networks were set up, bringing together people inter-
ested in experimenting with open wireless technologies and those interested 
in improving civic life. In general, projects embraced one of two architectural 
forms: either using wireless as a means of broadcasting a single point of 

Coding alternative modes of governance  183
Internet access, or as a means of establishing meshed networks that inter-
linked individual wireless routing devices. Like other alternative imagina-
tions of technology-enhanced cities, they influenced dominant imaginations, 
in some cases inspiring the development of municipal scale wireless connec-
tivity projects.
These projects espoused a range of aims and goals that included provid-
ing Internet access to underserved areas or using wireless networks as a 
mechanism for social engagement, but also focused on F/OSS development, 
open hardware, reuse and repurposing of computer technology, and public 
engagement with communication policy issues. Community wireless net-
works depended on some form of community contribution of expertise, time, 
money, hardware or software (Abdelaal and Ali 2008). They experimented 
with peer-to-peer urbanism through cultures of peer production derived from 
F/OSS development strategies (Gaved and Mulholland 2008; Forlano et al. 
2011) by positioning alternative coded architectures as alternative spatial 
engagements (Powell 2008; Antoniadis et al. 2008), and promising alterna-
tive modes of social engagement (Shaffer 2013). The links between the codes 
of F/OSS development and the reimagining of space reveal how alternative 
conceptions of the coded city establish new ways of engaging and governing 
local space. This valorises unstable, temporary and contingent encodings of 
urban space, which permit us to think about governance of the smart city as 
a form of politics of the minor.
Peer-to-peer production and modes of participation
Community wireless network projects depended on the existence of F/OSS 
software that permitted modification of wireless equipment in order to effec-
tively run their projects. This software was collaboratively developed by an 
international community of practice who shared the code online, and by 
local activists who subsequently modified it and (not always legally) installed 
it onto wireless networking hardware. The different options for F/OSS wire-
less networking software also linked with the different ways that activists 
imagined that CWNs could fit into their city neighbourhoods – from the 
expansion of convivial ‘third places’ imagined by participants at Montreal’s 
Ile Sans Fil network to the alternative media and file-sharing network con-
structed using high-powered wireless technology by the members of the 
Athens Metropolitan Wireless Network. The Athens Metropolitan Wireless 
Network was built by friends who lived around the hills in the centre of 
Athens, and used antennae mounted on the tops of apartment buildings to 
link together these private spaces in a network that never connected to the 
public Internet. In contrast with the provision of Internet in existing public 
spaces imagined by Ile Sans Fil, this presents a highly private view of the 
city. Other networks imagined wireless connectivity as a form of media (in 
Lawrence, Kansas, the CWN launched a local online newspaper) or security 
infrastructure (in Lompoc, California, the network managers installed virtual 

184  Alison Powell
networks so that police and fire services could use it for their work, and also 
provided temporary service to contractors at the local air base and prison) 
(see Forlano et al. 2011).
Social organisation and legitimacy
The social dynamics within peer-to-peer processes are also variable. Peer-to-
peer processes are often described as being inherently more democratic than 
other modes of engagement, especially because they aim to create shared 
commons of assets (Bauwens 2005). In the expansion of coded work into 
city space, some parallels with the dynamics of peer-to-peer production 
online  emerge. Although some CWNs developed their technical projects 
using hierarchies where one person was ultimately responsible for the qual-
ity of the code, other strategies were required in order to maintain inter-
est  and participation in projects over the long term, as well as to secure 
the  roll-out  and maintenance of Wi-Fi infrastructure. These included 
distributed,  heterarchical models of organisation, characterised around 
strong participation in developing the physical wireless access network and 
the social, organisational and cultural capital also required to make projects 
‘go live’.
These varying strategies align with the two forms of peer production: 
‘heavy’ and ‘lightweight’ (Haythornthwaite 2009). ‘Heavyweight peer produc-
tion’ is characterised by ‘strong-tie affiliation with community members and 
community purpose, enacted through internally negotiated, peer-reviewed 
contribution’ (here and below, Haythornthwaite 2009: 1). Strongly organised 
CWNs with institutional ties to other organisations followed this form. In 
contrast, ‘lightweight peer production’ functions ‘by weak-tie attachment 
to a common purpose, enacted through authority-determined, rule-based 
contribution’, including the CWN projects that invited people to list their 
open Wi-Fi hotspots but also in projects that required only technical inter-
connection to become ‘part of the project’. For example, at Berlin’s Freifunk 
network, participation in the network was both limited to and required the 
construction of a mesh network node – although in the end this was such a 
difficult task that for many it transformed into a form of ‘heavyweight peer 
production’. Regardless, the instigators of the Freifunk network were clear 
that anyone who was willing to build a network node was welcome to partici-
pate in the construction of the network: ‘Freifunk is just a concept, it is not 
an entity’, reported one of the network’s founders (Forlano et al. 2011: 36). 
Each node host owns an equal portion of the network, making the network 
the property of its participants.
In contrast, other CWNs employed more structured and hierarchical 
relationships. This happened both through the choices made about project 
architecture and through organisational structures. In rural Denmark, the 
Djursland project used secured anchors. Finally, some CWNs moved from 
grassroots organisational forms to hybrid organisational forms including 

Coding alternative modes of governance  185
community–university partnerships (Vienna, Austria), municipally owned 
networks (Fredericton, NB; Wireless Philadelphia), and municipal–com-
munity partnerships (Montreal, QC) (Tapia et al. 2009). These structural 
relationships encoded methods of collaboration between very different kinds 
of entity, with the shared project of extending the communicational benefits 
of coded infrastructure to all.
Architectural choices
In addition to showing the variable ways that F/OSS might augment urban 
space, and the intersecting modes through which legitimacy is constructed for 
CWN proponents, CWNs also demonstrate the extension of code into space 
by politicising architectural choices. These political positionings emerge with 
the architectural possibilities available for setting up wireless networks. Two 
architectural forms – broadcast and distributed networks, combined with the 
social structures that developed around CWNs – establish frameworks for 
an alternative diagramming of the city. Broadcast networks require Internet 
connectivity at a central point that is of high enough quality to transmit a 
signal to receivers in the area, bearing in mind that the radio spectrum used 
by CWNs is of low quality. By contrast, a distributed network architecture 
in which wireless routers are linked together, each sharing a portion of their 
connectivity, suggests a reciprocal, peer-to-peer diagram of civic relation-
ships. These different modes imply different relationships between people 
within the city, and even different conceptual frames for civic relations. 
Osborne and Rose (1999) use the concept of ‘diagramming’ to suggest the 
relationship between space and government of cities. They write, ‘The vicious 
immanence of the city is a never-ending incitement to projects of government. 
Such projects seek to capture the forces immanent in the city, to identify 
them, order them, intensify some and weaken others, to retain the viability of 
the socialising forces immanent to urban agglomeration while civilising their 
antagonisms’ (Osborne and Rose 1999: 738).
We could take community networks as literal ‘diagrams’ of cities, which 
propose alternative spatial tendencies by establishing nodes and links that 
connect different kinds of space, some physical and some virtual. We could 
also take them as invitations to employ the different ‘diagramming’ modes 
as proxies for understanding the social and relational aspects of local city 
governance. A ‘broadcast lilypad city’ might valorise centres of exchange, 
such as local community centres (used by many CWNs as installation 
points for wireless broadcast antennae), and more aggregate modes of social 
relation in keeping with the traditions of social mapping derived from the 
Chicago School of Sociology in the 1930s. These modes focus on a know-
able city that can be mapped. In contrast a ‘distributed, peer-to-peer city’ 
might valorise more informal social links not based around cultural insti-
tutions,  or the creation of hybrid, commercial–community ‘third spaces’ 
(Oldenburg 1989).

186  Alison Powell
Spatial engagements: a coded city’s alternative diagrams
Community wireless networks reiterate how such diagramming of the city 
can be a socio-technical project linking new infrastructures to existing social 
and spatial practice. In other words, CWNs and their interventions create a 
way for advocates to talk about and explore what their cities mean to them. 
For example, in his report on the Consume network active in London in the 
early 2000s, Julian Priest (2004) argued that attempts to map the location 
of Consume network nodes was actually more successful as a proxy for 
measuring the location of geeks living in London, since geeky participants 
in the Consume project were likely to have wireless network nodes on their 
personal property. Unfortunately, for the ‘success’ of Consume, the distribu-
tion of geeks was concentrated in particular areas of the city, and outside of 
these areas their density was simply not high enough to create a function-
ing wireless network. In analysing Adelaide Wireless in southern Australia, 
Jungnickel (2014) focused on the messiness of aims to create a meshed net-
work linking individual residences, which by necessity included ad-hoc and 
informal meetings of wireless network creators in backyards and on rooftops. 
These meetings were social; in addition to helping create wireless networks, 
they also spawned relationships to other civic technologies (like bicycles).
Outcomes and implications
The proliferation of CWNs as code-based civic interventions in particular 
urban spaces was short-lived. By some measures, the vast majority of these 
projects failed: in 2005, individuals added thousands of wireless nodes to col-
laborative online maps, such as nodeDB or the Wikipedia page for CWNs. 
At present, only a fraction of these networks are still in operation. This lack 
of sustainability also suggests some lessons for governance within ‘minor 
politics’. Some of the CWN legacies rest in social, rather than technical trans-
formations that appeared at the time to be temporary or contingent. The 
network of people who initially set up Serbia’s BGWireless network found 
that their monthly picnic hackathons were more valuable than a function-
ing network and have continued to hold the parties without supporting the 
code. Other legacies are technical: CWNs actively contributed to the develop-
ment of F/OSS software and hardware, including gateway software, such as 
WiFiDog, and mesh networking software, such as the Mesh Potato, a version 
of which was used to relay activist communications during the Arab Spring. 
These collective efforts go quite some distance to establish an information 
commons: ‘the “open and free” availability of the raw material; participa-
tory “processing”; and commons-oriented output’ (Bauwens 2009: 122). 
Since these products of peer-produced efforts remain in common ownership, 
they maintain the possibility of peer-produced F/OSS code production and 
the expansion of peer-to-peer cities (Corsin-Jimanez, 2014). Finally, some 
projects achieved sustainability through encoding new social relationships 

Coding alternative modes of governance  187
amongst techno-enthusiasts, small businesses, city governments and non-
governmental organisations. These efforts created locally specific modes of 
integrating technology into the minor politics of the urban. They succeeded 
in producing technology in space, as engagement with space, in ways that 
were appropriate to the spaces they were in, for as long as it made sense to be 
there. Some remain as parts of infrastructure and others leave traces in the 
cultural and social spaces of cities, and in the codes that can still be used to 
augment them.
Conclusion
This chapter has contrasted two modes of combining citizenship, technol-
ogy and space, the ‘hierarchical city’ espoused in many ‘smart city’ technol-
ogy projects, and the ‘peer-to-peer’ city suggested by some CWN projects. 
Such projects establish a range of alternative means of organising access to 
communications. The ‘coding’ includes the integration of F/OSS social and 
cultural codes into the city, and the way that wireless architecture is imagined 
as being integrated into the city.
The extent to which projects oriented around the smart city can produce 
forms of ‘technological citizenship’ depends on how citizenship, space and 
technology are combined. Although it is tempting to automatically oppose 
dominant and alternative visions of cities, history does not work that way. 
The alternatives of the peer-to-peer city have also influenced the dominant 
imaginaries, at least in the way they have organised infrastructures and posi-
tioned discourses that facilitate the development – temporary, contingent – of 
coded city projects that can generate alternative modes of imagining a smart 
city. However, CWNs offered only an alternative to technological citizenship 
based around the consumption of ICT connectivity. Another way of looking 
at the partnerships created as these networks became more sustainable would 
be as an appropriation of the alternative into the dominant (Cammaerts 
2011). Indeed the very notion of citizenship has now been challenged by the 
dominant neoliberal political order. Can peer-to-peer forms effectively chal-
lenge this political form?
This challenge poses a problem for the emerging forms of encoding that 
are bound in to the contemporary city. The augmentation of the city through 
technology is now based less on the opportunity to be ‘connected’ (as it was 
for CWN projects) and more on the production and processing of data via 
information networks. As the technological city shifts from being a place 
where new innovations are discussed as creating new ways to listen and 
speak, and towards a place where subjects produce and clients consume data, 
the alternative modes of techno-social governance sketched here will need to 
be better developed. In the coming reiteration of the smart city, who writes 
the codes? How will data be able to speak for people’s interest? As these 
develop and mature, we need to examine how they, too, might be governed – 
and what techno-social alternatives remain.

188  Alison Powell
References
Abdelaal, A.M. and Ali, H.H. (2008) ‘A graph theoretic approach for analysis and 
design of community wireless networks’, AMCIS 2008 Proceedings, available from 
http://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2008/310 [accessed 25 November 2015].
Antoniadis, P., Le Grand, B., Satsiou, A., Tassiulas, L., Aguiar, R., Barraca, J. and 
Sargento, S. (2008) ‘Community building over neighborhood wireless mesh net-
works’, IEEE Technology and Society Magazine, 27(1): 48–56.
Aurigi, A. and de Cindio, F. (2008) (eds) Augmented Urban Spaces: Articulating the 
Physical and Electronic City, Design and the Built Environment. Farnham, UK: 
Ashgate.
Bauwens, M. (2005) ‘The political economy of peer production’, 1000 Days of Theory, 
available from http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=499 [accessed 25 August 
2015].
Bauwens, M. (2009) ‘Class and capital in peer production’, Capital & Class, 33(1): 
121–41.
Benkler, Y. (2006) The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms 
Markets and Freedom, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Bevir, M. (2013) A Theory of Governance, Berkeley: University of California  
Press.
Cammaerts, B. (2011) ‘Disruptive sharing in a digital age: rejecting neoliberalism?’, 
Continuum: Journal of Media and Cultural Studies, 25(1): 47–62.
Castells, M. (2001) The Internet Galaxy, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Corsin-Jimanez, A. (2014) ‘The right to infrastructure: a prototype for open source 
urbanism’, Environment and Planning D Society and Space, 32(2): 342–62.
Dodge, M., and Kitchin, R. (2005) ‘Code and the transduction of space’, Annals of the 
Association of American Geographers, 95(1): 162–80.
Feenberg, A. (2011) ‘Agency and citizenship in a technological society’, Course on 
Digital Citizenship, IT University of Copenhagen.
Forlano, L., Powell, A., Shaffer, G. and Lennett, B. (2011) From the Digital Divide 
to Digital Excellence: Global Best Practices for Municipal and Community Wireless 
Networks, Washington, DC: New America Foundation.
Foucault, M., and P. Rabinow (ed.) (1984) The Foucault Reader, New York: Pantheon.
Gaved, M. and Mulholland, P. (2008) ‘Pioneers, subcultures and cooperatives: the 
grassroots augmentation of urban places’, in A. Aurigi and F. de Cindio (eds) 
Augmented Urban Spaces: Articulating the Physical and Electronic City. Design and 
the Built Environment, Farnham, UK: Ashgate.
Greenfield, A. (2013) The City is Here for You to Use: Part I Against the Smart City, 
New York: DO projects.
Haythornthwaite, C. (2009) ‘Crowds and communities: heavy and lightweight models 
of peer production’, Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, available from https://ideals.illinois.edu/bitstream/handle/2142/9457/
HICSS%2042%20PPVCC%20Jan%202009.pdf?sequence=2 [accessed 25 August 
2015].
Jungnickel, K. (2014) DiY WiFi: Re-imagining Connectivity, London: Palgrave 
MacMillan ‘Pivot’.
Moere, A.V. and Hill, D. (2012) ‘Designing for the situated and public visualisation 
of urban data’, Journal of Urban Technology, 19(2): 25–46.

Coding alternative modes of governance  189
Oldenburg, R. (1989) The Great Good Place: Cafés, Coffee Shops, Community Centers, 
Beauty Parlors, General Stores, Bars, Hangouts and How They Get You through the 
Day. New York: Paragon House.
Osborne, T. and Rose, N. (1999) ‘Governing cities: notes on the spatialisation of 
virtue’, Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 17(6): 737–60.
Powell, A. (2008) ‘Wi-Fi publics: producing community and technology’, Information, 
Communication and Society, 11(8): 1034–56.
Priest, J. (2004) The State of Wireless London, available from http://informal.org.
uk/people/julian/publications/the_state_of_wireless_london/ [accessed 25 August 
2015].
Salim, F.D. (2012) ‘Probing streets and the built environment with ambient and com-
munity sensing’, Journal of Urban Technology, 19(2): 47–67.
Shaffer, G. (2013) ‘Lessons learned from grassroots wireless networks in Europe’, in 
A. Abdelaal (ed.) Social and Economic Effects of Community Wireless Networks and 
Infrastructures, Hershey, PA: Idea Group Inc.
Tapia, A.H., Ortiz, J.A. and Powell, A. (2009) ‘Reforming policy to promote local 
broadband networks’, Journal of Communication Inquiry, 33(4): 354–75.
Thrift, N. (2014) ‘The “sentient” city and what it may portend’, Big Data and Society, 
1(1): 1–21.
Townsend, A. (2013) Smart Cities: Big Data, Civic Hackers, and the Quest for a New 
Utopia, New York: W.W. Norton and Co.

14	 Encountering the city at hacking  
events
Sophia Maalsen and Sung-Yueh Perng
Introduction
Software developers have long held community events in which they build 
code and discuss issues or bugs they encounter. The open source community 
first coined the term ‘hackathon’ for an event held on 4 June 1999 when 
developers converged on Calgary, Canada, to work on Internet identity 
and security protocols (OpenBSD n.d.). In its early stage, and within the 
OpenBSD community, attending hackathons had both technological and 
symbolic significance. Although participation was not on a paid-for basis, 
attendance at the events was by invitation only, targeting those with dem-
onstrated abilities; these were not ‘developer training events’. Hackathons 
have since diversified and spread beyond elite tech communities. Meyer and 
Ermoshina (2013: 3) categorise hackathons into three types: ‘issue oriented’, 
centred around solving specific real-world problems; ‘tech oriented’, focused 
on developing prototype systems; and ‘data oriented’, wherein datasets are 
supplied by the organisers. The value of the events is more than technologi-
cal and includes building ‘new alliances and partnerships, discovering and 
developing new ideas and approaches to problems, and providing the muscle 
needed to make the new ideas and approaches a reality’ (Popyack 2014: 40). 
From a personal perspective, attending a hackathon can provide a route 
into a new community, lead to potential new employment or a start-up 
enterprise, enhance skills and build friendships.
Since 2009, the social and ethical benefits derived from the use of open 
government data have led to an increase in ‘civic hackathons’. Following the 
American ‘coding for democracy’ movement, civic hackers are described as 
‘technologists, civil servants, designers, entrepreneurs, engineers – anybody –  
who uses a minimum of resources and a maximum of brainpower and inge-
nuity to create, enhance or fix something’ (Meyer and Ermoshina 2013: 3). 
Thus, for Meyer and Ermoshina (2013), hackathons contain an experimental 
element of bricolage as well as being collaborative, heterogeneous and con-
stituted by hybrid expertise. This creates an innovation and problem-solving 
space and a set of tools in which social challenges can be addressed through 
technology and which produces a community of experts, professionals, 

Encountering the city at hacking events   191
activists and citizens, who can mutually support each other and contribute 
their individual skills.
Despite their benefits and ethics of openness, hackathons nonetheless pose 
questions and difficulties with respect to the politics of membership, which 
has implications for which issues are addressed, how they are tackled, and 
to whom the end product is designed. Usually taking place at weekends to 
attract working developers, and often consisting of intensive ten-hour-plus 
working days, hackathons tend to exclude those who have weekend and 
family commitments. Moreover, the decision making process during the 
event can prioritise the views of technology and coding experts and margin-
alise the roles played by domain experts, social scientists, urban planners, 
activists, public sector employees, local volunteers and interest groups. More 
crucially, the timing and format can ignore the opinions and experiences of 
local residents, whose everyday lives are to be analysed, programmed and 
reconfigured and potentially altered and disrupted. This is most acutely 
reflected in the production of apps intended to shape the ‘smart city’, lead-
ing to questions as to whom the smart city is being designed by and for. 
As Porway (2013) reflects, rather than addressing broader social problems 
faced by cities, there is a danger that hackathons only ‘solve the participant’s 
problems because as a young affluent hacker, my problem isn’t improving 
the city’s recycling programs, it’s finding kale on Saturdays’.
In this chapter, we examine how the energy, data, creativity and imagina-
tion play out when code is mobilised to address urban problems and the 
implications and challenges that emerge in that process. To do so, we draw 
on our ethnographic participant observation conducted in Dublin, Ireland, 
in 2014. We focus on Code for Ireland events, but are also informed by the 
participation in a number of other coding or hacking events. Although we 
both have relatively weak coding skills, much of which were learnt through 
the hackathons, these events became increasingly inclusive over time, with 
an emerging appreciation of a diversity of skills beyond coding, and thus 
we could contribute to the hackathons in other ways (such as providing 
feedback, domain knowledge, facilitating team negotiation). Moreover, 
we engaged in dialogue with event organisers concerning our observations, 
opening up two-way communication that enabled a more reflexive research 
practice. In particular, we use our fieldwork at Code for Ireland to examine 
the productive tension in the aims and ambitions between two forces often 
found at work at Code for Ireland ‘meet-ups’ which do not always seam-
lessly interact: what the developers want to do and what the government or 
companies running the hackathon desire. The following sections comment 
on the making of hacking space, the fluidity and messiness of the hackathon 
process, and questions whether the end-products live up to the promotional 
rhetoric of hackathons.

192  Sophia Maalsen and Sung-Yueh Perng
Placing civic hacking
The mundane question of where participants hack and develop apps is often 
overlooked when highlighting the value, ethics and culture within the hack-
ing community. However, the place of hacking is important because the 
social relationships and practices of assembling code have to be brought 
together to be materialised in chips, parts and infrastructure to take effect 
(MacKenzie 2001), and venues and their configuration produce particular 
kinds of sociality and spatiality that influence interactions and dynamics 
within teams and projects, and also influence attendance. To decode how 
Code for Ireland provides a ‘place’ for hacking and how their goals and 
achievements are contextualised, in this section we attend to practical issues, 
such as choice of venue, the internal spatial arrangement and its temporal-
ity, to highlight how ethical values and organisational challenges meet and 
materialise.
Code for Ireland was launched in January 2014 and since then has had reg-
ular, monthly gatherings in Dublin where participants can meet face-to-face, 
catch up with the progress of each other’s projects, work on their projects, 
and network with developers, community members and other interested indi-
viduals. The meet-ups are scheduled for the last Thursday evening of each 
month, and the evening often starts with socialising until the organiser gath-
ers participants to start the event. The organiser introduces the motivation 
and goal of the meet-up, highlighting that Code for Ireland is a voluntary 
organisation that promotes the idea of openness, transparency and connect-
ing communities and technologies. The opportunity that Code for Ireland 
want to harness is to leverage the participants’ diverse skills sets, including 
developing and designing software, marketing and data analysis, to produce 
apps that serve community needs. Alongside the meet-up participants, there 
are usually guests present from government agencies or companies who may 
have access to required datasets, the knowledge to source data if not readily 
available, or required domain expertise.
Realising the goals of the organisation is not a trivial task and the organ-
isers have gradually developed strategies to pursue these. Rather than a 
weekend event creating a quick fix, they recognise that they are taking a 
longer-term approach. This requires regular meet-ups and various ways to 
maintain momentum: using social media, maintaining a website populated 
with details about ongoing projects, creating a database of diverse skill sets 
using online forms, and developing problem-evaluating methods to help their 
projects get started. Their efforts created a regular flow of new participants 
with backgrounds ranging from local authorities and tech companies to non-
governmental organisations and local businesses. The momentum created by 
Code for Ireland is demonstrated in the turnout for the July 2014 meet-up. 
Held in the Dublin offices of LinkedIn, in a warm, breezy and bright summer 
evening, the meet-up had around 70 people registering their interests and 
about 40 people attending, working on six different projects.

Encountering the city at hacking events   193
With a longer-term approach comes sustained logistical issues, for exam-
ple, the venue and the means to accommodate participants. Part of Code for 
Ireland’s remit is to establish an inclusive group of participants to pursue 
projects for addressing community issues. To provide the participants with 
a place to discuss and work on projects during 2013 and 2014, the meet-
ups took place in the headquarters of Facebook, Google and LinkedIn in 
Dublin’s ‘Silicon Docks’. The only exception was for the launch event, which 
took place in Dublin Castle, a popular historical venue for high-profile con-
ferences and cultural events, providing social and symbolic significance to 
the organisation. Within the company venues, meet-ups took place in or near 
the canteen area, where at the end of each event the sponsored pizza and 
beer became a catalyst for networking and catching up before the night con-
cluded. The venues are all open-plan, providing enough space for individual 
groups to occupy their own corners for discussion, as well as allowing event 
participants to move in between projects. This gives a sense of openness to 
members, encouraging them to contribute wherever they can, at any stage 
in a project’s development, with their ultimate goal of being open for reap-
propriation and reproduction of ideas and code elsewhere by other groups of 
people and for different purposes.
This focus on inclusion and community, however, is simultaneously in 
tension with the corporate host venues, as some participants commented. 
Several times, participants had to sign confidentiality agreements to enter the 
building while participating in an event advocating openness and transpar-
ency. Almost always, participants were shepherded by company staff into the 
canteen. We were left wondering if this is simply because we might be lost in 
the often vast and complex buildings, or in fear that we might take the oppor-
tunity to wander off and enter restricted areas ‘by accident’. In other words, 
the hack events often seemed to be hosted in a liminal space, with participants 
always an insider to the event but an outsider to the venue. Despite this, these 
same major tech companies set aside budget, encourage their employees to 
take ‘social responsibility’ and, in effect, contribute to the stability and sus-
tainability of Code for Ireland with sufficient space and generous supplies to 
keep the initiative going.
Further, Code for Ireland encourage their members to work towards the 
vision that any solution they create in Dublin can be taken up by other cities 
in Ireland and beyond for wider reuse and redeployment. There have been 
increasingly frequent reminders for participants to build products from open 
source software and deposit code in GitHub, an online service providing 
repository, version tracking functionalities and other code services, especially 
as projects come close to completion. In early hacking history, the right to 
access was a critically important motivation, driving the writing of free and 
open source software (F/OSS), with associated licensing to ensure that the 
software would not be privatised (Coleman 2013).
Behind such a material arrangement for code is an emphasis on building 
modular and scalable apps that cut across geographical boundaries and social 

194  Sophia Maalsen and Sung-Yueh Perng
needs. Indeed, Code for Ireland is inspired by Code for America to build apps 
that work well in a local context and can then be reappropriated for another 
community. An often cited example in the meet-up is an American app in 
which citizens are encouraged to ‘adopt’ a hydrant being quickly tweaked to 
replace the hydrant with a park so that Dublin communities can take more 
responsibility for their neighbourhoods. Code here becomes an ‘immutable 
mobile’ (Latour 1987), where the core architecture remains the same even 
though the purpose and context of use change. However, what is less stable 
is the interest and the motivation that enables code writing in the first place. 
Finding existing solutions is a good software development practice to save 
time and resources, which are both scarce in voluntary activities. But the 
translation of the motivation for adopting hydrants, which is to prevent the 
hydrants from being covered by the snow after winter storms in Boston, 
into the context of encouraging community participation and responsibil-
ity in Dublin, while truly inspiring, has to undergo series of brainstorming, 
outreach and reorientation before specific goals for the project can be set 
and software specifications decided. In other words, code becomes mutable 
(Law and Mol, 2001) when brought into the city, organised under a differ-
ent framework, extended with new functionality, tweaked and refined, and 
responds to specific dynamics and requirements from local communities. At 
the meet-ups we attended, considerable time was spent discussing ideas and 
subsequent variations of the original idea, what it could be used for and how 
it could be made, so much so that the actual coding and app development was 
delayed perhaps longer than it should have been.
Exploring the ‘placing’ of civic hacking also led us to rethink the often 
singular, fixed, streamlined and goal-specific backdrops that contextualise 
hackathons. Frequently, what the aim is and what would be a good approach 
to achieve it are developed and negotiated through conversational interaction 
during the events; this process is never fixed but is in a constant state of rene-
gotiation throughout the project. Interestingly, the dynamic of the Ireland 
chapter of the Code for All events was also seen to be different from that in 
other countries. For example, one of the organisers had recently attended the 
Open Knowledge Festival in Berlin with representatives from international 
chapters of the Code for All movement. He observed that the discourse in 
Berlin was strongly centred around transparency, measuring the outcome 
of projects, and whether they could influence government policy and action. 
Code for Ireland, in contrast, was less focused on influencing government and 
more on enabling change at a community level and in people’s lives by situat-
ing them in a more community- and ethics-driven environment. As such, the 
approach to project management was less controlling and there was a strong 
focus on making the event relevant to participants’ lives and enjoyable, with 
coding seen as something of a social and leisure activity. The organiser thus 
referred to Code for Ireland ‘hacking the system with apps’, wherein the apps 
become a means to the mission, but are not the mission itself.

Encountering the city at hacking events   195
The individual
The hackathon could not exist without those who participate. Although 
there is rhetorical discussion as to what hackathons can do for the city and 
communities, less emphasis is placed on what hackathons can do for those 
who are involved in the event. As Coleman notes, much of the research on 
hacking and F/OSS development focuses on the more intangible spaces of 
bits and bytes but often neglects the existence of ‘face-to-face interactions 
amongst these geeks, hackers and developers’. The reason Coleman (2013: 
45) offers for this lack of interest is the fact that much of the communication 
and interaction between participants is ‘unremarkable – the ordinary stuff of 
work and friendships’. And yet, the social element of hackathons is a strong 
influence on participation, as we have clearly observed at the coding events 
we have attended.
So what attracts people to hacking and coding events? Some participants 
mentioned that it was a way to meet people; indeed with PyLadies and 
Coding Grace, the programs were designed to encourage women to partici-
pate and engage with technology in a supportive environment. As for Code 
for Ireland, while there may be some spectacle lent to Code for Ireland by 
virtue of the venues – the googleness of Google – and the emphasis on the 
project’s PR, the majority of the interpersonal communications reflect those 
of normal interactions and decision making processes: discussing ideas, sug-
gesting ways to approach the topics, somebody always typing, and ideas 
boards being added to.
Moreover, there is often fluidity between the groups, encouraged by the 
organisers and enacted by participants. The organisers promote mobility 
between groups as a way of sharing experiences and ideas. Allowing par-
ticipants to move freely between groups can be an effective way of sustaining 
their interests in the event. For the participants, even if they are not ‘affiliated’ 
to a particular group, they can still show up and provide their thoughts and 
experiences to various groups in one evening. Even when some people attach 
themselves to one project at a meeting, at the next meeting they may join 
another ‘more-interesting-at-that-moment’ project, or a project that they feel 
has more potential to be followed through or to produce a useful product. 
However, group members may also not show up at all, with an e-mail sent 
to the online project management site about work commitments preventing 
attendance being the most common form of apology. Indeed, at one event 
we attended, there was only one representative in each of the two groups 
we had participated in at the previous meeting. This stalled the process of 
development and made decision making difficult. In one case, a project idea 
was changed quite substantially when only one key member of the group was 
present who was left to make decisions on behalf of the larger group in consul-
tation with a government representative who was persuading him to reframe 
the project along new lines. Absences, then, can have considerable impact on 
whether a project will be followed through to completion and in what form.

196  Sophia Maalsen and Sung-Yueh Perng
Furthermore, while there was a general acknowledgement that the projects 
were not operating in isolation and that the ideas were intended to benefit 
the wider community, often the main driver for people to attend was some 
type of self-gain. In our case, we were obviously motivated by research and 
the need to study the field, but talking to other participants brought up 
other reasons. As a result, practices of sharing and individual gains cannot 
be easily separated from each other. By virtue of Dublin promoting itself 
as a tech hub and attracting international companies, such as Google and 
Facebook, we observed that there were people involved from such organisa-
tions. Importantly, such companies often import part of the workforce with 
them to Ireland. One participant revealed that he had moved to Dublin for 
work from San Francisco and that he was not just attending the event to 
donate his skills but to meet new people. For others, it is a way to develop 
skills and to engage with a broader community of programmers and develop-
ers, with a social occasion, including free pizza and beer as an added bonus. 
The way that hackathons can serve individuals is described in a post on the 
Kansas City IT Professionals’ website that highlights ‘seven reasons why you 
need to attend hackathons’ (Gelphman 2014):
(1)	 connect with passionate developers;
(2)	 demonstrate your skills;
(3)	 push yourself;
(4)	 get feedback;
(5)	 learn and grow;
(6)	 become part of the community;
(7)	 change your life.
Certainly, these reasons were motivators at the events we attended. 
However, there is an individual element that is often overlooked in the 
hackathon and the smart city discourse. Gelphman goes on to indicate that 
hackathons can be framed instead as a way to become part of a community 
in which the emphasis can switch from what the individual can do for the 
community, to what the community can do for the individual. It is not simply 
what people can do for the hackathon but also what the hackathon can do 
for the people involved. Mattern (2014) alludes to this sense of individualism 
when she discusses what she terms the ‘widgetisation’ of urban resources, 
which conveniently translates ‘our messy city into my efficient city’, produc-
ing an individualised civics.
Mattern’s critical appraisal of what kind of city is produced through the 
hackathon and who it is envisioned by is shared by Porway. He critiques the 
usefulness of ‘throwing data’ at hackers and expecting something good and 
useful to emerge: ‘Most companies think that if you can just get hackers, pizza 
and data together in a room, magic will happen’ (Porway 2013). He does not 
dismiss hackathons per se, but he does emphasise the need to start with a 
clear question and definition of the problem to be solved, and make use of 

Encountering the city at hacking events   197
subject matter experts to articulate the problems to which the data are related 
to the hackers and to assess the results so that the process not only addresses 
the ‘what’ of the data but also the ‘why’. The lack of a clear question and 
focus certainly delayed many of the projects we observed, and Porway’s sug-
gestions could be one way of negotiating such stalling. Like Mattern, Porway 
sees the individuality of many of the apps as problematic. Using the example 
of the New York City Reinvent Green Hackathon, he demonstrates how the 
winning apps, including a ‘bikepool’ app and a farmer’s market inventory 
app, reflect the participant’s ‘problems’ and do not solve the wider sustain-
ability problems of the city.
However, this is not to say that there is no reflection from the participants 
on the process of pursuing individual interests under the name of citizen 
collaboration. One of the Code for Ireland participants raised concerns over 
the ambiguous relationship and the lack of reciprocity with government 
agencies, which release data to facilitate projects pursued by the initiative. 
Here, the participant is reflecting on the ethics of taking the data without 
necessarily providing something in return. His concerns are appeased by the 
event organiser and his framing of the activity as a broader opportunity to 
effect change at a community level. Nonetheless, the mechanism and scope 
for benefitting the government or the general public seems to be missing. 
However, such a ‘reciprocal relationship’ between the government and par-
ticipants is presently being trialled as the initiative develops its own project 
and alliances with relevant government agencies. An example referred to by 
one of the Code for Ireland organisers was a queuing time estimation service 
for a highly congested public office. The organiser described the difficulty of 
obtaining data from the government for improving estimation accuracy, the 
alternative approaches the project undertakes to acquire data, and to prove 
to relevant agencies that such service is needed and that there is a viable solu-
tion under development.
These tensions and opportunities between hacking for individual or com-
munal gain are underlined by the broader ethics of the F/OSS community, 
and we cannot understand the motivators behind the hacking and coding 
events described here without paying some attention to the ethical practice 
that informs them. There are parallels between the openness of data and the 
openness of source code that converge in the place of the hacking events 
and inform the practice of the individual. Both share a ‘vibrant ethic of 
information freedom’, and projects can also be understood ‘as a site for 
the production of ethics’ (Coleman and Hill 2005: 277). Coleman and Hill 
(2005) note that F/OSS ethics and politics are oppositional to market-based 
software production and associated intellectual property regimes. Instead, F/
OSS developers take advantage of copyleft licenses, in which the code source 
remains accessible. Importantly, they describe this as a material and symbolic 
reterritorialisation of knowledge, which means that developers can access 
and use source code legally. Thus, F/OSS is characterised by an aesthetic 
of openness and collaboration for the greater good. This parallels with the 

198  Sophia Maalsen and Sung-Yueh Perng
politics of civic hacking, e.g., the corporate hosting, the contextualisation of 
success or the individualised interests, as discussed here, and the associated 
openness of the data providers, in this case, most often Dublin City Council.
The hacking events, the F/OSS and the individual participants encounter 
the city in a way that is mediated by their own ethical and political code. 
The tensions between individual and broader community gain are negotiated 
by a practice of openness and it is this that helps maintain the energy of the 
projects. Although unifying, an ethics of openness does not negate the plural-
ity of approaches, or the multiplicity of the issues that participants want to 
address. Nor does the mutability of code necessarily allow an easy transfer of 
ideas from one country or region to another to produce a successful outcome, 
as advocated by Code for Ireland organisers. The hackathons themselves 
become sites of encountering the city, often in messy ways, as various agen-
das and politics compete, despite an overriding motivation to make the city 
better for all. It is this tension that may be responsible for the relative lack of 
apps that successfully address urban issues and governance. Such events do, 
however, produce opportunities that benefit participants in more social and 
localised ways; thus, the value of hacking events cannot be discounted.
Conclusion
This chapter is an opening scene for our research on hacking events. We 
have asked whether such events deliver on the promises they make to find 
workable solutions to civic issues and city governance. We addressed these 
questions through observations made during our fieldwork and found hack-
ing and coding events to be dynamic spaces, with the mutability of code, the 
social relationships facilitated through the events, and the city and communi-
ties they address, interacting in mutually informing ways.
Such events were seen by some as creative and legitimate ways to approach 
city problems, as evidenced by the presence of local government representa-
tives at some events suggesting issues they would like addressed and offering 
access to data, the enthusiasm of the organisers to encourage participation 
and openness across projects, and the commitment of individuals. However, 
the success of the events and their products in solving these issues was rarely 
validated. For the individual, hacking and code events provided them with 
a chance to acquire and develop skills, network, make friends, socialise and 
channel their energies into issues that mattered to them. In this sense, we 
must remember that hacking and coding events are not necessarily all work, 
but can be spaces of leisure.
The hacking events we observed were spaces of interaction, discussion, 
creation and leisure and, as such, can be seen to mediate positive encounters 
with the city regardless of output. Further, there is a need for making the 
plurality of code and coders more explicit, so as to understand who and 
what kinds of activity are still missing in this approach. In so doing, we also 
expand the discourse on the smart city by focusing on the people and the 

Encountering the city at hacking events   199
relationships they establish in proactively creating ‘smart city’ spaces and 
tools. Indeed, a focus on civic hacking places people back into the smart city, 
addressing the critique that much of the smart city discourse forgets about 
community by focusing predominantly on technology.
Acknowledgement
The research for this paper was conducted under The Programmable City, 
a project funded by a European Research Council Advanced Investigator 
award (ERC-2012-AdG-323636-SOFTCITY).
References
Coleman, G. (2013) Coding Freedom: The Ethics and Aesthetics of Hacking, Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Coleman, G. and Hill, B. (2005) ‘The social production of ethics in Debian and free 
software communities: anthropological lessons for vocational ethics’, in S. Koch 
(ed.) Free/Open Source Software Development, Hershey, PA: Idea Group Inc.
Gelphman, M. (2014) ‘7 reasons why you need to attend hackathons’, Kansas City 
IT Professionals, available from http://www.kcitp.com/2014/07/01/hack-midwest-
kansas-city-hackathon/ [accessed 15 July 2014].
Latour, B. (1987) Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through 
Society, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Law, J. and Mol, A. (2001) ‘Situating technoscience: an inquiry into spatialities’, 
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 19(5): 609–21.
MacKenzie, A. (2001) ‘Open source software: when is a tool? What is a commodity?’, 
Science as Culture, 10(4): 541–52.
Mattern, S. (2014) ‘Interfacing urban intelligence’, Places, April 2014, available at 
https://placesjournal.org/article/interfacing-urban-intelligence/ [accessed 17 June 
2014].
Meyer, M. and Ermoshina, K. (2013) ‘Bricolage as collaborative exploration: 
transforming matter, citizens and politics’, i3 Conference Cooperating for 
Innovation:  Devices for Collective Exploration, TELECOM ParisTech, Paris, 2 
December 2013, available from http://www.i-3.fr/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/
Meyer_conferenceI32013.pdf [accessed 15 July 2014].
OpenBSD (n.d.) ‘Hackathons’, OpenBSD, available from http://www.openbsd.org/
hackathons.html, [accessed 19 March 2015].
Popyack, J.L. (2014) ‘Prohacktivity, or one giant hack for mankind’, ACM Inroads, 
5(2): 40–52.
Porway, J. (2013) ‘You can’t just hack your way to social change’, Harvard Business 
Review Blog, 7 March 2013, available from http://blogs.hbr.org/2013/03/you-cant-
just-hack-your-way-to/ [accessed 15 July 2014].

15	 Semantic cities
Coded geopolitics and the rise of 
the Semantic Web
Heather Ford and Mark Graham
Introduction
Cities are much more than just bricks and mortar. They are also digital. A 
core aspect of places and the ways that we enact them and bring them into 
being is computation and digital data (Kitchin and Dodge 2011; Graham et al. 
2013). Platforms such as Google Maps, Baidu, OpenStreetMap, Wikipedia, 
Twitter, Facebook and Yelp! all encourage users to embed and deploy digital 
content in their everyday spatial practices. Graham et al. (2013: 465), for 
example, argue that ‘representations of place, in conjunction with myriad 
other layerings and discourses’ can be seen as augmentations of the city. 
Because these augmentations are such an integral element to contemporary 
urban environments, it is crucial to understand how they are produced and 
reproduced, and made visible and invisible by both large organisations and 
the cumulative efforts of millions of contributors (Leszczynski and Wilson 
2013; Leszczynski 2015; Wilson 2014).
A major contributor to the rise of digital layers of the city has emerged 
from the phenomenon called ‘volunteered geographical information’. This 
is a practice and phenomenon whereby individuals voluntarily provide geo-
graphical information on sites and platforms, enabling the capture of user-
generated content (Elwood et al. 2011: 573). The idea that there are now 
many different ways for citizens to contribute to the representation of their 
cities has led some to argue that the representation of place has become 
democratised. Lawrence Lessig, for instance, has noted that, ‘For the first 
time in a millennium, we have a technology to equalize the opportunity that 
people have to access and participate in the construction of knowledge and 
culture, regardless of their geographic placing’ (Lessig 2003).
But not only is digital content impacting on how cities are experienced, 
the infrastructure of the Web itself is undergoing a significant phase of 
transformation – one related to the way in which information is structured 
and represented. In 2001, Berners-Lee et al. (2001) outlined a new vision 
for the creation of a Semantic Web as a ‘web of data’ to replace the ‘web 
of documents’ that had been the result of the Web’s original design. The 
goal of the Semantic Web was to enable the development of principles 

Semantic cities  201
and  standards  for the structuring and sharing of data between different 
websites.
Over a decade after this vision for the Semantic Web was published, 
Google launched a service called the Knowledge Graph, which adopts many 
of the same principles of the Semantic Web. The goal of the Knowledge 
Graph was to answer basic search queries without the user having to navi-
gate to other websites. A search for ‘Paris’, for example, would result in a 
prominent table on the right-hand side of the Google search page listing facts 
about Paris (in addition to regular search results on the left-hand side of the 
page). These facts include the status of Paris as the capital city of France, a 
paragraph of text about the city (taken from Wikipedia), followed by a series 
of statistics including its size, weather and population (attributed to figures 
from UNdata) and a series of labelled images under the heading, ‘Points of 
interest’, as can be seen in Figure 15.1.
In 2012, the Wikimedia Foundation (the organisation that administers 
Wikipedia) announced a new project called Wikidata that would boost 
Wikimedia’s efforts to support Semantic Web principles. Funded in part by 
Google, Wikidata would develop a semantically organised knowledge base1 
sourced with information from Wikipedia and other Wikimedia Foundation 
projects, as well as other sources of open data. Wikidata’s goals are twofold: 
to support Wikipedia and other Wikimedia projects by enhancing consist-
ency across different projects and language versions, and to support the many 
different (third-party) services and applications that reuse Wikipedia data in 
a structured way (Vrandecic and Krotzsch 2014). In other words, Wikidata 
stores structured information in formats that allow websites and machines 
(instead of human beings) to easily reuse it.
With two of the world’s most popular websites (Google and Wikipedia) 
now applying Semantic Web principles to the organisation of information, 
we ask what effects these data integration practices have on the representation 
of places. Using the example of the city of Jerusalem, we explore data sharing 
practices at the intersection of Wikipedia and Google by tracing the repre-
sentation of the city as data moves from Wikipedia to Google and Wikipedia 
to Wikidata through the process of automated data extraction and database 
linking. By analysing the practices by which data is extracted and then linked 
according to the logic of the Semantic Web, we argue that, far from enabling 
shared meaning across different sites, as promised by the original designers of 
the Semantic Web, meaning is significantly different across these sites.
When data moves from Wikipedia to Wikidata and to Google, it becomes 
less nuanced, its provenance is obscured, the agency of users to contest infor-
mation is diminished and the use of personalised filters means that users 
cannot see what information is being presented to them. Because the domi-
nant discourses surrounding the move towards a more semantic web frame 
these changes as inherently technical rather than political, we conclude that 
there needs to be a renewed debate about the politics encoded in and per-
formed through geographically linked databases.

Figure 15.1   Results of a search for ‘Paris’ on Google (4 December 2014)

Semantic cities  203
Jerusalem is a city in the Middle East with a capital claimed by both the 
State of Israel and the State of Palestine and whose status as a capital city is 
one of the longest running disputes on Wikipedia (Wikipedia contributors 
2014). The city’s borders and governance have changed significantly over 
the years, most recently after the 1967 (Six-Day) war between Israel and the 
neighbouring states of Egypt, Jordan and Syria, when Israel annexed East 
Jerusalem from Jordan. Many Palestinians foresee Jerusalem as their future 
capital, but there is no widespread international recognition for Jerusalem 
(as composed of both East and West parts) as the capital of either Israel or a 
Palestinian State. Such disagreement is reflected in the very different perspec-
tives on what are the basic facts about Jerusalem in the Arabic and Hebrew 
versions of Wikipedia and in the heated and long-running disagreements on 
the text of the English version – for instance, see Graham et al. (2013) and 
Graham and Zook (2013) for examples of the divergent representations and 
contestations of Jerusalem on Google and Wikipedia.
To understand how the city’s contested political contexts are embedded 
into its digital layers, we traced how the city is digitally represented and the 
debates about such representations. We did this by analysing representations 
of Jerusalem across the Arabic, Hebrew and English versions of Wikipedia 
(working with a translator on the Arabic and Hebrew versions), as well as 
on the platforms of Wikidata, Freebase and Google. Other search engines, 
such as Microsoft’s Bing, also display data from Wikipedia, but we decided 
to focus on Google because of its widespread usage in much of the world as 
the default search engine.
The impact on representational power of mediating technologies
Research into the political implications of technologies has a rich history 
in such fields as science and technology studies, but the analysis of search 
engines is still nascent in contemporary technology research, albeit for a 
few notable examples. Introna and Nissenbaum (2000), for example, have 
shown how search engines ‘systematically exclude (in some cases by design 
and in some accidentally) certain sites, and certain types of sites, in favour 
of others’ (Introna and Nissenbaum 2000: 169), and that this is a sign of 
increasing centralisation and commercialisation of the guiding forces of 
the Internet. Similarly, in the Society of the Query Reader, König (2014) 
­reiterates  the  importance of search engines for the public health of the 
Internet, and calls for an opening up of the ‘black boxes’ of search algo-
rithms, and for a recognition of the increasingly concentrated, monopoly-
like nature of the search engine market. But it is also important to look 
beyond the effects of algorithms on representations, and focus attention on 
the practices through which large databases are constructed. In the process 
of extracting data from these systems, Groth (2013: 1) notes that ‘we remove 
nuance, context and provenance’.
In this chapter, we situate these arguments in the context of the urban 

204  Heather Ford and Mark Graham
environment, a context in which digital representations can quickly trans-
late into material practices. By analysing the features of this intersection 
between people, practices, tools, laws and economics in a spatial account, 
we are able to recognise the features of practice that produce digital results. 
Furthermore, despite the resurgence in research about search engines, the 
majority of previous research has considered individual platforms, focusing 
on Google, Facebook and other major corporations, rather than addressing 
the increasing interdependence of different organisations in the development 
of Web logics. By tracing practices between interconnected sites such as 
Wikipedia and Google, we note the underlying logics that are guiding the 
development of the Web in general, rather than focusing on the idiosyncra-
sies of one particular site.
The digital dimensions of Jerusalem
We first trace how Jerusalem is represented on the Arabic, English and 
Hebrew versions of Wikipedia, and then on Wikidata, Freebase and Google. 
We then go on to describe the affordances of each of these platforms for users 
interacting with the platforms.
A search for ‘Jerusalem’ on Google reveals the multitude of sources from 
which Knowledge Graph results are produced. Google extracts data from 
information repositories such as Wikipedia, the CIA World Factbook and 
Freebase for its factual statements, and draws on data about what people 
search for in the presentation of results for the section ‘Points of interest’.2 
In the Jerusalem example, the paragraph about Jerusalem is extracted from 
the English version of Wikipedia,3 but the foundation date and area size are 
mirrors of the Freebase item on Jerusalem. The population figures presented 
in search results are attributed to UNdata. Perhaps most interestingly, the 
results represent Jerusalem as the ‘Capital of Israel’, a claim disputed by most 
of the world’s national governments.
When we trace the material effects of the cleaning, tweaking and join-
ing of databases according to Semantic Web logics in the case of Google’s 
Knowledge Graph and Wikimedia’s Wikidata project, we observe four key 
trends. As information is extracted from a variety of data sources, there is 
a resulting loss of nuance, and a loss of important contextual information. 
As data are extracted from a number of different sources, the provenance of 
the data becomes obscured. Furthermore, as statements are extracted from 
user-generated content systems (such as Wikipedia), which are populated by 
volunteer labour and then housed in Google’s system, the agency of the users 
diminishes, with concurrent limitations on their ability to edit or functionally 
contest information originally provided by them. Finally, the logic of the 
personalised agent present in Semantic Web logic means that the perspectives 
of other users on the same topic are obscured. We discuss each of these results 
next.

Semantic cities  205
Loss of nuance
Although Google employs data from Wikipedia, its representation of the 
status of Jerusalem as the ‘capital of Israel’4 is significantly less nuanced 
than the representation of the status of the city in English Wikipedia. The 
Jerusalem article in English Wikipedia contains an infobox5 listing both 
Israel and Palestine as ‘claimants’ to the city, followed by the statement that 
Jerusalem is ‘administered by Israel’ and a listing of both the ‘Israeli District’ 
and ‘Palestinian Governorate’, as can be seen in Figure 15.2. Google, on the 
other hand, represents Jerusalem unequivocally as the ‘capital of Israel’, even 
in searches conducted in Arabic and searches conducted from the Palestinian 
Territories.
Figure 15.2  Section of the Jerusalem infobox on English Wikipedia as at 13 July 
2014

206  Heather Ford and Mark Graham
The Wikidata entry for Jerusalem has suffered from a similar loss of 
nuance. Struggles to define the description tag for the Jerusalem item on 
Wikidata have been ongoing since the page was created at the end of October 
2012, with editors reverting between different versions of Jerusalem’s status in 
relation to Israel and Palestine. After a statement was added that associated 
Jerusalem with Israel, Israeli editors added statements asserting Jerusalem’s 
status as the capital city of Israel. It was only almost two years later, in July 
2014, that a user created the statement that Jerusalem was also associated 
with the State of Palestine with reference to East Jerusalem. Israeli editors 
continue to revert edits referring to Palestine and to add further statements 
supporting the Israeli claim (such as the most recent edit, at the time of 
writing, which stipulated that East Jerusalem also belonged to Israel with 
a reference to Jerusalem Law). During this time, Wikidata is being used by 
other sites to represent facts about the world, including the 30–40 apps that 
have been written to extract data from Wikidata and present them in other 
contexts.
When information moves from the highly contested and editable space of 
Wikipedia to structured databases, such as Wikidata and Google, it loses 
a direct connection to its contested and unstable origins. The ideal of the 
Semantic Web is based on the ideal that computers need to be able to process 
the semantics (meaning) that human beings attach to their words. Using 
Semantic Web logic, the computer would ‘know whether we meant Paris, the 
perfume, Paris, the place, or Paris, the celebrity’ by structuring information 
in a way that computers could understand, and then interconnecting those 
structured databases so that computers could understand what was meant by 
users’ queries (Berners-Lee et al., 2001).
The problem with this logic is that Google may be able to disambiguate 
the difference between Jerusalem, the play, and Jerusalem, the city, but it is 
unable to distinguish between different lived understandings of the city. The 
Israeli government sees Jerusalem as its capital city but most other states do 
not; Jerusalem is seen by the Palestinians as their future capital but Ramallah 
is the de-facto capital of the Palestinian administration. Such complex per-
spectives are difficult to represent in a structured database also intended to 
represent every other city in the world because they are largely unique and 
context-dependent. Although Wikidata enables competing claims to be rep-
resented within the same item, the initial extraction of data from Wikipedia 
did not reflect this nuance, and, after almost three years, there seems to be 
no evidence that the qualifying claims (that the city’s status is contested) are 
being represented when the data travels to other sites.
The way in which facts are constructed is in the process of separating the 
social context of their production from the statements themselves (Latour 
and Woolgar, 1986). This means that there are political implications to 
the loss of complexity and nuance. The more that statements are repre-
sented as fact-like, the more they will be recognised and accepted as facts. 
For this reason, Google’s representation of Jerusalem as the unequivocal 

Semantic cities  207
capital of Israel has potential material effects on the conditions of people in 
the region.
The provenance of data is obscured
Neither the reasoning behind Google’s decision to show particular facts nor 
the sources of those facts are always visible. In addition, facts or statements 
that are attributed are not always accurately sourced. Following the link 
from Google’s population number for Jerusalem, for example, a user is taken 
to a Google ‘Public Data’ page that indicates that the source of population 
statistics for Jerusalem is ‘UNdata’ (see Figure 15.3). This is done instead of 
providing users with either specific datasets or metadata about how the data 
were selected.
UNdata (data.un.org) collects census figures from national governments 
and is therefore not the direct publisher of data in this instance. For this to 
be revealed, a user would have to click on the UNdata hyperlink in Google, 
search for ‘Israel’6 on the UNdata website and read the notes that indi-
cate that the data is provided by Israel and that these figures include East 
Jerusalem. Google has limited affordances for accurate sourcing, since it 
divorces the content that it provides from the source (and consequently the 
methodological details) of that information.
Population statistics are inherently political. By definition, they serve as 
a signifier for who is actually counted and contained within the borders of a 
city. That is, they tell us something about both the boundaries of the city and 
who is counted as being within those boundaries. In a city like Jerusalem, 
where fundamental disagreements exist about what the city itself is and who 
it contains, population statistics can be particularly revealing about who 
counts and who is counted. In Jerusalem, population statistics furthermore 
often depend on government institutions such as the Israeli Central Bureau 
of Statistics, even though such institutions are not recognised by Palestinians 
and are dependent on which of the contested borders are being recognised by 
the counting body. As the data moves from national statistics offices to UN 
statistics offices to the UNdata platform and to Google and Freebase, the 
numbers are iteratively stripped of the national and institutional context that 
gave rise to their very particular result. This stripping of contextual informa-
tion is not a de-politicisation of the data, but rather, the presentation of data 
that advances one political position (in this case, the Israeli position) at the 
expense of others.
Wikidata outlines how users should add citations to particular statements 
and asks for editors to replace current references (indicating the Wikimedia 
site from which the data was imported) with a ‘reliable, secondary’ source. 
In the case of the Jerusalem item in Wikidata, only a single secondary 
source is identified (with the qualifying statement that East Jerusalem (also) 
belongs to Israel with reference to ‘Jerusalem Law’) (Wikidata contributors 
2014).

Figure 15.3  Screenshot of Google results after clicking on the population figure for Jerusalem (19 January 2015)

Semantic cities  209
The diminishing agency of users
When information is housed on Google’s platform, the affordances for that 
information to be edited or challenged by ordinary users are significantly 
reduced. Google does not allow editing by users and interaction is limited to 
restricted forums where users can provide feedback. Clicking on the ‘feed-
back’ button in small grey lettering at the base of the Knowledge Graph 
results box makes a series of buttons labelled ‘wrong?’ appear next to each 
statement (see Figure 15.4). Users have the option of adding a description of 
what is ‘wrong’ with the information reflected, as well as to provide a URL 
with supporting evidence. No information is available about what happens 
to a user’s feedback once they have provided it and any feedback is not dis-
played publicly. The result is that feedback and potential revisions submitted 
by the public are left disassociated from the data.
In another example, when users click on the population figure for 
Jerusalem in Google, they are taken to the Google Public Data platform 
Figure 15.4  Screenshots after clicking on ‘feedback’ and the ‘Wrong?’ hyperlink 
above the Jerusalem headline on google.com

210  Heather Ford and Mark Graham
(see Figure 15.5), where they might click on a button entitled ‘discuss’, which 
links to a Google group. Users have, however, been posting questions and 
comments about incorrect information to the forum that have remained 
unanswered for months (see Figure 15.5). Although users are able to discuss 
problems amongst themselves, such discussion is not helpful if users do not 
have permissions to make necessary changes after discussion.
Even though a piece of information, such as the population of Jerusalem, 
can exist in the 286 possible language versions of Wikipedia, if it were to be 
entered on Wikidata (as a first step to populate Wikipedia infoboxes that 
use this data), it could only be discussed in English on Wikidata. This is 
because, on Wikidata, there is only a single talk page for discussing an item. 
This consequently restricts the ability of non-English speakers to participate 
fully in debates. Wikipedia’s talk pages, in contrast, are almost always open 
for any user in any language version of Wikipedia to contribute to. As data 
moves from Wikipedia to Wikidata, there is a decrease in the ability of people 
speaking languages other than English to fully participate in debates about 
how information is reflected. Here, centralisation affords greater efficiency 
but this has an impact on who is able to participate.
Personalised results make others’ filters less recognisable
On Google, users receive personalised results and cannot view what results 
other users obtain. The algorithms that drive personalised results are opaque to 
users and there are no informational cues about whether other users are seeing 
information differently (Gillespie 2010; 2014). The unintended consequence 
of personalisation is that, while individual users are able to potentially obtain 
more accurate results filtered according to their own needs, the corollary of 
Figure 15.5  Screenshot of Google Public Data Explorer Forum as at 21 December 
2014
Source:  https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/public-data-labs, accessed 21 December 
2014

Semantic cities  211
this is that users are not able to see how others view the same subject. This has 
a potentially negative effect on public discourse when users become isolated 
from information that disagrees with their viewpoints (Pariser, 2012).
As data are extracted and combined within Google’s Knowledge Graph 
and Wikipedia’s Wikidata project, nuance is lost as important contextual 
information is left behind during the extraction process. Extracted data also 
suffer from the obscuring of the data’s sources and a concurrent disconnec-
tion of information from its source. This disconnection also involves a loss of 
agency of the user to engage actively with public information systems, where 
debate and contestation is obscured and isolated from the display of that 
information. As information is increasingly personalised, the perspectives of 
other users are obscured by the system, preventing shared perspectives on 
important public topics. On their own, these effects are effective in closing off 
the opportunity for debate and contestation, but they are reinforced by the 
discourses that prescribe how the Semantic Web and linked data are imagined.
Technical discourses
Underlying the Semantic Web and linked data are powerful narratives about 
the apolitical and purely technical processes of structuring and linking data. 
In the Wikidata talk page for Jerusalem, for example, many editors accuse 
one another of ‘pushing a political agenda’. ‘Ymblanter’, the administra-
tor who started the page, was accused by an editor, ‘Hanay’, of ‘pushing a 
political agenda’ when he changed the description in the Jerusalem article 
from ‘city in Israel’ to ‘city in Israel which Israel claims to be its capital’ after 
‘Hanay’ tried changing it to ‘capital city of Israel’ and another editor tried 
changing it to ‘a city in Israel and Palestine’. Both ‘Hanay’ and ‘Ymblanter’ 
accused one another of pushing a political agenda, asserting their own ver-
sions of what is the ‘clearly neutral’ description.
Wikidata, on the other hand, does not have any political aims in making 
statements acknowledging the existence of certain facts.
(‘Yair rand’, Wikidata talk page for Jerusalem, 5 February 2013)
As information moves from Wikipedia to Wikidata, from Wikipedia 
to Google, not only does information itself change, the process of editing 
becomes increasingly complex, its discourses focus on the sites as apolitical 
and highly technical spaces, and the corresponding rules for, and expertise 
in dealing with controversy are increasingly obscured. This impacts on the 
ways in which local people are able to participate, challenge and speak back 
to representations of place.
Conclusion: code, content and cities
As our cities become increasingly digital, and as the digital becomes increas-
ingly governed by the logics of the Semantic Web, there are important 

212  Heather Ford and Mark Graham
questions to ask about how these new alignments of code and content shape 
how cities are presented, experienced and brought into being. What we found 
is a paradoxical situation whereby, through connecting datasets, Semantic 
Web initiatives detach localised information from the contexts of its creation. 
By divorcing content from its contexts, this process establishes new contexts 
in which necessarily political decisions are being made, with far-reaching 
consequences.
Linked data organised through the Semantic Web can be easily integrated, 
repurposed, collected, classified, published and indexed. It is, however, 
important to recognise that such efficiencies come with a price. By automati-
cally extracting content from different sites and presenting it in new frames, 
knowledge bases are increasingly distancing (and in some cases cutting off) 
debate about contested knowledges of places. This effect is achieved by trans-
ferring data about cities from Wikipedia’s participatory framework to sites 
like Wikidata and Google, where the affordances are less participatory, where 
the rules are increasingly opaque to the average user and where the framing 
discourses are that these platforms are apolitical and highly technical. When 
user-generated knowledge reaches the veiled confines of Google search, users 
lose the ability to effectively contest and change information that forms a key 
component in the representation of places.
The move to the Semantic Web also means that many decisions about how 
places are represented are increasingly being made by people and processes 
far from, and invisible to, people living under the digital shadows of those 
very representations. Contestations are centralised and turned into single 
data points that make it difficult for local citizens to have a significant voice 
in the co-construction of the digital augmentations of their own cities.
Despite this pessimism, we believe that much can be done to remedy this 
situation. Mediators like Google could do more to lay bare the origins of the 
information that they host, and to provide opportunities for ordinary users to 
participate in the improvement and contestation of those data. The Wikidata 
community, similarly, could recognise that it, too, is a site for political con-
testation and that they need to build the functionality and experience within 
their administrator community to deal with such disputes when they arise. 
Despite Wikidata employees claiming that ‘Wikidata will not be about the 
Truth’ (Vrandencic in Graham 2012), Wikidata is employed as a repository 
for all manner of truths, and will therefore exert significant impacts on our 
informational environments.
Because platforms like Wikipedia and mediators like Google are becoming 
not just central gatekeepers of information, but also integrated parts of our 
cities, it is important that different communities are able to create, reproduce 
and represent different truths and worldviews on, and through, those plat-
forms. And while certain truths are universal (Paris is generally considered to 
be the uncontested capital city of France), others are more messy and unclear 
(for example, whether the population of Israel should include occupied and 
contested territories).

Semantic cities  213
The reason that the rise of the Semantic Web and linked data matters is 
because they not only eliminate some of the scope for culturally contingent 
representations of places, processes, people and events, but also depoliticise 
and obfuscate some of those processes of representation. Potentially, even 
more concerning is the fact that centralised and linked data organised under 
the logics of the Semantic Web are unlikely to reflect the opinions and beliefs 
of traditionally marginalised groups. Disagreements over places and the ways 
in which they are represented are no longer simply confined to specific infor-
mational silos: they are, instead, extracted and linked in increasingly complex 
formations that are difficult to trace and engage with. Said simply, structured 
data is not conducive to the representation of minority opinions.
In following contested urban information through the Semantic Web, we 
have shown how the governance of linked data and logics of the Semantic 
Web is ultimately making the messy political informational layers of cities 
more transparent to machines and more opaque to human beings. Linked 
data and the Semantic Web have important implications for representation, 
voice and ultimately power in cities, and we need to ensure that we are not 
seduced into codifying, categorising and structuring in cases when we should 
be describing the inherent heterogeneity of meaning in certain situations. 
If we ever hope to move towards a goal of more inclusive informational 
cities,  we first need to better understand how the Semantic Web changes 
urban life.
Notes
1	 Knowledge bases are systems used to store structured data, consisting of facts and 
rules, which are structured according to specific formats.
2	 Because Google does not cite the source of factual data, we assume that it is 
being sourced from Freebase, based on public comments about the sources of its 
data.
3	 Searches in other languages draw data from the relevant language version of 
Wikipedia.
4	 The same results were available using Arabic and Hebrew settings and by users 
located in Tel Aviv (Israel) and East Jerusalem (Palestine).
5	 An infobox is a summary or list of facts added to the top right-hand corner of 
Wikipedia articles.
6	 The UNdata site houses a population figure for Jerusalem that is significantly 
larger than the Google figure – probably because the UNdata site houses the more 
recent figures.
References
Berners-Lee, T., Hendler, J. and Lassila, O. (2001) ‘The Semantic Web’, Scientific 
American, May 2001, available from http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.
cfm?id=the-semantic-web [accessed 25 August 2015].
Elwood, S. Goodchild, M.F. and Sui, D.Z. (2011) ‘Researching volunteered geo-
graphic information: spatial data, geographic research, and new social practice’, 
Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 102(3): 571–90.

214  Heather Ford and Mark Graham
Gillespie, T. (2010) ‘The politics of “platforms”’, New Media and Society, 12(3): 
347–64.
Gillespie, T. (2014) ‘The relevance of algorithms’, in T. Gillespie, P.J. Boczkowski and 
K.A. Foot (eds) Media Technologies: Essays on Communication, Materiality, and 
Society, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Graham, M. (2012) ‘The problem with Wikidata’, The Atlantic, (6 April 2012).
Graham, M. and Zook, M. (2013) ‘Augmented realities and uneven geographies: 
exploring the geolinguistic contours of the Web’, Environment and Planning A, 
45(1): 77–99.
Graham, M., Zook, M. and Boulton, A. (2013) ‘Augmented reality in urban places: 
contested content and the duplicity of code’, Transactions of the Institute of British 
Geographers, 38(3): 464–79.
Groth, P. (2013) ‘The knowledge-remixing bottleneck’, IEEE Intelligent Systems, 
28(5): 44–8.
Introna, L.D. and Nissenbaum, H. (2000) ‘Shaping the Web: why the politics of 
search engines matters’, The Information Society, 16(3): 169–85.
Kitchin, R. and Dodge, M. (2011) Code/Space: Software and Everyday Life, 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
König, R. (ed.) (2014) Society of the Query Reader: Reflections on Web Search, 
Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures.
Latour, B. and Woolgar, S. (1986) Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific 
Facts, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lessig, L. (2003) ‘An information society: free or feudal’, World Summit on the 
Information Society, Geneva, Switzerland, available from http://www.itu.int/wsis/
docs/pc2/visionaries/lessig.pdf [accessed 25 August 2015].
Leszczynski, A. (2015) ‘Spatial media/tion’, Progress in Human Geography, 39(6): 
729–51.
Leszczynski, A. and Wilson, M.W. (2013) ‘Guest editorial: theorizing the geoweb’, 
GeoJournal, 78(6): 915–19.
Pariser, E. (2012) The Filter Bubble: What the Internet is Hiding from You, London: 
Penguin.
Vrandecic, D. and Krotzsch, M. (2014) ‘Wikidata: a free collaborative knowledge 
base’, Communications of the ACM, 57(10): 78–85.
Wikidata contributors (2014) Wikidata Jerusalem Entry, available from https://www.
wikidata.org/wiki/Q1218 [accessed 23 July 2014].
Wikipedia contributors (2014) Wikipedia: Requests for Arbitration/Palestine-
Israel 
Articles, 
available 
from 
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title= 
Wikipedia:Requests_for_arbitration/Palestine-Israel_­articlesandoldid=617668489 
[accessed 23 July 2014].
Wilson, M.W. (2014) ‘Continuous connectivity, handheld computers, and mobile 
spatial knowledge’, Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 32(3): 535–55.

16	 Cities and context
The codification of small areas through 
geodemographic classification
Alex Singleton
Geodemographic place coding
Geodemographic analysis continues an extensive history of empirically 
driven models of urban socio-spatial structure, extending back to the work of 
human ecologists in the 1920s and 30s and, more recently, the large body of 
empirically driven work producing social area analysis models (Shevky and 
Williams 1949; Shevky and Bell 1955) for various urban locations (see Timms 
1971: 56). Representations created through such models attempted to reduce 
the complexities of population and built structure into meaningful and simpli-
fied typologies, giving order to multiple attributes about small areas (Abler et 
al. 1971). Some of the earliest published work on geodemographics was also 
described as social area analysis (Webber 1975) and focused on single cities 
(in Webber’s case, Liverpool, UK). It was only later that geodemographic 
techniques were expanded to create classifications with national coverage 
(Webber 1977; Webber and Craig 1978). Such geodemographic systems were 
presented by Webber (1978: 275) as a methodological solution for handling 
the highly dimensional 1971 UK census:
What is needed is a strategy which will pick out a pattern from the detail, 
without losing too much of the original information, and which will 
admit more detailed examination of parts of the pattern which become 
relevant to a particular issue or local area as and when required.
(Webber 1978: 275)
Webber (1978) also makes two further points. First, that geodemographics 
provide utility as a method of performing analysis on sparsely populated 
census variables that otherwise might suffer statistical unreliability at the 
local level. This has contemporary relevance in the context of the USA, where 
the national census now only represents a limited number of questions, and 
is supplemented by more uncertain small-area estimates from the American 
Community Survey (Spielman and Singleton 2015). Second, geodemograph-
ics are a useful framework within which non-census indicators could be 
evaluated over time and, again, would be familiar to contemporary users of 

216  Alex Singleton
geodemographics with respect to spatial policy evaluation (Batey et al. 2008) 
and small-area population profiling (Singleton 2010a).
Although this early history concerned analysis in the public sector, during 
the 1980s geodemographics were adopted widely by the private sector as 
a tool for customer segmentation (Sleight 1997), as it was found that the 
grouping of areas into clusters showed strong correspondence with the con-
sumption of certain product categories. This led to the creation of numer-
ous commercial classifications. However, more recently, there has been a 
resurgence of interest in geodemographic applications within the public 
sector (Longley 2005). Although many geodemographic classifications are 
commercial, and, as such, have cost implications, within the UK a series of 
academic classifications have been built that correspond to the decennial 
release of the 1981 (Charlton et al. 1985), 1991 (Blake and Openshaw 1995), 
2001 (Vickers and Rees 2007) and 2011 (Office for National Statistics, 2015) 
censuses.
Although of demonstrated utility (Harris et al. 2005, Singleton and 
Spielman 2014), geodemographics have been criticised as geographically 
oversimplified (Twigg et al. 2000), or of masking diversity within small areas 
(Voas and Williamson 2001). However, there is evidence to suggest that 
geodemographic classifications perform well in comparison with more com-
plex statistical models (Brunsdon et al. 2011). In the mid-1990s, as part of 
a wider critique of GISs, there was also extended critique of the negative 
images that place-based marketing initiatives may elicit (Goss 1995, 2003). 
Uprichard et al. (2009) more recently raised concerns about the ‘automatic 
production of space’ (Thrift and French 2002), through recursive, reiterative 
and transformative practices that are embedded within software.
Sociologists (along with numerous other social science disciplines) have 
widely utilised classifications based on occupation (e.g., in the UK, the 
National Statistics Socio-Economic Classification) to code individuals into 
occupational class based groupings or hierarchies. However, since the mid-
2000s, interest has grown over the use of contemporary geodemographic 
classifications as part of research into the spatialisation of class (Parker et 
al. 2007). Geodemographics have been argued as ‘emblematic of a signifi-
cantly changing relationship between class and status’ (Burrows and Gane 
2006: 805), and, within this context, geodemographics are seen as usefully 
encapsulating a wide range of social transactional data that are otherwise 
of restrictive access to academia. Additionally, geodemographics are seen to 
be engaging with a ‘rhetoric of sociological discourse’ (Savage and Burrows 
2007: 887), albeit arguably only at the level of cluster description. Other 
theoretical work has also sought to identify how geodemographics fit within 
Bourdieu’s field-capital theory (Tapp and Warren 2010). Most commer-
cial geodemographic classifications are optimised on the basis of discrimi-
nating patterns of consumption (Webber 2007), which have been shown 
to have similar stratification to patterns of occupational groups (Sivadas 
1997); and, as such, it is perhaps not unsurprising that parallels between 

Cities and context  217
these two classification approaches are drawn, despite their very different 
methodologies.
Subjectivity and classification builder preferences
A geodemographic is created using algorithms that aim to optimise the 
assignment of small areas into groups that offer the greatest similarity over a 
typically large set of attributes. However, such representations are explicitly 
linked to those methodological decisions taken in their construction. Such 
choices can be informed empirically, theoretically and more pragmatically, 
based on the practitioner or collective of industry experience. As such, the 
process of geodemographic classification building is regularly described as 
both art and science (Harris et al. 2005).
The research presented in this chapter does not attempt to provide an eval-
uation of geodemographics relative to other techniques, nor does it aim to 
provide an exposition about the ‘best’ method of building a geodemographic, 
or how this might be assessed. The empirical focus here is to explore how 
output geodemographic patterns can be sensitive to changes in methodologi-
cal approach. Some potential options that a classification builder might take 
when building a geodemographic classification are outlined in the remainder 
of this section.
Geographical extent
The choice of geographical extent affects how similarity between areas are 
considered by clustering algorithms. Geographical extent selection has three 
impacts. First, by altering the statistical distributions of attributes, for exam-
ple, the minimum, maximum and average values, each variable will change 
relative to the selected geographical extent. This alters the shape of the 
‘attribute space’ that is searched when a clustering algorithm is seeking an 
optimal partitioning of areas into groups. As such, it could be argued that 
classifications built for and from data about more localised extents are likely 
to demonstrate greater sensitivity (Openshaw et al. 1980), and some have 
argued that national classifications are not necessarily more complete rela-
tive to local models (Reibel and Regelson 2011). However, to some extent, 
this also reflects a difference of view that geodemographics are seen as either 
a method (e.g., application of clustering to uncover patterns) or a tool (use 
of a classification system to illustrate patterns or contexts) (Singleton and 
Spielman 2014).
The second impact of switching from a national to constrained geographi-
cal extent is that the benefits of appending national surveys onto a classifica-
tion are lost unless an adequate sample within the restricted extent can be 
extracted. Descriptive detail that could be obtained by appending such addi-
tional data potentially impacts the range of possible end-user applications. 
These issues may, however, be minimised in the future, as greater volumes 

218  Alex Singleton
of open data, which can be partitioned into different geographical extents, 
become available.
Finally, changes from the national extent impact the ability to use geode-
mographics as a measure for comparing places. Furthermore, they can 
be expensive to maintain and update, an issue acute for the public sector 
(Webber 1980).
Scale, zones and input variables
The arrangement of areas into geodemographic clusters is impacted by the 
choice of zonal geography, as this affects the calculation of summary values 
for input attributes. This is a prescient issue in statistical analysis involving 
aggregate geographical data, and is referred to as the modifiable areal unit 
problem (Openshaw 1984). Although of concern, Richard Webber has con-
tended: ‘I have yet to come across any real-world example of a conclusion 
being invalidly reached as a result of this hypothetical possibility’ (cited in 
de Smith et al. 2009:133). Nonetheless, sensitivity to this issue is required in 
selecting an ‘appropriate’ geography and interpreting results derived at this 
selected scale. An ‘appropriate’ zonal geography can be guided by a number 
of factors, such as the availability of data inputs, the intended applications, 
stability of patterns over different scales or other motivations to provide 
more detailed classifications, such as leveraging competitive advantage.
Variable choices can be driven by multiple perspectives ranging from theo-
ries about what influences socio-spatial structure, empirical investigation of 
attribute influence on cluster formation, and pragmatic choices based on 
the experiences of the classification builder or the overarching purpose of 
the classification (e.g., general purpose versus bespoke; see Singleton and 
Longley 2009a). Precursors to geodemographics, such as social area analysis 
(Shevky and Bell 1955), were constructed from a theory about the key driv-
ers of small-area differentiation and change, although some have argued 
that these were ex-post-facto rationalisation of earlier works featuring more 
ad-hoc choices (Timms 1971). Geodemographics were, however, established 
with a more applied focus. In one of the earliest national classifications, 
Webber and Craig (1978: 6) note, ‘[A] general purpose classification should 
by definition represent as wide as possible a variety of characteristics with-
out over representing any particular aspect.’ Correlated attributes have a 
‘weighting’ effect that gives greater emphasis to such combined dimensions, 
potentially influencing cluster assignment. Inputs into this classification were 
organised around ‘dimensions’ not dissimilar to those presented in social area 
analysis models, and such typology of input attributes has also remained a 
feature of many present-day classifications.
Knowledge about the input variables used to build geodemographics 
ranges in degrees of transparency. For many commercial classifications, the 
exact specification of inputs will be commercially sensitive, and, as such, will 
typically not be fully disclosed (Singleton and Longley 2009b). Conversely, 

Cities and context  219
in ‘open geodemographics’ (Vickers and Rees 2007), a full specification of 
variables would normally be made, including links to where these data may 
be obtained in the public domain. For open geodemographic classifications, 
transparency requires that all data be publicly available, and, as such, this 
could also restrict inputs to certain variable types where licences permit 
redistribution.
Finally, the choice of variables is also related to the selection of scale or 
extent, given that each affects whether or not certain attributes would be 
available to the classification builder, and how they might be amalgamated 
(e.g., individual versus concatenated age ranges). For example, open data 
within one context may not be available in another, or attributes available 
more universally might be restricted in scale for a target area.
Measurement, weights and transformations
A classification can be built with attributes of numerous measurement types, 
such as proportions (e.g., percentages), averages, ratios, continuous measures 
(e.g., distance) or relative scores (e.g., index scores). The choice depends to 
an extent on the attributes of interest. For example, density would typically 
be presented as a ratio of population divided by area, whereas an example 
of a continuous measure might be the distance of an area from the coast or 
another feature of interest. However, the measurement of attributes using 
either rates or relative scores is more nuanced. The former relates to the 
expression of an attribute within an area on a standard scale, whereas the 
latter takes a rate for a given attribute, and then compares areas by the extent 
these deviate from the national average. Measurement types impact the range 
of values that an attribute can hold, for example, percentage scores range 
between 0 and 100, whereas other measures can hold a wider range of values; 
such differences may alter the shape of output classification.
Historically, managing a large number of attributes when building geode-
mographic classifications was more difficult with restricted computing power. 
Principal component analysis (PCA) was introduced as a method of reducing 
attribute dimensions (see Webber 1975), and also reducing the impact of 
correlated attributes (since PCAs, by definition, comprise linearly uncor-
related variables). As computing power has increased, the necessity for PCA 
has been reduced, and given that PCA can remove non-linear association 
between variables emergent within specific geographical contexts, some have 
argued against its use (Harris et al. 2005).
Weights can be added to attributes to increase their importance in a clus-
tering solution; however, the choice of weights can be considered subjective, 
and as such, has been avoided in a number of open geodemographics (Vickers 
and Rees 2007). Weighting does, however, see extensive use in commercial 
geodemographics, and has also been noted as a method to control unhelpful 
effects caused by highly skewed or otherwise problematic attributes (Harris 
et al. 2005).

220  Alex Singleton
Finally, prior to clustering, data standardisation is required, to ensure that 
all attributes are measured on the same scale and, as such, have the same 
influence on the final cluster solution. However, the exact methods chosen can 
either constrain or enhance the impact of outliers. For example, standardisa-
tion with a z score measures how distant an attribute score is relative to the 
mean in standard deviation units; however, this can accentuate the effect of 
outliers. Other techniques, such as the commonly used range standardisation, 
redistribute attribute scores onto a fixed scale, typically 0–1, compressing 
outliers into this range, and suppressing their impact. Decisions on which 
techniques are appropriate are framed within classification builder views on 
whether outliers are an issue to correct or an interesting local pattern that 
is desirable to influence final cluster assignment. Such decisions will also be 
guided by practicality, given that outlier clusters will, by definition, be small 
in nature, and this may not be viewed as a useful feature to appear in a final 
typology.
Clustering methods
Clustering algorithms attempt to seek an optimal grouping of areas into 
clusters by maximising some measure of within-cluster homogeneity or 
between-cluster heterogeneity. Methods of optimisation vary between clus-
tering approaches; however, the choice of algorithm can influence the assign-
ment of areas to clusters. A further key decision must be made about how 
many clusters are desirable in a final solution. Such decisions are commonly 
guided by experience (Harris et al. 2005); however, they can also be assessed 
empirically through analysis of divisions that ‘fit’ the data most effectively. 
Common techniques include the use of ‘elbow criterion’ measures (Vickers 
and Rees 2007) or such methods as silhouette plots (Adnan et al. 2010). A 
final consideration is whether the classification is to be hierarchical, and if so, 
whether it is to be built from the top down (most aggregate groups first) or 
from the bottom up (most disaggregate groups first).
Case study – national versus local geodemographics
In this final section, two geodemographic classifications are compared, illus-
trating how, from the same input data and methods, two different assign-
ments of areas into clusters can be created by adjusting the geographical 
extent of the classification boundaries. The 2011 Office for National Statistics 
Output Area Classification (OAC) will be used as the national classification, 
and the methodology repeated for the localised extent of Liverpool.
The full methodology for the 2011 OAC is presented elsewhere (Office for 
National Statistics, 2015). However, in brief: the input data for the OAC 
are sourced entirely from the 2011 census, and are detailed in Table  16.1. 
Variables are organised around three domains; demographic, housing 
and socio-economic. These are then divided into a series of subdomains, 

Cities and context  221
comprising a total of 60 variables. The input variables to the OAC are all 
calculated as percentages against an appropriate denominator, with the excep-
tion of a standardised illness ratio and population density. Input data were 
selected on the basis of maintaining similarity to the 2001 OAC (Vickers 
and Rees 2007), while also exploiting some new variables added in the 2011 
census. These requirements were formulated after the outcome of a national 
consultation exercise delivered by the Office for National Statistics1 and 
extensive evaluation.
After the 2011 census, data were assembled and the attribute measures cal-
culated. These were first standardised using an inverse hyperbolic sine func-
tion, which transforms the attributes more closely to a normal distribution. It 
can be argued that more normally distributed input attributes assist cluster-
ing algorithms such as k-means, given their optimisation for finding spheri-
cal clusters, although there is no statistical requirement for the data to be 
normally distributed, as might be the case with such techniques as regression 
analysis. Second, prior to clustering, all of the attributes were standardised 
onto a 0–1 scale using a range standardisation method, thus ensuring that 
each variable had an equal influence on the clustering result. The k-means 
algorithm was then implemented to cluster the UK Output Areas and Small 
Areas (in Northern Ireland) into eight initial clusters, referred to as ‘super-
groups’. The data were then split by these clusters, and further divided into 
between two and four clusters, forming a second level, ‘groups’, and com-
prising 26 clusters in total. A final set of splits created a ‘subgroup level’, 
comprising a total of 76 clusters. The nested hierarchy of OAC 2011 is shown 
in Table 16.2 and mapped for the UK and Liverpool in Figures 16.1 and 16.2. 
Although the eight supergroup clusters are visible in the UK map, within 
Table 16.1  2011 Output Area Classification input variables
Domain
Subdomain
Variables
Demographic
Age structure
Age bands
Family structure
Marriage; children; dependent children
Ethnicity
Ethnic groups; spoken English; Europe 
versus new Europe
Housing
Composition
Density; communal establishment; student 
household; occupancy rating
Type
Detached, semi-detached, terrace, flats
Tenure
Socially rented; privately rented; owned or 
shared ownership
Socio-economic
Health
Day-to-day activities limited, a lot or a 
little; standardised illness ratio
Employment
Full time; part time; unemployment
Occupation
Occupation groups
Education
Level 1; Level 2; Level 3; Level 4+
Mobility
Car ownership; private transport; public 
transport; active transport
Source: 2011 UK census

222  Alex Singleton
Table 16.2  2011 Output Area Classification hierarchy
Supergroup
Group
Subgroup
1 – Rural residents
1a – Farming communities 1a1 – Rural workers and families
1a2 – Established farming 
communities
1a3 – Agricultural communities
1a4 – Older farming communities
1b – Rural tenants
1b1 – Rural life
1b2 – Rural white-collar workers
1b3 – Aging rural flat tenants
1c – Aging rural dwellers
1c1 – Rural employment and 
retirees
1c2 – Renting rural retirement
1c3 – Detached rural retirement
2 – Cosmopolitans
2a – Students around 
campus
2a1 – Student communal living
2a2 – Student digs
2a3 – Students and professionals
2b – Inner-city students
2b1 – Students and commuters
2b2 – Multicultural student 
neighbourhoods
2c – Comfortable 
cosmopolitans
2c1 – Migrant families
2c2 – Migrant commuters
2c3 – Professional service 
cosmopolitans
2d – Aspiring and affluent
2d1 – Urban cultural mix
2d2 – EU white-collar workers
2d3 – Highly qualified quaternary 
workers
3 – Ethnicity central 3a – Ethnic family life
3a1 – Established renting families
3a2 – Young families and students
3b – Endeavouring ethnic 
mix
3b1 – Striving service workers
3b2 – Bangladeshi mixed 
employment
3b3 – Multiethnic professional 
service workers
3c – Ethnic dynamics
3c1 – Constrained 
neighbourhoods
3c2 – Constrained commuters
3d – Aspirational techies
3d1 – Established tech workers
3d2 – Old-EU tech workers
3d3 – New-EU tech workers
4 – Multicultural 
metropolitans
4a – Rented family living
4a1 – Privately renting young 
families
4a2 – Socially renting new  
arrivals
4a3 – Commuters with young 
families
4b – Challenged Asian 
terraces
4b1 – Asian terraces and flats
4b2 – Pakistani communities
4c – Asian traits
4c1 – Achieving minorities
4c2 – Multicultural new arrivals
4c3 – Inner-city ethnic mix

Cities and context  223
 
Supergroup
Group
Subgroup
5 – Urbanites
5a – Urban professionals 
and families
5a1 – White professionals
5a2 – Multiethnic professionals 
with families
5a3 – Families in terraces and flats
5b – Aging urban living
5b1 – Delayed retirement
5b2 – Communal retirement
5b3 – Self-sufficient retirement
6 – Suburbanites
6a – Suburban achievers
6a1 – Indian tech achievers
6a2 – Comfortable suburbia
6a3 – Detached retirement living
6a4 – Aging in suburbia
6b – Semi-detached 
suburbia
6b1 – Multiethnic suburbia
6b2 – White suburban 
communities
6b3 – Semi-detached aging
6b4 – Older workers and 
retirement
7 – Constrained city 
dwellers
7a – Challenged diversity
7a1 – Transitional eastern 
European neighbourhoods
7a2 – Hampered aspiration
7a3 – Multiethnic hardship
7b – Constrained flat 
dwellers
7b1 – Eastern European 
communities
7b2 – Deprived neighbourhoods
7b3 – Endeavouring flat dwellers
7c – White communities
7c1 – Challenged transitionaries
7c2 – Constrained young families
7c3 – Outer-city hardship
7d – Aging city dwellers
7d1 – Aging communities and 
families
7d2 – Retired independent city 
dwellers
7d3 – Retired communal city 
dwellers
7d4 – Retired city hardship
8 – Hard-pressed 
living
8a – Industrious 
communities
8a1 – Industrious transitions
8a2 – Industrious hardship
8b – Challenged terraced 
workers
8b1 – Deprived blue-collar 
terraces
8b2 – Hard-pressed rented terraces
8c – Hard-pressed aging 
workers
8c1 – Aging industry workers
8c2 – Aging rural industry 
workers
8c3 – Renting hard-pressed 
workers
8d – Migration and churn
8d1 – Young hard-pressed families
8d2 – Hard-pressed ethnic mix
8d3 – Hard-pressed European 
settlers
Source: 2011 UK census

Figure 16.1  Supergroup level Output Area Classification – UK
Source:  2011 UK census

Cities and context  225
Liverpool, only seven clusters are present, excluding the predominantly rural 
supergroup ‘1 – rural residents’.
A subset of 1584 Output Areas were extracted for the extent of Liverpool, 
and inputs were created that mirrored the attributes, measures, transforma-
tion and standardisation methods used for the OAC 2011 classification. Prior 
to clustering the Liverpool classification, a range of k values were considered 
for the initial supergroup level by plotting a total ‘within sum of squares’ 
statistic for 2–12 cluster solutions. The purpose of this plot was to identify an 
‘elbow criterion’, which is a visual indication of where an appropriate cluster 
frequency might be set for Liverpool. As can be seen in Figure 16.3, there are 
no large decreases in the ‘within sum of squares’, and a minor moderation 
of the decrease around 7 or 8 clusters; which also mirrors similar patterns 
1 − Rural Residents
2 − Cosmopolitans
3 − Ethnicity Central
4 − Multicultural Metropolitans
5 − Urbanites
6 − Suburbanites
7 − Constrained City Dwellers
8 − Hard−Pressed Living
Figure 16.2  Supergroup level Output Area Classification – Liverpool
Source:  2011 UK census

226  Alex Singleton
observed within the UK OAC (Office for National Statistics 2015). As such, 
and to maintain comparability with the way in which the national OAC is 
represented within Liverpool, a seven-cluster solution was chosen.
The next stage was to create the seven-cluster solution, and the k-means 
algorithm was run 10,000 times on the input data. This repetition is neces-
sary as the initial starting conditions for k-means are randomly allocated, 
and, as such, a pool of outcomes must be generated in order to assess which 
result represents a best fit of the data. For full details of how the k-means 
algorithm assigns areas into clusters, see Harris et al. (2005); for processes 
of optimisation, see Singleton and Longley (2009a). The final set of seven 
clusters for Liverpool is shown in Figure 16.4. To contextualise these assign-
ments, rates for input attributes within each cluster were compared with the 
Liverpool averages. From these scores, the labels and descriptions shown in 
Table 16.3 were formulated. Furthermore, the output areas that were closest 
in attributes to their assigned cluster mean were identified, and a random 
postcode within these zones selected, where an illustrative photograph was 
taken (see Figure 16.5).
Figure 16.3  An ‘elbow criterion’ plot used to consider an appropriate number of 
supergroup clusters in a Liverpool Output Area Classification
Source:  2011 UK census
1600
1800
2000
2200
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
k
Total within sum of squares

Cities and context  227
Figure 16.4  Supergroup level Liverpool Output Area Classification
Source:  2011 UK census
1−Family Terraces
2−Students and University
3−Constrained and Aging
4−Central Diversity
5−Affluent Suburbs
6−Struggling Families
7−City and Central
The purpose of such descriptive material is to give a very brief overview of 
the ‘typical’ characteristics of the clusters. Although this was not the case here, 
such processes of labelling are often completed by a wider review group rather 
than an individual. For the 2011 OAC, this involved consultation and approval 
of names and descriptions by the Office for National Statistics. An alterna-
tive method of validation of both the cluster assignment and the descriptive 
interpretation is illustrated by Longley and Singleton (2009), who used an 
online public consultation portal to gather feedback on the classification. 
Such systems give the general public a method of responding to assignments; 
this feedback could be incorporated into revised classifications.
Although the colours are not comparable, if the arrangement of areas into 
clusters in the Liverpool OAC in Figure 16.4 and in the subset of the 2011 
UK OAC for Liverpool (see Figure 16.2) are compared, the overall patterns 

228  Alex Singleton
Table 16.3  Liverpool Output Area Classification labels and brief descriptions
Supergroup
Brief description
1 – Family terraces
Within these predominantly terraced areas, there are 
many families with young children; however, there are 
fewer ethnic minorities than the Liverpool average. 
Most property is owner-occupied or rented from the 
private sector.
2 – Students and university
The majority of students studying in higher education 
live within these areas in shared accommodation, 
typically rented from the private sector.
3 – Constrained and aging
These areas have a high concentration of elderly 
residents and others living in constrained 
circumstances. There are higher than Liverpool average 
rates of divorce and unemployment. Many of the 
properties are flats rented from the social sector.
4 – Central diversity
These centrally located areas have high ethnic diversity. 
There are many families with young children, although 
the rate of divorce is higher than the Liverpool average. 
Unemployment within these areas is high, and those in 
work tend to work in low-level service occupations.
5 – Affluent suburbs
These affluent suburban areas feature larger detached 
and semi-detached houses, many of which are owner-
occupied. Residents are typically well qualified and in 
the latter stages of successful careers in the public 
sector, finance or education. In families who have had 
children, the children are old enough to be no longer 
dependent.
6 – Struggling families
Families within these areas typically have young 
children and live in terraced housing rented from the 
social sector. There are high levels of unemployment in 
these areas; those in work typically have blue-collar 
occupations.
7 – City and central
These central areas are typically occupied by young 
professionals, with high ethnic diversity, and 
particularly large proportions of wider-EU residents. 
Many residents within these areas are single and living 
in flats rented from the private sector; they are well 
qualified and work in white-collar occupations.
Source: 2011 UK census
are broadly similar, although there is a greater degree of spatial autocorrela-
tion (less ‘noise’) in the Liverpool OAC. Such effects would probably occur 
because the optimisation process in building the local classification forms clus-
ters in relation to local attribute means rather than those of the UK. The effect 
is that the resulting clusters fit the data better for their locality.
This comparison can be extended by cross-tabulating the assignment of 
output areas in the two classifications. These are presented as percentage 
scores in Table 16.4. A number of interesting trends are highlighted. The first 

Figure 16.5  Liverpool Output Area Classification supergroups
Source:  photos by Alex Singleton

Table 16.4  Percentage of output areas assigned to Output Area Classification supergroups (rows) and Liverpool Output Area Classification 
supergroups (columns)
1 – Family 
terraces
2 – Students and 
university
3 – Constra­ined 
and aging
4 – Central 
diversity
5 – Affluent 
suburbs
6 – Struggling 
families
7 – City and 
central
2 – Cosmopolitans
  7.2
34.3
  1.8
  1.8
  0.0
  0.0
54.8
3 – Ethnicity central
  0.9
  3.7
  0.0
80.4
  0.0
  0.0
15.0
4 – Multicultural 
metropolitans
15.0
  8.8
  0.0
69.9
  1.8
  4.4
  0.0
5 – Urbanites
41.7
  0.5
  5.9
  0.0
51.5
  0.0
  0.5
6 – Suburbanites
  0.0
  0.5
  0.0
  0.0
99.5
  0.0
  0.0
7 – Constrained city 
dwellers
15.8
  0.0
67.7
  7.6
  0.3
  8.2
  0.3
8 – Hard-pressed living
23.5
  0.0
  9.3
  0.0
  6.6 
60.6 
  0.0
Source: 2011 UK census

Cities and context  231
is that the OAC supergroup ‘2 – Cosmopolitans’, which represents the gentri-
fied core of most large cities in the UK, is split within Liverpool OAC into a 
cluster with similar characteristics ‘7 – City and central’, and a further cluster 
that represents many of the student areas (‘2– Students and university’). Such 
areas are not necessarily as concentrated or extensive in other urban areas 
of the UK. Other OAC supergroups maintaining similarity to those in the 
Liverpool classification are ‘3 – Ethnicity central’ and ‘6 – Suburbanites’, 
with 80.4% and 99.5% similarity, respectively. The UK OAC supergroup 
‘4 – Multicultural metropolitans’ maintains broad similarity to the Liverpool 
OAC supergroup ‘4 – Central diversity’, although some output areas are 
reassigned into ‘1 – Family terraces’, which has lower ethnic diversity and ‘2 – 
Students and university’ which, although ethnically diverse, has different age 
profiles and many more residents in full-time education. Similarly, the UK 
OAC supergroup ‘5 – Urbanites’ is split into two between the less affluent ‘1 – 
Family terraces’ and ‘5 – Affluent suburbs’. The supergroup ‘7 – Constrained 
city dwellers’ maintains most similarity to the Liverpool OAC supergroup 
‘3 – Constrained and aging’ (67.7%); however, output areas are also reas-
signed into ‘1 – Family terraces’ (15.8%) and ‘6 – Struggling families’ (8.2%). 
The supergroup ‘8 – Hard-pressed living’ has the majority of output areas 
assigned to ‘6 – Struggling families’ (60.6%); however, other output areas 
are assigned into areas that, although less affluent, have either more elderly 
residents (‘3 – Constrained and aging’; 9.3%) or younger families (‘1 – Family 
terraces’; 23.5%). There are also some assignments into the most affluent 
supergroup in Liverpool (‘5 – Affluent suburbs’). This latter difference is 
interesting, as ‘8 – Hard-pressed living’ might be a cluster where use could 
be envisioned in public sector targeting of resources – for example –widening 
university participation or healthcare initiatives. However, in the context of 
Liverpool, 6.6% of these areas are reclassified as ‘5 – Affluent suburbs’ when 
examined with the city-focused classification.
Discussion and conclusions
This chapter has provided an overview of how geodemographic classifica-
tion emerged as a method of describing the characteristics of areas from rich 
multidimensional census data. The use of contemporary geodemographics 
is widespread in the public and private sectors, to effectively code people 
and the places in which they live into aggregate groupings based on shared 
attribute similarities. As a representational method, details of reality are bal-
anced in favour of generalisation, with the aim of providing a model that has 
utility in aiding understanding about how places are structured or that can be 
used as a component of area-based targeting strategies. Such codification is 
informed first by those choices made when compiling the classification, and 
second, by the choice of labels and descriptive materials associated with the 
output typology to provide context. As such, there are no ‘correct’ or ‘true’ 
geodemographic representations and, between classifications, these organise 

232  Alex Singleton
a variety of different granular geographies into aggregate typologies of vary-
ing characteristics.
Methodological decisions that a classification builder might take when 
building a geodemographic vary, and some typical choices were reviewed, 
alongside discussion of their probable impacts. A comparison of all pos-
sible methods and their combinations would run the length of many doc-
toral theses; thus, an illustrative case study was selected to focus on the 
impact of one specific methodological decision, the geographical extent of 
the classification. In this comparison, the national OAC 2011 was mapped 
for the geographical extent of Liverpool. The methodology used to create 
this classification was then repeated to derive a new classification with cluster 
optimisation restricted to the extent of Liverpool. The impact of this single 
decision resulted in a classification that arguably represents the geography of 
Liverpool more appropriately, given that the clusters were optimised based 
on a constrained geographical area, and as such, do not have to account 
for the wider variance of a UK dataset. Reassignments from 2011 OAC 
into the Liverpool classification were considered, and highlighted local socio-
spatial structures that either deviate from or are similar to national patterns.
It is important to differentiate between a geodemographic method, which 
is the process by which a classification can be built, and a geodemographic 
system, in which those classifications are pre-compiled and often integrated 
into software coding solutions that can be applied to a range of applications. 
In this chapter, a classification system is compared with an implementation 
of a method, and the results indicate that, perhaps unsurprisingly, a bespoke 
classification (in this case optimised for local context) offers a potentially 
more effective representation than a generic geodemographic system. The 
purpose here is not to make the case for general purpose versus bespoke 
classifications, as such arguments have been rehearsed since the inception of 
geodemographics (see Openshaw et al. 1980), and are discussed and evalu-
ated elsewhere (Singleton 2010b). In a geodemographic system, the aim is 
to provide the ‘best’ representation for a wide range of purposes. For exam-
ple, a commercial classification may find utility in the retail, automotive or 
insurance sectors; however, it is not specifically designed for any of these 
applications.2 Whereas geodemographic methods aim to provide contextual 
structure for a given application or locality, given the divergent aims and 
objectives of geodemographic systems and methods, the exact choices about 
how a classification will be created become application-specific. For exam-
ple, the UK OAC 2011 required input attributes that would be available 
in all counties of the UK, and as such, ignores those attributes that might 
only be available within specific countries. Examples could include the input 
of Welsh language variables in Wales, or within England, attributes about 
second home ownership.
As illustrated by the case study presented in this chapter, the choice of 
methods can impact the output representation, and as such, it is critical when 
building a geodemographic to be open and transparent about methodological 

Cities and context  233
specification, and present a clear rationale about why these decisions were 
taken. This is of particular importance for applications in the public sector 
where life chances might be apportioned through those decisions informed 
by geodemographics (Singleton and Longley 2009b). Such methodologi-
cal clarity engenders greater scientific rigour, as methods are more open to 
scrutiny, testing and reproduction. Arguably, the best practice in this regard 
is to place within the public domain – for example, utilising public code 
sharing repositories such as GitHub – the code, data and written interpreta-
tions.3 Furthermore, and as argued elsewhere (Longley and Singleton 2009), 
mechanisms that enable end users to be empowered to give feedback about 
classification reliability should also be encouraged.
Building geodemographics employs scientific methods of data reduction to 
provide summary measures of the characteristics of typically small-area geogra-
phy. The art of building geodemographics relates to methodological choices and 
their justifications, which are typically guided by classification builder exper-
tise. Given this subjectivity, there are no ‘best’ solutions, although some clas-
sifications may perform better for certain applications, either serendipitously, 
or by design, such as with a bespoke classification. Given their prevalence of 
use, it is argued here, that for geodemographics to attain greater social respon-
sibility all aspects of the build process should be  placed within  the public 
domain, and additionally, mechanisms should be enabled to provide end users 
(either those who are coded or those who are coding) with the ability to give 
feedback on the quality of assignments.
Notes
1	 Details of the consultation exercise can be found at Office for National Statistics 
(n.d.).
2	 In addition to general purpose classifications, many commercial geodemographic 
companies also offer systems that have been tailored to markets. For example, 
CACI produce ‘Acorn’ (http://acorn.caci.co.uk/).
3	 https://github.com/
References
Abler, R., Adams, J.S. and Gould, P. (1971) Spatial Organisation: The Geographer’s 
View of the World, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Adnan, M., Longley, P.A., Singleton, A.D. and Brunsdon, C. (2010) ‘Towards real-
time geodemographics: clustering algorithm performance for large multidimen-
sional spatial databases’, Transactions in GIS, 14(3): 283–97.
Batey, P., Brown, P. and Pemberton, S. (2008) ‘Methods for the spatial targeting 
of urban policy in the UK: a comparative analysis’, Applied Spatial Analysis and 
Policy, 1(2): 117–32.
Blake, M. and Openshaw, S. (1995) Selecting Variables for Small Area Classifications 
Of 1991 UK Census Data, Working Paper 95/5, Leeds: School of Geography, 
University of Leeds.
Brunsdon, C., Longley, P., Singleton, A. and Ashby, D.I. (2011) ‘Predicting 

234  Alex Singleton
participation in higher education: a comparative evaluation of the performance of 
geodemographic classifications’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 
174(1): 17–30.
Burrows, R. and Gane, N. (2006) ‘Geodemographics, software and class’, Sociology, 
40(5): 793–812.
Charlton, M.E., Openshaw, S. and Wymer, C. (1985) ‘Some new classifications 
of census enumeration districts in Britain: a poor man’s ACORN’, Journal of 
Economic and Social Measurement, 13(1): 69–96.
de Smith, M., Goodchild, M.F. and Longley, P. (2009) Geospatial Analysis: 
A Comprehensive Guide to Principles, Techniques and Software Tools, 3rd edn, 
Leicester: Matador.
Goss, J. (1995) ‘Marketing the new marketing: the strategic discourse of geode-
mographic information systems’, in J. Pickles (ed.) Ground Truth, New York: 
Guildford Press.
Goss, J. (2003) ‘The instrumental rationality of geodemographic systems’, in D. 
Clarke (ed.) The Consumption Reader, New York: Routledge.
Harris, R.J., Sleight, P. and Webber, R.J. (2005) Geodemographics, GIS and 
Neighbourhood Targeting, London: Wiley.
Longley, P. (2005) ‘Geographical information systems: a renaissance of geodemo-
graphics for public service delivery’, Progress in Human Geography, 29(1): 57–63.
Longley, P. and Singleton, A. (2009) ‘Classification through consultation: public 
views of the geography of the e-society’, International Journal of Geographical 
Information Science, 23(6): 737–63.
Office for National Statistics (n.d.) User Engagement on a New 2011 United Kingdom 
Output Area Classification, available at http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guide-method/
geography/products/area-classifications/ns-area-classifications/new-uk-out-
put-area-classification/index.html [accessed 25 November 2015].
Office for National Statistics (2015) 2011 Area Classifications. London: Office for 
National Statistics, available from http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guide-method/geog-
raphy/products/area-classifications/ns-area-classifications/ns-2011-area-classifica-
tions/index.html [accessed 21 August 2015].
Openshaw, S. (1984) The Modifiable Areal Unit Problem, CATMOG 38, Norwich: 
Geoabstracts.
Openshaw, S., Cullingford, D. and Gillard, A. (1980) ‘A critique of the national clas-
sifications of OPCS/PRAG’, Town Planning Review, 51(4): 421–39.
Parker, S., Uprichard, E. and Burrows, R. (2007) ‘Class places and place classes 
geodemographics and the spatialization of class’, Information, Communication and 
Society, 10(6): 902–21.
Reibel, M. and Regelson, M. (2011) ‘Neighborhood racial and ethnic change: the time 
dimension in segregation’, Urban Geography, 32(3): 360–82.
Savage, M. and Burrows, R. (2007) ‘The coming crisis of empirical sociology’, 
Sociology, 41(5): 885–99.
Shevky, E. and Bell, W. (1955) Social Area Analysis, Stanford: Stanford University 
Press.
Shevky, E. and Williams, M. (1949) The Social Areas of Los Angeles, Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Singleton, A. (2010a) ‘The geodemographics of educational progression and their 
implications for widening participation in higher education’, Environment and 
Planning A, 42(11): 2560–80.

Cities and context  235
Singleton, A. (2010b) Educational Opportunity: The Geography of Access to Higher 
Education, Farnham: Ashgate.
Singleton, A. and Longley, P. (2009a) ‘Creating open source geodemographics – 
refining a national classification of census output areas for applications in higher 
education’, Papers in Regional Science, 88(3): 643–66.
Singleton, A. and Longley, P. (2009b) ‘Geodemographics, visualisation, and social 
networks in applied geography’, Applied Geography, 29(3): 289–98.
Singleton, A. and Spielman, S. (2014) ‘The past, present and future of geodemographic 
research in the United States and United Kingdom’, Professional Geographer, 
66(4): 558–67.
Sivadas, E. (1997) ‘A preliminary examination of the continuing significance of social 
class to marketing: a geodemographic replication’, Journal of Consumer Marketing, 
14(6): 463–79.
Sleight, P. (1997) Targeting Customers: How to Use Geodemographic and Lifestyle 
Data in Your Business, Henley-on-Thames: NTC Publications.
Spielman, S.E. and Singleton, A.D. (2015) ‘Studying neighborhoods using uncertain 
data from the American Community Survey: a contextual approach’, Annals of the 
Association of American Geographers, 105(5): 1003–25.
Tapp, A. and Warren, S. (2010) ‘Field-capital theory and its implications for market-
ing’, European Journal of Marketing, 44(1–2): 200–22.
Thrift, N. and French, S. (2002) ‘The automatic production of space’, Transactions of 
the Institute of British Geographers, 27(3): 309–35.
Timms, D.W. (1971) The Urban Mosaic: Towards a Theory of Residential 
Differentiation, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Twigg, L., Moon, G. and Jones, K. (2000) ‘Predicting small-area health-related 
behaviour: a comparison of smoking and drinking indicators’, Social Science and 
Medicine, 50(7–8): 1109–20.
Uprichard, E., Burrows, R. and Parker, S. (2009) ‘Geodemographic code and the 
production of space’, Environment and Planning A, 41(12): 2823–35.
Vickers, D. and Rees, P. (2007) ‘Creating the UK national statistics 2001 output 
area classification’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A. Statistics in 
Society, 170(2): 379–403.
Voas, D. and Williamson, P. (2001) ‘The diversity of diversity: a critique of geodemo-
graphic classification’, Area, 33(1): 63–76.
Webber, R.J. (1975) Liverpool Social Area Study, 1971 Data, PRAG Technical Paper 
14, London: Centre for Environmental Studies.
Webber, R.J. (1977) An Introduction to the National Classification of Wards and 
Parishes, Technical Paper 23, London: Centre for Environmental Studies.
Webber, R.J. (1978) ‘Making the most of the census for strategic analysis’, The Town 
Planning Review, 49(3): 274–84.
Webber, R.J. (1980) ‘A response to the critique of the national classifications of 
OPCS/PRAG’, The Town Planning Review, 51(4): 440–50.
Webber, R.J. (2007) ‘The metropolitan habitus: its manifestations, locations, and 
consumption profiles’, 39(1): 182–207.
Webber, R. and Craig, J. (1978) Socio-Economic Classifications of Local Authority 
Areas, Studies on Medical and Population Subjects 35, London: OPCS.

Index
abstraction 4, 5, 10, 51, 56, 61, 62, 63–6, 
67, 69, 72, 125, 180 
accelerometer 137, 139
activism 41, 97, 181, 183, 186, 191
actor network theory 67, 133, 142
actuators 1, 3, 28
aesthetics 55, 139, 146, 147, 158–9
agency 6, 7, 9, 45, 50, 51, 52, 53, 57, 91, 
118, 120, 124, 126, 127, 131, 142, 143, 
167, 173, 201, 204, 209–11; secondary 
15, 132
agent-based modelling 5, 61, 62, 64, 65, 
68, 69, 70
aggregation 55, 65, 75, 159, 185, 218, 
220, 231, 232
algorithms 9, 10, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 27, 
36, 52, 56, 67, 75, 95, 105, 117, 118, 
131, 133, 134, 141, 159, 173, 203, 210, 
217, 220, 221, 226
Amazon 149, 166
analogue 2, 32, 92
Android 32, 84, 86
apparatus 18, 19, 23, 82, 122, 132, 142
Apple 32, 130, 137, 139
Application Programming Interface 
(API) 52, 80, 88, 100, 138, 139, 158, 
159, 179
apps 1, 3, 6, 7, 9, 45, 50, 51, 52, 91, 93, 
130, 132, 137, 145, 155, 158, 191, 192, 
193, 194, 197, 206
ARPANet 33, 39
art installations 3, 6, 116, 118, 123,  
124
Arup 49, 52, 55
assemblage 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 16, 18, 
19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 74, 81, 82, 87, 122, 
123, 132, 133, 134, 136, 141–3
automation 8, 15, 16, 18, 81, 131, 163, 
164, 165, 167, 171, 173, 201
Benkler, Yochai 132, 133, 182
black-boxing 22, 49, 50, 118, 130, 134, 
203
buildings 4, 30, 96, 157, 164, 183
capital 19, 141
capitalism 11, 87, 134–7, 141, 182
cellular automata 64
census 8, 155, 157, 207, 215, 216, 220, 
221, 231
citizenship 2, 9, 41–2, 187
civic: engagement 36, 40, 42, 56, 97, 118, 
119, 122, 179; hacking 8, 9, 181, 190, 
192–4, 198, 199
classification 10, 215–33
code: libraries 3, 75–86, 136; traffic 5, 
72–86
Code for America 194
Code for Ireland 9, 191, 192, 193, 194, 
195, 197, 198
code/space 16, 17, 18, 22, 24, 118, 131, 
132
collaboration 76, 159, 167, 168, 170, 
172, 185, 197
communications 1, 7, 27, 28, 35, 38, 52, 
93, 108, 109, 136, 165, 179, 182, 187, 
195
computation 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 27, 28, 36, 
38, 45, 61, 65, 66, 69, 75, 86, 105, 106, 
109, 112, 113, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 
141, 142, 146, 172, 200
computing: cloud 8, 27, 28, 34, 35, 36, 
45, 73, 75, 86, 91, 92, 97, 102, 103, 
164–6; human-centred 91, 92, 96, 102; 
mobile 3, 5–8, 130–43; sensor-based 
28; street 179, 180; tangible 106; 
ubiquitous 2, 18, 28, 29, 119, 179; 
urban 3, 27, 36, 40, 44, 45
context 1, 6, 9, 11, 17, 18, 40, 51, 100, 

Index  237
117, 120, 121, 125, 126, 131, 179, 194, 
198, 203, 204, 206, 217
contingency 10, 11, 17, 18, 131, 132, 181, 
183, 186, 213
control 1, 4, 5, 8, 32, 34, 37, 45, 46, 49, 
51, 54, 63, 66, 68, 72, 75, 76, 81, 82, 
120, 131, 136, 165, 166, 178, 179, 182, 
194; centre 49; creep 15
crisis 8, 163–73
crowdsourcing 1, 3, 6, 76, 102, 168, 169
cultural: analytics 7, 8, 146–59; capital 
184
curation 7, 116, 120, 121, 123, 126, 127
data: analytics 30, 36, 38, 67; assemblage 
18, 19, 20; big 2, 8, 18, 27, 149, 158, 
159, 163, 165; infrastructure 1, 18, 
132; linked 201, 211, 212, 213; model 
53; open 18, 50, 51, 52, 155, 218, 219; 
structures 9, 67, 69
database 6, 7, 20, 54, 80, 81, 95, 110, 
111, 116, 118, 124, 132, 137, 139, 141, 
142, 192, 202, 203, 204, 206
datafication 6, 116
deconstruction 17, 122, 133
Deleuze, Gilles 74, 108, 142
diagram city 64–6
discursive regime 2, 21–3, 121
dispositif 7, 118, 119–27
disruptive innovation 8, 56, 137, 142, 
163, 167, 182
distributed mapping 8, 168
Dodge, Martin 1, 2, 15, 16, 17, 18, 22, 
24, 105, 106, 117, 118, 131, 132, 139, 
141, 163, 179, 200
Dourish, Paul 4, 17, 27–46, 51, 106
Earthquake 8, 164–8, 170, 172
Embodiment 7, 11, 51, 55, 56, 106, 117, 
120, 123, 126, 127, 133, 173
emergency response 1, 3, 5, 8, 163, 166, 
167, 170
empiricism 4, 61, 67, 68, 69
epistemology 6, 22, 49, 54, 68, 105, 143
ethics 8, 11, 19, 52, 57, 65, 164, 165, 166, 
167, 170, 172, 190, 191, 192, 197, 198
ethnography 6, 9, 17, 106, 109, 112, 191
everyware 163
Facebook 67, 91, 137, 141, 158, 159, 
169, 170, 173, 193, 196, 200, 204
finance 1, 19, 23, 56, 141, 158
firmware 1, 136
Flickr 125, 146
F/OSS 182, 183, 185, 186, 187, 193, 195, 
197, 198
Foucualt, Michel 66, 120, 142, 181
Foursquare 1, 6, 7, 8, 18, 91–102, 106, 
109–12, 139, 155, 156
Freebase 9, 203, 204, 207
Fuller, Matthew 4, 5, 10, 15, 61–70,  
141
Galloway, Alex 51, 54, 56, 136, 141 
game theory 5, 62
geodemographics 3, 10, 131, 215–33
geographic information system (GIS) 
18, 19, 165, 168, 216
geopolitics 9, 200–13
GitHub 5, 75–86, 193, 233
Global Positioning System (GPS) 42, 43, 
91, 110, 121, 122, 137, 139
Google 32, 55, 75, 86, 130, 193, 195, 196, 
201–10, 212; Knowledge Graph 9, 
211; Maps 42, 56, 200; Street View 8, 
155, 156, 157, 158
governance 1, 8–10, 15, 16, 22, 23, 42, 
56, 63, 105, 124, 133, 173, 178–87, 
198, 203, 213; algorithmic 15, 16, 18, 
131; anticipatory 15, 22; technocratic 
23
government 1, 2, 4, 9, 19, 41, 49, 50, 55, 
56, 65, 158, 163, 164, 166, 173, 178, 
179, 181, 185, 187, 190, 191, 192, 194, 
195, 197, 198, 204, 206, 207
governmentality 118
Greenfield, Adam 36, 41, 54, 105, 163, 
180
Hackathon 3, 9, 50, 155, 186, 190–8
Hacking 4, 9, 37, 190–8
Hailo 7, 130, 134–37, 142, 143
hardware 1, 7, 10, 18, 20, 29, 51, 52, 64, 
68, 69, 131, 132, 133, 134, 136, 137, 
141, 142, 143, 180, 183, 186
Heidegger, Martin 6, 107, 108, 111,  
113
hermeneutic 106, 110, 111
home 2, 16, 18, 27, 29, 32, 34, 36, 37, 38, 
42, 45, 51, 94, 95, 97, 232
IBM 49, 54, 166
Ideology 11, 19, 56, 62, 64
imitation 74, 75, 76, 77, 80, 81, 84, 85,  
86
indeterminancy 5, 72, 73, 74, 82

238  Index
infrastructure 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 
15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 24, 27, 28, 30, 
31, 32, 34, 37, 38, 40, 42, 43, 45, 50, 
51, 56, 73, 80, 81, 86, 91, 131, 132, 
134, 136, 137, 141, 142, 143, 158, 168, 
178, 179, 180, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 
187, 192, 200
innovation 2, 8, 15, 20, 30, 33, 64, 100, 
119, 122, 127, 163, 165, 167, 171, 187, 
190
Instagram 7, 8, 146, 147, 148, 151, 153, 
155, 156, 158
instrumental rationality 4, 50
interface 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 
34, 43, 50, 51, 52, 53–4, 55, 56, 57, 
67, 92, 106, 111, 112, 116–27, 132–43, 
146, 148, 157, 158, 159, 178, 179, 181
Internet of Things 3, 4, 22, 27–46, 73
interoperability 29, 30, 69, 163, 164,  
166
iOS 32, 86, 139
Jerusalem 9, 201–11
Justice 8, 69, 164, 165
Kitchin, Rob 1, 2, 3, 15–24, 105, 106, 
117, 118, 131, 132, 139, 141, 142, 163, 
179, 200
labour 137, 141 
language 9, 17, 20, 62, 73, 170, 178, 201, 
210, 232
Latour, Bruno 67, 142, 171, 194, 206
Law 7, 9, 11, 17, 19, 23, 36, 37, 42, 82, 
142, 178, 180, 197, 204
life-logging 7, 134, 137, 166
LinkedIn 192, 193
Living Plan-IT 51
location-based services 1, 42, 119, 126
location-based social networks (LSBN) 
6, 91–103, 105–114
logic 4, 10, 34, 42, 61, 66–70, 118, 119, 
121, 132, 133, 201, 204, 206, 211, 213
machine learning 27, 75
McLuhan, Marshall 118, 121
management 1, 2, 4, 10, 15, 16, 22, 
27, 34, 37, 41, 46, 51, 56, 95, 180; 
automated 16
Manovich, Lev 7, 8, 15, 18, 117, 119, 
141, 146–59
map 1, 2, 8, 39, 42, 49, 51, 52, 54, 56, 91, 
102, 110, 111, 121, 138, 139, 140, 156, 
157, 159, 167, 168, 170, 172, 186, 200, 
221, 232
mass media 109
Master Touch 125
Materiality 131, 132, 134, 141, 143, 172, 
197, 204
Mathematics 5, 10, 64, 65
measurement 10, 35, 50, 52, 116, 124, 
149, 151, 173, 186, 194, 218, 219–20, 
221, 225
metadata 132, 134, 136, 207
meters 1, 27, 35, 37, 137, 139
middleware 1
mobile phones 1, 8, 32, 33, 51, 55, 102, 
148, 164, 165, 167, 168, 171
mobility (movement) 42, 43, 52, 53, 75, 
76, 77, 78, 80, 86, 91, 93, 117, 118, 
119, 131, 132, 134, 136, 138, 139, 141, 
158, 164–66, 173, 195, 221
modality 8, 53, 139
model 2, 5, 7, 8, 10, 19, 30, 53, 61–70, 95, 
126, 130, 131, 133, 136, 137, 142, 164, 
184, 215–33 
modernity 37, 69, 146, 180
Moves 7, 130, 134, 137–41, 142, 143
navigation 42, 43, 44, 50, 55, 66, 96, 102, 
110, 111, 112, 119, 120, 122, 124, 125, 
130, 153, 157–8, 181, 201
neoliberal 182, 187
networks 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 19, 
22, 27, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 36–40, 45, 
46, 50, 51, 52, 55, 77, 106, 108, 109, 
112, 113, 121, 122, 130, 131, 132, 
134, 136, 142, 156, 171, 173, 183–86, 
192; community 9, 179, 181, 182–86; 
distributed 36, 127, 181, 182, 184, 185; 
DIY 40; peer-to-peer 9, 178–87; radio 
1, 136, 137, 182, 185; satellite 1, 29; 
wireless 3, 9, 27, 28, 32, 37, 52, 179, 
180–87
object orientated programming 65, 68
objectivity 5, 11, 65, 132
On Broadway 8, 153–55, 159
ontology 11, 62, 105, 130, 141, 142, 143
openness 29, 40, 45, 191, 192, 193, 197, 
198
OpenStreetMap 168, 172, 200
operating systems 1, 4, 10, 20, 31, 32, 44, 
45, 50, 51, 52, 54, 56, 136
output areas 220–31
ownership 35, 36, 38, 186, 221, 232

Index  239
panoptic 120
participation 2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 41, 42, 45, 55, 
116, 117, 118, 120, 122, 123, 124, 127, 
170, 178, 180, 183–4, 190, 193, 194, 
198, 212
peer production 181–87
performativity 7, 11, 94, 102, 116–126, 
131
phenomenology 6, 106, 107, 110, 165, 
167, 170, 172
photographs 52, 91, 92, 101, 124, 147, 
148, 153, 155, 171
platform 1, 5, 7, 18, 20, 21, 37, 42, 44, 
45, 56, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 
81, 82, 83, 84, 86, 91, 92, 93, 96, 99, 
100, 101, 102, 109, 117, 121, 127, 134, 
141, 200, 203, 209, 212
policy 10, 17, 19, 23, 57, 65, 133, 165, 
171, 183, 194, 216
political economy 11, 19, 23, 131
politics 4, 8–10, 11, 18, 28, 38–41, 52, 55, 
56, 57, 61, 64, 67, 69, 130, 131, 141–3, 
158–9, 165, 178, 181, 182, 183, 186, 
187, 191, 197, 198, 201
post-human 165, 167, 170, 172, 173
post-phenomenology 107
power 2, 5, 11, 15, 37, 41, 45, 56, 61, 66, 
68, 72, 73, 75, 76, 81, 82, 118, 131, 
142, 170, 178, 182, 203–4, 213
prediction 2, 65, 66, 74, 95, 166 
privacy 22, 94, 95, 101, 124, 126, 166
protocols 4, 19, 29, 30, 33, 38–41, 45, 
51, 52, 54, 56, 86, 122, 133, 134, 136, 
141, 190
provenance 9, 201, 203, 204, 207–10
public space 82, 116, 117, 123, 124,  
183
qualculation 8, 163, 164, 165, 167, 171, 
172, 173
radical constructivism 67
real-time 112
recommendation systems 18, 93, 94, 95, 
99, 100, 101
reductionism 4, 5, 10, 61, 63, 66, 68, 130, 
233
reflexivity 117, 119, 120, 123, 126, 191
regulation 1, 2, 7, 15, 19, 22, 35, 37, 40, 
66, 82, 101, 118, 131, 137, 142, 165
rematerialisation 6, 92, 102
representation 9, 10, 43, 46, 52, 54, 55, 
64, 65, 123, 130, 132, 139, 142, 159, 
181, 200, 201, 203, 204, 205, 206, 211, 
212, 213, 215, 217, 231, 232
resistance 11, 22, 44, 100, 164
rhetoric 3, 23, 27, 28, 29, 36, 44, 69, 120, 
121, 123, 180, 191, 195, 216
satellite 1, 29, 52
Saving Face 7, 116–20, 123, 124, 125, 
127
scale 3, 8, 17, 22, 23, 24, 33–4, 38, 42–3, 
53, 54, 55, 61, 63, 64, 68, 69, 77, 81, 
132, 133, 137, 157, 165, 183, 218–19, 
220
screens 1, 4, 6, 7, 49, 50, 52, 53, 54, 55, 
111, 113, 116–127, 139, 158, 171,  
179
search engines 3, 203, 204
security 1, 16, 22, 27, 38, 54, 136, 165, 
166, 183, 190
segregation 5, 61–66
Selfiecity 7, 8, 148–53, 159
semantics 68, 70
Semantic Web 9, 200–13
sensors 1, 3, 19, 27, 28, 34, 35, 36, 51, 73, 
105, 178, 179, 181
sentience 15, 49
Silicon Valley 56, 73
Simulation 2, 5, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 67,  
68
Sloterdijk, Peter 6, 106, 107–109, 110, 
111, 112, 113
smart cities 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 18, 22, 23, 24, 
27, 29, 36–8, 41, 42, 43, 44, 49, 50, 53, 
54, 56, 107, 124, 126, 179, 180, 181, 
183, 187, 191, 196, 198
smartphone 1, 5, 6, 34, 45, 51, 57, 105, 
106, 130, 132, 134, 136, 137, 139, 143, 
181
social: area analysis 215, 218; coding 5, 
77, 81, 82, 86; gaming 95; interaction 
1, 6, 91–103; responsibility 50, 193, 
233; sorting 65, 131, 166
socio-spatial behaviour 1, 6, 11
software studies 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 
24, 117, 141, 146, 156
Songdo City 41
space, production of 3, 15, 16, 187, 216
stack 4, 7, 20, 29, 45, 52–3, 54, 56, 130, 
132, 134, 137, 139, 141, 143, 157
standardisation 32, 33, 132, 220, 221, 
225
standards 4, 19, 31, 37, 132, 133, 136, 
159, 168, 172, 201, 219

240  Index
statistical analysis 10, 27, 49, 67, 151, 
157, 201, 207, 216, 217, 218, 220, 225
subjectivity 2, 19, 108, 109, 118, 125, 
132, 217, 233
surveillance 1, 8, 16, 18, 38, 55, 116, 120, 
124, 158, 159, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 
171, 173, 180
Swarm 91, 93
TCP/IP 29
technological unconscious 2, 178
teleology 9, 11
temporality 4, 11, 30–2, 38, 43, 44, 45, 
97, 113, 119, 120, 122, 125, 192
Tinder 1
Townsend, Anthony 2, 16, 58, 179,  
181
transduction 106, 131
transgression 11
transport 1, 16, 35, 44, 52, 55, 91, 131, 
132, 139
Tripadvisor 92, 100
Twitter 1, 7, 8, 91, 109, 155, 156, 157, 
158, 159, 166, 168, 200
UNData 9, 201, 204, 207
Urbanism: abstract 4, 10, 61–70; 
digital 8, 163–73; networked 2, 15, 
18, 22; peer-to-peer 9, 179, 181, 182, 
183; programmable 11, 22, 23, 24; 
splintering 131
USB 31, 32
utilities: energy 1, 16, 29, 32, 55, 191; 
lighting 1, 16, 30; water 1, 16, 30, 51
visualisation 7, 8, 18, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 
54, 55, 56, 87, 119, 124, 125, 139, 146, 
148, 149–55, 158, 159, 179
Volunteered Geographic Information 
200
weather 1, 49, 55, 163, 167, 201 
widgetisation 4, 49, 50, 196
Wikidata 9, 201, 203, 204, 206, 207, 210, 
211, 212
Wikipedia 9, 182, 186, 200, 201, 203, 
204, 205, 206, 210, 211, 212
wireless 27, 28, 32, 37, 52, 180, 183, 
184, 187; community 3, 9, 179, 181, 
182–83, 186
World Bank 170
Yelp 100, 200
YouTube 146, 159

