
Janet Nay Zadina, Ph.D. 
Tulane University School of Medicine
Rita Smilkstein, Ph.D. 
North Seattle Community College, 
emeritus Western Washington University
Deborah B. Daiek, Ph.D.
Schoolcraft College
Nancy M. Anter
Schoolcraft College
College Reading: 
The Science and Strategies 
of Expert Readers
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States

© 2014, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright 
herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by 
any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to 
photocopying, recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, 
information networks, or information storage and retrieval systems, except 
as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright 
Act, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012952820
Student Edition: 
ISBN-13: 978-1-111-35001-7
ISBN-10: 1-111-35001-9
Annotated Instructor’s Edition/Instructor’s Annotated Edition: 
ISBN-13: 978-1-111-35004-8
ISBN-10: 1-111-35004-3
Wadsworth
20 Channel Center Street
Boston, MA 02210
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions
with oﬃ  ce locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United 
Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil and Japan. Locate your local oﬃ  ce at
international.cengage.com/region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by 
Nelson Education, Ltd.
For your course and learning solutions, visit www.cengage.com
Purchase any of our products at your local college store
or at our preferred online store www.cengagebrain.com
Instructors: Please visit login.cengage.com and log in to access instructor-
speciﬁ c resources.
College Reading: The Science and 
 Strategies of Expert Readers 
Janet N. Zadina, Ph.D., 
Rita Smilkstein, Ph.D., 
Deborah B. Daiek, Ph.D., Nancy M. Anter
Director: Annie Todd
Executive Editor: Shani Fisher
Senior Development Editor: Marita Sermolins
Editorial Assistant: Erin Nixon
Media Editor: Christian Biagetti
Brand Manager: Lydia LeStar
Senior Content Project Manager: 
Corinna Dibble
Art Director: Faith Brosnan
Manufacturing Planner: Betsy Donaghey
Rights Acquisition Specialist: Ann Hoﬀ man
Production Service and Compositor: 
Integra Software Services
Cover Image: Sergio77/Shutterstock.com
Cover Designer: RHDG/Riezebos  Holzbaur
Interior Designer: Anne Bell Carter
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at 
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product, 
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions 
Further permissions questions can be emailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Printed in the United States of America  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 16 15 14 13 12

Brief Contents
CHAPTER 1 
Making Brain Connections to Become an Expert Reader 2
CHAPTER 2 
Remembering What You Read 48
CHAPTER 3  
Developing Your College Vocabulary 98 
CHAPTER 4  
Locating Stated Main Ideas 152 
CHAPTER 5  
Finding Supporting Details 198 
CHAPTER 6  
Using Inference to Identify Implied Main Ideas 244 
CHAPTER 7  
Recognizing Patterns of Organization 296 
CHAPTER 8  
Using Preview, Study-Read, and Review (PSR) 354
CHAPTER 9  
Taking Control of Your Textbook: Marking and Note Taking 392 
CHAPTER 10  Using Visuals to Increase Your Understanding of Textbooks 432  
CHAPTER 11  Understanding and Creating Arguments 490
CHAPTER 12 
Reading Arguments Critically 544
CHAPTER 13  Reading Beyond the Words 592 
Appendix 
Test-Taking Strategies 636


 
Why Study Reading? 4
What Is Reading? 6
Critical Reading and Metacognition 8
Reading Is an Active Process 10
Why You Are Already a Natural Learner: Growing Dendrites 12
Synapses 14
Synapses and Emotions 15
The Natural Human Learning Process (NHLP) 17
Reading with Concentration 21
Managing Your Attention 21
Fighting Distracters 25
Write in a Journal 26
Use the Checkmark Monitoring System 28
Create You r Learning Environment 29
Develop a Daily Reading Plan 30
Learning Is State Dependent 33
Factors that Affect State 33
Habits to Enhance Your Learning 34
Practice with a Reading Passage   
Shanghai Girls 36
Post Test   
From The Fattening of America 44
Brain Strength Options  
47
Contents
Making Brain Connections 
to Become an Expert Reader 
2
CHAPTER 1

 
vi 
Contents
What Is Memory 50
The Memory Process 55
Sensory Input 57
Working Memory 58
Rehearsing and Repetition 58
Chunking 58
Encoding 61
Rehearsing and Repetition 62
Chunking 65
Creating Mnemonics 67
Reformatting 70
Making Associations and Connections 72
Using Multiple Pathways 77
Long-term Memory 78
Factors Affecting Long-term Memory 79
Retrieval 82
Practice with a Reading Passage   
The New Rules of Social Networking 84
Post Test   
Project Runway Spices Up Sleepy Classrooms 92
Brain Strength Options  
97
Remembering What You Read 
48
CHAPTER 2 

 
Contents 
vii
Developing Your College 
Vocabulary 
98
CHAPTER 3 
Develop a Strong Vocabulary 100
Context Clues 101
Types of Context Clues 102
Word Part Analysis 114
Prefixes 115
Suffixes 119
Roots 122
Specialized Vocabulary 126
Exam Terminology 128
Methods to Help You Learn and Remember Vocabulary 130
Word Maps 130
The Card Review System (CRS) 134
Sounding It Out 137
Practice with a Reading Passage   
 Physics Major Has a Name for a Really 
 Big Number 140
Post Test   
Learn Something New—Your Brain Will Thank You 148
Brain Strength Options  
151

 
viii 
Contents
Locating Stated Main Ideas 
152
CHAPTER 4
Main Ideas Help You Understand Your Reading 154
Recognizing Topics, Main Ideas, and Details 154
Understanding Topics 156
Previewing to Determine Topic 161
Identifying Stated Main Ideas 162
Strategy One: Question Yourself 162
Strategy Two: Look in the Usual Spots 167
Strategy Three: Notice Word Clues 169
Strategy Four: Categorize an Author’s Points 175
Mind Mapping with Main Ideas 179
Practice with a Reading Passage   
From “The Spider and the Wasp” 185
Post Test   
The “Thrill” of Theft 192
Brain Strength Options  
197

 
Contents 
ix
Finding Supporting Details 
198
CHAPTER 5 
Using Your Entire Brain: Big Picture and Detail 200
What Are Supporting Details? 201
Identifying Major Supporting Details 201
Strategy One: Ask Questions 206
Strategy Two: Look for Support Word Clues 212
Strategy Three: Look for Implied Word Clues 215
Identifying Minor Supporting Details 217
Looking for the Big Picture in Longer Readings 222
Practice with a Reading Passage   
Letting Justice Flow 230
Post Test   
McDonald’s 237
Brain Strength Options  
243

 
x 
Contents
Using Inference to Identify 
Implied Main Ideas 
244
CHAPTER 6
Understanding the Theory of Mind 246
Finding Implied Main Idea from Inferences 246
Reader-Response Theory: Activating Prior Knowledge 248
Making Inferences 250
Strategy One:  Understand an Author’s Purpose 255
Strategy Two: Note Comparisons and Implied Similarities 259
Strategy Three: Understand an Author’s Tone 264
Strategy Four: Detect an Author’s Bias 271
Strategy Five: Recognize Information Gaps 275
Knowing How Much to Infer 280
Practice with a Reading Passage   
From The Hunger Games 286
Post Test   
The Cat Lady 291
Brain Strength Options  
295

 
Contents 
xi
Recognizing Patterns 
of Organization 
296
CHAPTER 7
What Are Patterns? 298
Why Your Brain Likes Patterns and Categories 300
Strategies for Recognizing Patterns of Organization 301
Question Yourself 302
Look for Organizational Word Clues 303
Common Patterns of Organization 303
Listing 306
Analysis 311
Cause/Effect 315
Comparison/Contrast 319
Definition/Example 326
Sequence 329
Mixed Patterns 338
Staying Focused on the Overall Pattern 342
Practice with a Reading Passage   
Neat People vs. Sloppy People 345
Post Test   
We’re Born to Learn 350
Brain Strength Options  
353

 
xii 
Contents
Using Preview, Study-Read, 
and Review (PSR) 
354
CHAPTER 8
Preview, Study-Read, and Review (PSR) 356
Stage One: Preview 357
Preview Step 1: Skim the Reading 359
Preview Step 2: Develop Questions and Predict Answers 362
Preview Step 3: Recall Prior Knowledge 363
Stage Two: Study-Read 370
Study-Read Step 1: Ask and Answer Questions 371
Study-Read Step 2: Monitor Your Reading 371
Study-Read Step 3: Determine Main Ideas 373
Study-Read Step 4: Cross-Reference Prior Knowledge 373
Stage Three: Review 377
Review Step 1: Return to Main Idea Statements 377
Review Step 2: Organize Material for Retrieval 377
Practice with a Reading Passage   
Practice Forms of Mental Hygiene 380
Post Test   
Material and Nonmaterial Culture 387
Brain Strength Options  
391

 
Contents 
xiii
Taking Control of Your Textbook: 
Marking and Note Taking 
392
CHAPTER 9
Getting the Right Mindset for Marking and Note Taking 394
Understanding Textbook Parts 396
Textbook Marking Gets You Right to the Point 398
Four Steps to Textbook Marking 400
Step One: Preview 400
Step Two: Study-Read 403
Step Three: Highlight 405
Step Four: Write Margin Notes 409
Deciding What Else to Mark 410
Take Control of Your Textbook by Using Focused Notes 417
Practice with a Reading Passage   
 A History of the Campaign for Nuclear 
 Disarmament: The CND Logo 420
Post Test   
What Happens When Two People Talk? 426
Brain Strength Options  
431

 
xiv 
Contents
Using Visuals to Increase Your 
Understanding of Textbooks 
432
CHAPTER 10
Reading and Creating Visuals Help Your Brain to Learn 434
Specific Purposes of Textbook Visuals 435
Applying PSR to Understand Textbook Visuals 437
Step One: Preview Visuals 437
Step Two: Study-Read Visuals 439
Step Three: Review Visuals 439
Types of Textbook Visuals 442
Tables 443
Diagrams 445
Illustrations 447
Graphs 449
Pie Charts 451
Pictographs 453
Photographs 454
Time Lines 457
Geographical Maps 459
Cartoons 462
Creating Your Own Visuals 464
Selecting the Right Visual 466
Practice with a Reading Passage   
 Is Hypnosis an Altered State 
 of Consciousness? 478
Post Test   
Chapter 1 Light and Life 484
Brain Strength Options  
489

 
Contents 
xv
Understanding and Creating 
Arguments 
490
CHAPTER 11
Understanding Argument 492
Readying Your Mind for Argument 493
Parts of an Argument 495
Conclusions 495
Reasons 495
Looking for Arguments in What You Read 499
Words that Signal Arguments 503
See the Argument without Word Clues 513
Distinguishing Facts from Opinions 514
Facts 516
Opinions 517
Hidden Assumptions 522
Making Sense of Visual Arguments 525
Argumentation Maps 530
Practice with a Reading Passage   
Are Universities Worth It? 534
Post Test   
Language 539
Brain Strength Options  
543

 
xvi 
Contents
Reading Arguments Critically 
544
CHAPTER 12
Kinds of Arguments 546
Inductive Arguments 546
Deductive Arguments 549
Deductive Argument Puzzles 556
Evaluating Arguments 562
Detecting Fallacies 563
Steps to Evaluating Arguments 569
Step One: Create an Argumentation Map 569
Step Two: Cross Out Weak Parts of an Argument 570
Step Three: Make a Judgment 571
Evaluating Information on the Internet 576
Practice with a Reading Passage   
Handshake or Hug? Why We Touch 578
Post Test   
 Passage #1: Ending Michigan’s Mandatory Helmet Law 
Would Cost Everyone Who Pays Insurance 587
Passage #2: By Giving Motorcyclists Choice on Helmets,  
Michigan Would Gain Millions 589
Brain Strength Options  
591

 
Contents 
xvii
Reading Beyond the Words 
592
CHAPTER 13
What Does It Mean to Read Critically? 594
Bloom’s Taxonomy 596
Remembering Level of Thinking 597
Understanding Level of Thinking 600
Applying Level of Thinking 602
Analyzing Level of Thinking 604
Evaluating Level of Thinking 607
Creating Level of Thinking 609
Levels of Learning: The Natural Human Learning Process 619
Keeping Your Brain Healthy beyond Reading 622
Practice with a Reading Passage   
 The Proposal Script 625
Post Test   
Empress Wu 632
Brain Strength Options  
635

xviii 
Contents
Test-Taking Strategies 
636
APPENDIX
Test-Taking Self-Assessment 636
Preparing for a Test 637
Coping with Test Anxiety 639
Practicing Time Management during Tests 643
Answering Test Questions 643
Strategies Specific to Objective Tests 644
Multiple-Choice 644
True-and-False 645
Matching and Fill-in-the-Blank 645
Strategies Specific to Essay Exams 646
What to Do After the Test 647

Preface
HOW DOES BRAIN-COMPATIBLE LEARNING HELP 
CREATE EXPERT READERS?
How does telling students to read and answer questions help them read? How 
does this actually make better readers? Teaching this way can help students 
with good decoding (reading fluency) skills think better and get more out of 
the reading, but does it help a struggling reader tackle difficult reading? 
Much of what we teach when we teach reading skills are “thinking skills.” 
But there is more to reading than just thinking. Many college developmental 
students are still struggling with reading skills involving basic decoding. They 
have problems with phonology and orthography—figuring out vocabulary 
and remembering sight words. They have underlying deficits in attention and 
working memory that appear as reading deficits.
College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert 
Readers bridges brain research and learning theory to 
offer reading strategies that are practical, interesting, 
and empirically grounded. 
College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert 
Readers approaches reading not only from a thinking 
skills perspective but also from a knowledge of how one 
thinks, learns, and reads. The bridge from the scientific research to the class-
room is built on expertise in both science and education. The translation from 
research to reading strategies that help struggling learners is clear, concise, 
and in layperson’s terms. By explaining the brain science of reading, Science 
and Strategies teaches students how to read with the knowledge that they can 
change their brain into a more effective reading brain. 
The benefits of teaching with an awareness of brain research are many. 
Research shows that when students learn that their brain is malleable—that it 
changes as a result of learning—their achievement rises. Science and Strategies is 
designed to increase student achievement by providing them with this impor-
tant information immediately. And when students understand why something 
should be done, they are more willing to do it. Therefore, students learn about 
their brain and the why behind the activities and strategies, which is a unique 
feature of this book—the transparency of the learning process. Teachers and 
students learn about these new insights into learning together.
“The overall tone of the text-
book is very accessible. The 
authors’ voice is personal and 
informal, and students will 
find this approach refreshing 
and helpful. I can imagine my 
students commenting on how 
easy this textbook is to read 
and understand.”
—MICHAEL BOYD, ILLINOIS 
CENTRAL COLLEGE
“This text bothers to explain 
the reasoning (the science) 
behind how students can 
become more effective readers 
while continually assuring 
students that they have the 
power to improve their read-
ing based on that reasoning. 
Most other texts focus on 
why students should become 
more effective readers and 
basically issue prescriptions 
for improved reading without 
rationale.” 
—ROCHELLE WATSON, MONROE 
COMMUNITY COLLEGE

xx 
Preface
College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers brings together an expert group of authors to 
credibly incorporate widely proven brain research and learning theory into a user-friendly, dynamic reading 
textbook aimed at diverse learners. As international and national authorities on brain research and education 
and developmental educators with more than 30 years’ experience who have conducted scientific research on 
reading, these authors are committed to helping your students become the expert readers they have the capa-
bilities of being.
Janet N. Zadina, Ph.D., is an Adjunct Assistant Professor at Tulane University 
School of Medicine, Department of Neurology. She is a cognitive neuroscientist 
and former community college instructor of reading and English. She has conducted 
award-winning research on the neurobiology of dyslexia. She is an internationally 
known speaker on brain research and instruction and was invited to give a presti-
gious TED talk.  She is also the author of several books and articles in the fields of 
science and education. 
Her background as a teacher and reading specialist, along with her neuroimaging of 
dyslexia experience in the lab, serves her in her passionate devotion to developmental 
reading students. She sees reading instruction through the eyes of a teacher and a sci-
entist. Because research shows that students who learn about their brain become higher achievers than those who 
don’t, she is passionate about the importance of educating students as well as teachers about the brain.
She is the 2011 winner of the Society for Neuroscience Science Educator Award given to “an outstanding 
neuroscientist who has made a significant impact in informing the public about neuroscience.” She is also a 
CLADEA Fellow of the Council of Learning Assistance and Developmental Education Associations, 2006, the 
highest honor in the field of Developmental Education, which recognized her lifetime achievement in helping 
college developmental students. She is a member of the Society for Neuroscience, Neurobiology of Language 
Society, National Association for Developmental Education, and College Reading and Learning Association.
Rita Smilkstein, Ph.D., has spoken nationally and internationally on brain- compatible 
education and the Natural Human Learning Process (NHLP). She has taught in 
middle school through graduate school, including 26 years in the Humanities 
Division at North Seattle Community College. Currently she is Professor Emerita, 
North Seattle Community College, and invited faculty in Secondary Education at 
Western Washington University’s Woodring College of Education, Everett Campus. 
She has received many teaching awards, including the National Institute for Staff and 
Organizational Development’s Excellence Award, 1991, 1995; the College Reading and 
Learning Association’s highest honor, the Robert Griffin Award, 2005; and Induction 
as a Fellow of the Council of Learning Assistance and Developmental Education Associations (CLADEA), 2006, 
the highest honor in the field of Developmental Education. She is also a member of the Editorial Advisory Board 
of the Journal of College Reading and Learning.
Her B.A. was in English at the State University of Iowa, her M.A. in English was at Michigan State 
University, and her Ph.D. in Educational Psychology was at the University of Washington. Her book We’re 
EXPERT AUTHORS TEACHING  

Preface 
xxi
Born to Learn: Using the Brain’s Natural Learning Process to Create Curriculum (Corwin Press, 2003; 2nd ed., 
2011) won the Delta Kappa Gamma International Society’s Educator’s Award of the Year, 2004. A second 
edition of her book Tools for Writing: Using the Natural Human Learning Process was published by Many 
Kites Press in 2011.
She also frequently gives presentations at national conferences of educational organizations such as the 
College Reading and Learning Association and the National Association of Developmental Education. 
Deborah B. Daiek, Ph.D., serves as the Associate Dean for Learning Support Services, 
Schoolcraft College, Livonia, Michigan. She oversees the College’s Library, Collegiate 
Skills Reading Department, English as a Second Language courses, Education Transfer 
Program, and Learning Assistance Center (LAC), which houses tutoring, Peer Assisted 
Learning, Writing Fellows, Student-Athlete Support System, and University Bound. 
Under her direction, Schoolcraft’s LAC was the recipient of the John Champaign 
Memorial Award for an Outstanding Developmental Education Program. She pro-
vides new faculty orientation workshops on ways to engage students in the learning 
process. 
She holds a Bachelor of Arts degree cum laude as well as an M.A. in Adult 
Learning, both from Western Michigan University. Additionally, she holds a doc-
torate from Wayne State University in Instructional Technology, with an emphasis on cognition. 
She is twice the Past President of MDEC, the Michigan Chapter of NADE, and remains actively involved. In 
1998, she was given the Outstanding Developmental Educator Award. She is a member of NADE and CRLA 
as well. She co-chaired NADE’s Brain Compatible Education SPIN and received NADE’s Administrator for 
Outstanding Support of Developmental Education Award. She served as Treasurer and President for the North 
Central Reading Association (NCRA). 
Nancy M. Anter is an educational consultant and freelance writer with more than 
20 years of experience in the field of developmental education. She has taught 
reading and writing at the high school, community college, and university level 
and has offered national and local workshops and seminars on learning theory and 
composition. 
She coordinated the learning center at Wayne State University. Her work involved 
instruction for student athletes, ESL students, and the general university popula-
tion as well as individual students preparing for graduate-level exams. Because she 
witnessed student success at both ends of the academic spectrum, developmental level to graduate level, she 
understands the importance of starting instruction where students are comfortable and gradually leading them 
to higher levels.
She holds a B.A. in English from the University of Michigan and two M.A.s from Wayne State 
University—one in English education and the other in English, with an emphasis in composition theory. 
She currently serves as an adjunct faculty member at Schoolcraft College and is a member of MDEC, the 
Michigan chapter of NADE.
STUDENTS TO BE EXPERT READERS

xxii 
Preface
EXPERT READING STRATEGIES  
Fire it until you wire it!
Repetition is important because the more a group of neurons fire together, the 
more likely they are to fire together again. Research shows that the more path-
ways by which information is encoded, the easier it is to learn and remember. 
We learn what is important to us, therefore students’ brains need to be engaged 
to be in a state conducive to learning.
FIRE IT!
 Making Connections questions begin each chapter to activate 
students’ existing network of knowledge about 
chapter topics to help them make connections 
to the new material introduced in that chapter. 
See p. 99 for example questions.
 Tips from the Brain Doctor introduce 
students to some of the research behind 
learning in a very user-friendly way while 
suggesting how students may use the latest 
scientiﬁ c brain research to improve their 
learning and reading. Look for the tip boxes 
throughout the chapters.
 Activities stimulate multiple pathways toward natural learning of 
reading and learning strategies, thus reaching a greater range of diverse 
learners. Th e design of many of the activities in Science and Strategies 
is implicitly compatible with the way the brain works. Students work 
together and are led through a process of constructing understanding 
through exploration. Students self-discover before being explicitly 
taught something. While most 
educators and textbooks address 
visual, auditory, and kinesthetic 
learners, this text includes other 
pathways involved in learning, such 
as attention, emotion, frontal lobe, 
social, and more. See Activity 6A 
(p. 249) and Activity 11A (p. 496) 
for examples of activities reaching 
diverse learners. 
“Tips from the Brain Doctor: 
This aspect is the most unique 
of this textbook. The author 
links science with the reading 
process in specific, easily 
understood ways.” 
—BARBARA COX, REDLANDS 
COMMUNITY COLLEGE
“I am thrilled that a  college 
reading textbook finally has 
paired how to learn with the 
process of reading. It incor-
porates teaching the student 
about the brain and how it 
functions and then applies 
that to the process of reading. 
This is something I have tried 
to do for over twenty years. 
It’s gratifying to find a text 
that does it so well.” 
—JONELLE BEATRICE, 
YOUNGSTOWN STATE UNIVERSITY

Preface 
xxiii
SUPPORTED BY SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
WIRE IT!
 Practice with a Reading Passage allows students to solidify 
learning. Cumulative to that chapter, these practice readings allow 
students to build and strengthen their neural networks for reading 
skills over time. Repeated exposure via a variety of pathways helps 
learners “wire” the material, or learn it. Many students have never 
experienced reading as an enjoyable activity. And so, students are 
exposed to a variety of high-interest, multi-length, college-level 
readings in order to discover that they can love to read and learn. 
When students garner ideas and knowledge from reading, they are 
motivated to go on. See Chapter 5, Letting Justice Flow (p. 230) for 
a representative reading.
 Post Tests serve as a student 
learning outcome for each 
chapter, providing a cumulative 
critical reading activity for all the 
reading strategies presented. Post 
Tests encourage students to expect 
more from themselves and their 
reading course by testing their 
understanding of concepts in 
Part 1 and application of reading 
skills in Part 2. See Chapter 4 
Post Test (p. 191) for an example.
 Brain Strength Options acknowledge that we are probably all wired 
diﬀ erently. We know that every student has a diﬀ erent brain and 
learns diﬀ erently. Neuroscience indicates that some students, those 
with dyslexia or severe reading diﬃ  culty, may use diﬀ erent brain 
pathways than typical readers. Th ey need strategies to help them 
compensate. Designed for students to self-select according to their 
strengths, these chapter-culminating projects go beyond learning 
styles to address multiple pathways in learning, allowing students 
to eﬀ ectively “wire” their reading skill knowledge. Some examples: 
Create a poster. Write song lyrics. Illustrate a graphic novel. Students 
will be empowered to show you how they have wired the chapter 
content. See p. 47 for an example.
“This text approaches read-
ing organically, leading the 
student through the pro-
cess, making connections 
between what the student 
already knows and what the 
student needs to learn. The 
pedagogy is not dry or boring 
 (student’s word). It is engag-
ing and clear and, best of all, 
supportive. It addresses the 
student as someone who can 
join in on this great adventure 
and then shows the student 
how in a very personal and 
personable way.” 
—CHRISTINE TUTLEWSKI, 
UNIVERSITY OF 
WISCONSIN–PARKSIDE

xxiv 
Preface
“Within a few weeks of 
using the text, I think that I 
would be able to convince my 
students that their devel-
opmental education could 
represent an ‘overhaul’ of 
their thinking processes, a 
radical change in how they 
approach intellectual tasks. 
In other words, I would use 
this text to engage them in 
a critical look at how their 
minds work and how to 
make their thinking more 
effective.” 
—MICHAEL BOYD, ILLINOIS 
CENTRAL COLLEGE
Visual pathway is powerful!
The brain is very visual and learns best through pictures. When pictures 
are associated with information, a more powerful memory is created.
 Activities throughout the book encourage students to 
create images in order to improve memory. 
 Chapter 10 is devoted to understanding visuals in 
textbooks. Students are taught how and why to create 
images as they study their other textbooks. 
 Chapter 2 is devoted to the encoding of memory from short-term 
to long-term. Many times what appear to be reading comprehension 
problems are actually working memory problems. Science and 
Strategies may be the only book that shows students how to 
address the challenges of encoding memory. Recall of material read 
depends upon long-term memory, which must be actively encoded. 
Th erefore, how it is encoded can make a big diﬀ erence. Students 
also learn how to address working memory problems that can hinder 
their performance on tests or comprehension of what they read.
Good frontal lobes help you make good decisions.
If you engage in activities that stimulate the frontal lobes, you can actually improve 
them. The frontal lobes develop in response to experience, so if students need to 
be better critical thinkers, then they must be provided with opportunities that 
stimulate critical thought.
 Comprehension Checks are classroom 
assessment techniques embedded in 
every chapter to gauge what students 
are learning and how well. Th ese prompts also get students into 
the habit of asking themselves if they are understanding what they 
are reading—the beginnings of being an expert critical reader. 
See p. 217 and p. 234 for examples.
 Mind Maps are used throughout the book to help students organize 
their thinking and improve their critical reading skills. Mind maps at the 
start of each chapter show students how the content can be organized 
visually. Using these maps as models, students can then organize other 
material they read. Maps prove especially useful when sorting out main 
ideas, details, and arguments. 

Preface 
xxv
College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers teaches students 
how to be better learners and readers by explaining the science of learning. 
Students will understand how what they do will change their reading skills 
and change their brain for the better for all their future coursework. Students 
make the connection that reading is learning. Not only will students learn to 
read more efficiently, but they will also learn how to learn more efficiently.
 Natural Human Learning Process is explained by the pioneer of 
the research, author Rita Smilkstein, an educational psychologist 
who over the years has collected empirical evidence to show that the 
process works. In Chapter 1 and revisited in Chapter 13, students 
are introduced to the basic process by which all humans learn, 
involving six stages: 
 motivation (wanting to or having to learn something)
 practice (trying it)
 more practice (improving, gaining conﬁ dence)
 more practice (more understanding, some success)
 more skill (more success, becoming natural)
 mastery (able to teach it, able to build on it)
 Brain Connections: Self-Assessments give students an opportunity 
to visually connect their understanding of a topic to what they 
imagine their dendrites and neural networks might look like. 
Students assess their 
comprehension of 
chapter concepts 
as they progress 
through the chapter 
in relation to how 
the brain processes 
information and 
learns.
“It’s almost like being in on 
the secret of how to learn 
more effectively.” 
—SHEILAH DOBYNS, 
FULLERTON COLLEGE
HELP CHANGE STUDENTS’ BRAINS: DEVELOP LIFELONG LEARNING SKILLS
“In my classes, I discuss 
building dendrites, but this 
book actually practices this 
theory in every chapter. . . . 
This book truly practices and 
reinforces brain theory. So 
many students do not have a 
clear understanding as to how 
they learn and how impor-
tant it is to their reading and 
comprehension. This is truly 
innovative and relevant to 
present-day college students.” 
—MARLYS CORDOBA, 
COLLEGE OF THE SISKIYOUS

xxvi 
Preface
Instructor’s Manual and Test Bank
Designed for both instructors who are new to and familiar with implementing 
brain-compatible learning strategies in their courses, the Instructor’s Manual 
includes an introduction on the benefits of brain-compatible learning and 
teaching strategies that foster brain-compatible learning. Author Spotlights 
highlight individual authors’ experiences using strategies from the book and 
how instructors can successfully do the same. A detailed sample syllabus, 
classroom activities, course teaching tips, and handouts are among the many 
resources available. The Test Bank includes chapter quizzes that test students’ 
comprehension and application of skills from the chapter. Pre Tests mirror 
the book’s Post Tests and a mid-term and final exam of comprehension-based 
questions using a variety of readings to test cumulative skills are provided. For 
more information, contact your Cengage Learning sales representative.
ExamView®
Create, deliver, and customize tests and study guides (both print and online) in 
minutes with this easy-to-use assessment and tutorial system. ExamView offers 
both a Quick Test Wizard and an Online Test Wizard that guide you step by 
step through the process of creating tests, while its “what you see is what you 
get” interface allows you to see the test you are creating on the screen exactly 
as it will print or display online. For more information, contact your Cengage 
Learning sales representative.
Instructor Companion Site
The Instructor’s Companion Site includes electronic versions of the Instructor’s 
Manual and Test Bank and downloadable files to use with the ExamView® 
suite. Instructor PowerPoint presentations are available for download and 
cover chapter concepts and provide lecture ideas. A listing of additional web 
resources can also be found here. Log into the Instructor Companion Site at 
login.cengage.com. 
HELPING INSTRUCTORS TO BE EXPERT TEACHERS: INSTRUCTOR SUPPORT
HELPING STUDENTS TO BE EXPERT READERS: STUDENT SUPPORT
Aplia for Developmental Reading
Aplia for Developmental Reading is an online learning solution that improves 
comprehension and outcomes by increasing student effort and engagement. 
Students stay on top of coursework with regularly scheduled graded prac-
tice. The Grade It Now feature provides students with detailed, immediate 

Preface 
xxvii
explanations for every answer. Grades are automatically recorded in the instruc-
tor’s Aplia grade book. Aplia assignments match the language, style, and struc-
ture of this text, allowing students to seamlessly apply chapter concepts. Find 
out more at www.aplia.com/developmentalenglish.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Great appreciation and heartfelt thanks go to our team at Cengage Learning, 
whose support, insightfulness, and expertise from beginning to end was always 
given with kindness and understanding.
Marita Sermolins, Senior Development Editor: We are very grateful to 
Marita for sustaining our focus. It was not easy to keep herd on four differ-
ent authors, but she did it amazingly. Her experience and expertise guided 
and shaped our book, making it better with every revision. We are indebted 
to her for her infinite patience, straightforward honesty, and talent. 
Shani Fisher, Executive Editor: We thank Shani for her ongoing encourage-
ment of our book and for her keen understanding of our vision. We are 
grateful for her support and steadfast optimism.
Annie Todd, Director of Developmental Studies: We thankfully acknowl-
edge Annie’s belief in our project and for working so hard to make it hap-
pen. Her energy and commitment to developmental education was the 
connection that got the ball rolling. We are grateful to her for championing 
our concept. She gave us strength and energy.
Corinna Dibble, Content Project Manager: We are thankful for Corinna’s 
insight and invaluable suggestions for improving the text and activities.
Ann Courtney, Project Manager for Integra: We are deeply appreciative for 
the expertise that Ann brought to the project. She understood the impor-
tance of brain-compatible reading strategies and wonderfully handled all 
the details in making this book come alive.
Janet N. Zadina
I would also like to thank the many colleagues who supported the idea 
of this book, particularly all my colleagues who volunteered to review the 
book and are too numerous to mention. Thank you for your excitement 
and willingness to move the project forward. In addition, I would like to 
thank all of those who did submit reviews. It was heartwarming to see the 
attention to detail that you put into those reviews so that this book would 
be the best possible product. 

xxviii 
Preface
Renee Casbergue, Deborah Christie, Denise DeFelice, Marina Morbiducci, 
Gayle Nolan, Charis Sawyer, and Lillian Tunceren for all the great con-
versations about teaching and learning! You are truly amazing friends and 
colleagues! Thank you to all who have kept me going through your exper-
tise, support, and friendship: Monica Fiala, Lisa Irwin, Pat Kidder, Danny 
Meyer, Kerry Porter, McLaughlin, Victor Vazquez (RIP). You have all 
made my life and work better! For helping me unwind, thanks to the gang: 
Karen and Tom Blanchard, Jim and June Blount, Janie and Terry Clark, 
Percy Doiron and Marcia Warner, Ross and Claudine Foushee, Darlene 
and Dennis Ferrerio, and Margot and Bill King. I would like to thank my 
co-authors on this book for contributing their unique viewpoints. Because 
we don’t agree on everything, the diversity of viewpoints has allowed us to 
create a book that can appeal to a diverse audience. While I did not always 
prevail, the discussions provided insight. In the end, we were able to create 
a book with multiple viewpoints and options.
A special thank you to my family: Larry and Joelan Nay, Jeff, Kathie, Alex, 
and Jason Nay, and my “adopted” family, Anne and Steve Capes! James E. 
Zadina, my husband and friend, thank you for supporting me in many 
ways, including never complaining when I travel the world to work with 
colleagues or to learn more and for putting up with me during the writing 
of this book! 
Writing the book has been a journey, almost archetypal, and I have learned 
a great deal from both the vistas and the valleys. I am grateful to all of you 
who have been with me on this path.
Rita Smilkstein
There is no way I could have contributed to this book without the help of 
many wonderful people. First and foremost, my students over the 30 and 
more years I have been teaching, who taught me invaluable lessons about 
learning and teaching. Also thanks to my family and friends for their inspi-
ration, support, and love, my daughters Jessica Dodge, Susanna Burney, 
Diana Phipps, and Georgia Franklin; grandkids Rome Davis, Laurel 
Dodge, Jesse and Isabella Franklin; friends Dale Chase, Dianne Hulscher, 
Edith Clarke, Dan Bockman (RIP), and especially Richard Blum, who was 
with me every step of the way.
I also want to acknowledge and express the deepest respect for—and thanks 
to—my excellent co-authors, Nancy Anter, Deborah Daiek, and Janet Nay 
Zadina, who were supportive, interactive, and helpful to the highest level of 

Preface 
xxix
professionalism and friendship throughout our work together from begin-
ning to end.
Deborah B. Daiek
I would like to thank my husband, Karl, my sons, David, Andy, and Ben, 
and my daughters-in-law, Erin and Lynde, for working around my intense 
schedule. Their love and patience is treasured. I want to thank my grand-
children, the future readers in our family: Ella, Logan, Luke, and Dillan 
for giving G-Ma fuel. I would like to express my gratitude to my MDEC, 
NADE, and Schoolcraft College colleagues for their encouragement and 
support. I would also like to thank all of the students who worked with me 
and made contributions to our book: Kalthoum Bayz, Mee Sook Choo, 
Matt Cornett, Brooke Frizzell, Brent Jacobsen, Suzanne Lenhardt, Tara 
Leach, Joseph Wafer, and Nathan Wagner; and to those who will contrib-
ute to the world of reading after reading our book. Special thanks in loving 
memory of my mother, Jacqueline R. Brooks, whose enthusiastic words, 
“How’s the book coming?” helped sustain the journey.
Nancy M. Anter
I would like to thank the other authors on this project for their expertise 
and effort toward making this book happen. Thanks are also due to the 
students who shared their college stories with us, especially Erin Bishop, 
Preston Tindall, Niki Hudson, Serja Goram, Sowmya Rasa, Joselyn Evans, 
Elise Guido, and Alex Manion. Many others offered detailed feedback 
on the manuscript, practical advice, and abundant prayers, most nota-
bly Mary Pilat, Katherine Tombolesi, Clyde Manion, Thomas Manion, 
Mary O’Dowd, Laura Srinivasan, Suzy Stockmann, Helen Roarty, Lynette 
Mikula, and Gwyn Makara. To them I am deeply indebted. I am grateful 
for the support of my children, Thomas and Julia, who provided encourage-
ment and humor when I needed it the most. I especially would like to thank 
my husband, Mark Anter, to whom this work is dedicated.
To our reviewers who enthusiastically supported us and provided valuable 
feedback that helped to shape this book into what you currently hold in your 
hands, a very grateful thank you:
Phillis Aaberg, University of Central Missouri
Nicole Aitken, Illinois Central College
James Andersen, Springfield Technical 
Community College
Bonnie Arnett, Washtenaw Community College
Kristi Barker, South Plains College
Melissa Barrett, Portland Community College
Jonelle Beatrice, Youngstown State University

xxx 
Preface
Brenda Boshela, Cuyahoga Community College
Michael Boyd, Illinois Central College
Robyn Browder, Tidewater Community College
Carol Bustamante, Oakton Community College
Eileen Cain, Leeward Community College
David Chase, Raritan Valley Community College
Sandra Chumchal, Blinn College
Marlys Cordoba, College of the Siskiyous
Barbara Cox, Redlands Community College
Julie Damerell, Monroe Community College
Sherry Dilley, Minneapolis Community and 
Technical College
Luciana Diniz, Portland Community College
Sheilah Dobyns, Fullerton College
Kimberley Donnelly, College of Southern 
Maryland
Mary Dubbe, Thomas Nelson Community 
College
Juliet Dunphy, Concordia University
La Tonya Dyett, Community College of 
Baltimore County
Grant Eckstein, Brigham Young University
Teri Eckhoff, Hutchinson Community College
Marie Eckstrom, Rio Hondo College
Courtney Edwards, Red Rocks Community 
College
Janell Edwards, Brookhaven College
David Elias, Eastern Kentucky University
Priscilla Faucette, University of Hawaii at Manoa
Gail Fensom, University of New Hampshire at 
Manchester
Suzanne Franklin, Johnson County Community 
College
John French, Cape Cod Community College
Sally Gabb, Bristol Community College
Amy Garcia, Fullerton College
Janice Gardner, Peninsula College
Cathryn Jeffers-Goodwine, St. Clair County 
Community College
Geraldine Gough, Brevard Community College
Linda Gubbe, The University of Toledo
Sharon Hayes, Community College of Baltimore 
County
Beverly J. Hearn, University of Tennessee
Janice Hill, Moraine Valley Community College
Amye Howell, Copiah-Lincoln Community 
College
Judy Hubble, Austin Community College
Dianne Ida, Kapiolani Community College
Susie Johnston, Tyler Junior College
Sandra Jones, Community College of Baltimore 
County
Sally Keeton, Johnson County Community 
College
Sandra Kelley, Leeward Community College
Susan B. Larson, Portland Community College
Debra Lee, Nash Community College
Erlinda Legaspi, City College of San Francisco
Levia Loftus, College of Lake County
Naomi Ludman, Southwestern Michigan College
Gail Malone, South Plains College
Teresa Massey, Chemeketa Community College
Brook Mayo, Asheville-Buncombe Technical 
Community College
James McNamara, Alverno College
Elizabeth Patterson Melton, Mississippi Delta 
Community College
Dorothy Minor, Tulsa Community College
Betty Moffitt, Paris Junior College
Dan Moody, Southwestern College
Vicki Moulson, College of the Albemarle
Nancy Parker, Community College of Baltimore 
County
Rick Richards, St. Petersburg College
Stephen Rizzo, Bevill State Community College
Amelia Rodriguez (Wilson), Mesa Community 
College
Kathryn Ryder, Broome Community College

Preface 
xxxi
Dianna Sand, Delaware County Community 
College
Charis Sawyer, Johnson County Community 
College
Lynn Strong, Pulaski Technical College
Iris Strunc, Northwest Florida State College
Linda Talbert, Schoolcraft College
Bonny Tibbitts, American English Institute, 
University of Oregon
Christine Tutlewski, University of 
Wisconsin-Parkside
Shari Waldrop, Navarro College
Danhua Wang, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
Phyllis Watson, American River College
Rochelle Watson, Monroe Community College
Kimberly Whalen, Ozarks Technical Community 
College
Nicole Williams, Community College of 
Baltimore County
Victoria Williams, St. Cloud State University
Patricia Windon, St. Petersburg College
Barbara Wolfe, University of Hartford
Lynda Wolverton, Polk State College
Cynthia VanGieson, Baker College of Jackson
Chris Yockey, Mitchell Community College
Lynne Zimmer, North Central Michigan College

Chapter 1
Making Brain Connections to Become an Expert Reader
Chapter Introduction
1-1 Why Study Reading?
1-2 What is Reading?
1-2a Critical Reading and Metacognition
1-2b Reading is an Active Process
1-3 Why You are Already a Natural Learner: Growing Dendrites
1-3a Synapses
1-4 The Natural Human Learning Process (NHLP)
1-5 Reading with Concentration
1-5a Managing Your Attention
1-5b Fighting Distracters
1-6 Learning is State Dependent
1-6a Factors that Affect State
1-7 Habits to Enhance Your Reading
1-8 Chapter Review
1-8a Practice with a Reading Passage
1-8b Chapter Summary
1-8c Post Test
1-8d  Brain Strength Options
Chapter Introduction
“The worth of a book is to be measured by what you can carry away from it.”
— James Bryce

Making Connections
To learn something new, you need to
connect it to something you already know.
Making this connection helps you learn the
new idea or material more naturally and
easily. Each chapter of this book contains
Making Connections questions to “warm up
your brain,” to activate your prior
knowledge, to make learning easier, and
also to identify things you may not know
Student to Student
Terry Clark
A tool and die skilled tradesman for an automotive company, a realtor, a
real estate developer, an artist-mural painter, a remodeling designer and
craftsman, and a poet
Courtesy of Terry Clark
When I was in school, it killed me to sit and read the books they make you read. I
would do anything I could do to avoid reading the book. It was like taking a
beating to read it. Then, at test time, I suffered. When you get out in life, you have
to be more focused than in class. You can't just say, “I'm not good at this.” You
need to focus on something that attracts your interest. Once a person finds their
focus in life, they are going to read about it.
No one at a young age knows their strengths. Give yourself time to find your
strengths. My advice is don't feel stupid. The “want to's” help you find your
strengths. And remember, somewhere along the line, no matter what you do, you
are going to have to read the directions.
Now I enjoy reading tax codes; they interest me because I have rental property.
You must read well to understand the system or problem. Now I like to read
about what is going on—meaningful, up-to-date information. If I am really
interested, I could sit down and read for the better part of a day. Looking back, if I
would have realized how much it would mean to me later in life, I would have
taken more interest in reading.

but will learn in the chapter.
What does it mean to pay attention?
What do you do differently when you
are paying careful attention as
compared with when you are not?
1.
How do you know when you are
paying attention? What signals does
your body send you? How else do you
know? Explain.
2.
Describe a time when paying
attention paid off. How were you
using your mind at that time?
3.
How do you think a person could
improve the ability to pay attention?
4.
List three things you know about how
the brain learns.
5.
Describe the reading process as you
understand it.
6.
What is the difference between being
active and being passive? Give
examples of being active and being
passive using the example of being in
a car.
7.

© Cengage Learning
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
On the scale, with 1 meaning nothing and 6 meaning a great deal, circle the
number for how much you understand right now about how the brain
learns.
1-1 Why Study Reading?
Never have Reading and Thinking Been so Important. This is the age of information. In
today's job market, the type of job you secure will be based on how well you can read
and apply new information—how well you learn. Being an effective reader will give you
the upper hand. Your future employer will want to know that you are able to locate and
access reliable sources of information, sort through a lot of details, and apply what you
have read. And employers will not want you to assume that everything you read is true!
The goal of this book is to focus on reading by building on your strengths. Your greatest
strengths are your brain and your natural-born ability to learn. This book teaches you
how to optimize your reading and learning.
Activity 1A
Take a Reading Survey
Check your present reading skills and strategies by completing the following
survey. Read each statement and respond based on your current reading habits.
Be honest with yourself. This is a way to help you discover how well you are able
to apply strategies. Write Y if the statement correctly describes you or what you

currently do or N if it does not. Each statement will be addressed in this textbook.
In Chapter 13, you will be asked to complete this same survey. Ideally, as an
expert reader, you will have changed some of your responses.
 I make every attempt to learn the words I don't
understand while reading. (See Chapter 3.)
1.
 I create questions to ask myself before I begin to
read a textbook chapter. (See Chapters 4 and 8.)
2.
 When I decide to read a chapter, I start at the
beginning and read straight through, often forgetting most of what I read.
(See Chapters 1, 4, and 8.)
3.
 I highlight main ideas consistently so that I can
review the key points of a chapter easily. (See Chapters 8 and 9.)
4.
 Thinking at different levels has nothing to do with
reading at different levels. (See Chapter 13.)
5.
 I don't make connections between what I know
and new reading material. (See Chapter 1.)
6.
 When I detect an argument in my reading
assignment, I locate and evaluate the reasons supporting it. (See Chapter
11.)
7.
 Detecting fallacies helps me understand authors'
conclusions more effectively. (See Chapter 12.)
8.
 I am always able to identify the main ideas of
textbooks. (See Chapters 4, 5, and 6.)
9.
 Sticking to a schedule seems too rigid for me. I'm
too spontaneous to stick to a regular reading plan. (See Chapter 1.)
10.
 When I read, I try to locate organizational clue
words. (See Chapter 7.)
11.
 Having a good attitude is related to how well I
read. (See Chapters 1 and 2.)
12.
 It is important to actually say to myself that I
intend to remember specific information in my textbook chapters. (See
Chapter 2.)
13.
 Using authors' patterns of organization is not an
important reading skill. It is more of a writing skill. (See Chapter 7.)
14.
 I create visuals for my most challenging textbook
information. I use different visuals based on the type of information
15.

presented. (See Chapter 10.)
 Tracking my concentration won't improve my
ability to read. (See Chapter 1.)
16.
 I always look for clue words to help me gain
deeper insight into the author's meaning. (See Chapters 7, 8, 9, and 13.)
17.
 I often try to create a metaphor to help me
remember textbook information. Making comparisons makes recall easier.
(See Chapters 2 and 6.)
18.
 I give up on trying to figure new information out. It
is a waste of my time. (See Chapters 6 and 7.)
19.
 I use specific colors to identify main ideas and
supporting details when marking my textbooks. (See Chapter 9.)
20.
To calculate your score, your instructor will provide you with the answers of an
expert reader. For every answer you have that matches that of an expert reader,
give yourself 5 points.
Your Score: 
100–95
Outstanding
Outstanding application of critical
reading and thinking strategies.
90–85 Above
Average
Above average application of critical
reading strategies.
80–75 Average
Additional knowledge of skills and
strategies will strengthen your ability
to read and think more eﬀectively.
70–65
Marginally
Adequate
You may have diﬃculty getting the
most out of your textbooks.
Additional knowledge of skills and
strategies will strengthen your ability
to read and think more eﬀectively.
60 and below
Needs Work
You will beneﬁt from learning and
applying the strategies learned in this
course. Not only will the strategies
help you academically, but they will
also beneﬁt you in the world of work.

Knowledge is power. The more you read, the more you know. And the ability to
use information in a meaningful way will always give you an advantage.
1-2 What is Reading?
Reading is Not Normal! Yes, you read that sentence correctly. Reading is a skill learned
late in human history. It is not as old as music or drawing skills. There is no single area in
the brain devoted to reading. Instead, parts of the brain designed for other tasks are used
to read. Reading does not come naturally, though learning does. Reading requires skills
that have to be learned, and college-level reading requires additional skills.
In school you are expected to read and understand what you read. But what does it mean
to “read” a textbook? What exactly is reading? Have you ever thought about how you'd
define reading? Probably not. It's just something you do. Take a few minutes to think
about how you would define reading, and write down your definition here.
You will probably be surprised to see that there is more than one way to define reading.
Reading really involves a lot of activities. Reading is complicated, and if you don't know
any reading strategies, such as vocabulary development, locating main ideas and details,
identifying implied main ideas, and textbook marking, college reading will be especially
challenging. If you have had difficulty with reading, you are not alone. Read your
definition of reading and see if it includes any of the following.
Reading is:
learning
intentional (for a purpose)
an active process (processes)
a task that requires focus and concentration
contextual (authors use clues to help readers understand information)
a two-way communication between an author and the reader
a two-way communication using written language or symbols
a medium or a way for authors to share information
understanding and interpreting

thinking and reflecting
making connections to previous experiences and learning
Did your definition include one or more of the items listed? All of the listed items are
correct definitions of reading. It is a complicated process. Did you ever think about
textbook reading as being a two-way communication between an author and the reader?
Did you know that when you read well, you bring important information you have to the
author's ideas? The author talks to you with words on the page and you add to this
conversation with information you know on the subject.
olly/Shutterstock.com
It is equally important to know what reading is not. Just looking at words is not reading.
Understanding is crucial. If you do not understand what you read, you will not learn or
remember the information. Without understanding, you are just looking. For example,
you can look at the words and characters in Russian, German, Greek, or Chinese books,
but you will not be able to read those books unless you are familiar with and understand
those languages. Read this sentence from a book about grammar: “Appositives are
typically non-restrictive noun phrases that have the same references as the preceding
noun phrases.”
 Do you understand what that means? If not, what would you have to
do to be able to understand it? The same is true when reading college textbooks or any
written information using the language of specific disciplines or subjects, like the
language used by the grammarian in the quote and by other experts, such as
mathematicians, biologists, historians, or engineers.
1-2a Critical Reading and Metacognition
Critical Reading (a complex thinking technique that involves discovering and taking
apart an author's meaning, evaluating the author's meaning based on established
standards, and incorporating the meaning into the ideas you already know) is a complex
thinking technique that involves discovering and taking apart an author's meaning,
evaluating the author's meanings based on established standards, and incorporating the
meaning into the ideas you already know. Critical reading, as required for textbooks and
other college reading material, is more complicated than reading done for pleasure,

which is why college reading is more difficult and takes more time than pleasure
reading. Critical reading goes beyond basic understanding and requires more strategies,
such as:
understanding an author's ideas even if they are not stated directly
recognizing patterns of organization in what you read
using a questioning technique before, during, and after you read
prioritizing an author's ideas
translating an author's ideas into visuals
identifying and evaluating an author's arguments
creating new ideas using an author's ideas
All of these strategies can, and should, be used to get more out of your college reading.
This textbook offers clear explanations and lots of practice with these essential critical
reading strategies.
As you master the critical reading strategies presented in this book, apply them to the
textbooks you are reading this semester. To purposely apply reading strategies that work
involves metacognition. Metacognition (thinking about how you think; an awareness of
your own knowledge and an ability to monitor and control your learning) is thinking
about how you think. It is an awareness of your own knowledge and your ability to
monitor and control your learning. Have you ever answered your cell phone in a
crowded area with lots of noise? You most likely covered one ear with your hand while
you listened to the call. You were aware that noise makes a phone call difficult to hear
and you knew that blocking one ear helped cut down on the noise. You knew how to
listen more effectively and created a strategy to help you. You actually used
metacognition.
With the strategies presented in this book, you can take control over your learning by
having a system for making sense of your textbook. Academic success is about
perseverance—to keep going in spite of obstacles, discouragement, or difficulty—as well
as actively engaging in your learning and maintaining a positive attitude. It is knowing
what skills to apply and how and when to apply them.
Activity 1B
Determine who is Reading
Read the paragraph below, and then answer the following questions using
complete sentences. Be specific in your answer.
A volunteer community reader has been assigned to record a history chapter for a blind
student. The volunteer pronounces all of the words correctly. He says that it is a
challenging (monotonous) job, so he tries to keep his mind busy as he speaks into the
recorder. He makes mental to-do lists or thinks about the next book that has to be

recorded. When the blind student plays the recording of the history chapter, she stops it
from time to time to summarize what she has heard. She identifies key points before
continuing to play more of the recording, recording her own notes into a second tape
recorder.
Source: Adapted from Smith, Frank. Reading Without Nonsense. New York: Teacher's
College Columbia University, 1985, pp. 48-49.
Is the volunteer reading? Explain your answer.
1.
Is the blind student reading? Explain your answer.
2.
1-2b Reading is an Active Process
Reading is an active process that depends on both an author's ability to communicate
meaning using words and your ability to create meaning from those words. Successful
reading requires you to constantly connect what you already know to what the author
has written. So, if you don't understand the words the writer uses, it is unlikely that you
will be able to remember much, if anything, that you read. The brain cannot remember
what it does not understand.
Neuropsychologist Adele Diamond offers a good analogy for active reading. To read well,
you need to be the “driver” of the process. She asks, “Who remembers a path to a
destination better, the driver or the passengers?” The driver, of course. The driver is
actively engaged in the activity and is acutely aware of what is going on around him. He
remembers details like what streets to turn on and what the speed limits are, and he
keeps in mind his main idea—the final destination. The passengers, on the other hand,
could pay attention to the road, but they could also text their friends, listen to music, and
even take a nap. The passengers are involved in the driving experience, but for the most
part, they are along for the ride, passively seeing what is around them. The driver is
actively involved, purposefully making choices about what to do, where to go, and what
information to concentrate on.
To read well, you need to be active in your reading experience. Like a driver of a car, an
active reader is purposefully engaged in the reading process. An active reader focuses
attention on the words on the page just like the driver keeps eyes on the road. He reads
carefully to understand the author, blocking out any distractions. An active reader slows
his reading speed if an author's meaning is unclear. An active reader sometimes rereads
passages and occasionally, looks up unfamiliar words. An active reader pauses to recall

any information he already knows on the subject and tries to relate it to what he is
reading. An active reader constantly monitors comprehension. If he becomes passive in
his reading, he may read each word but not carefully monitor his understanding. Like
the passenger of a car, he may shift his focus from one thing to another. He may
daydream. He may even fall asleep. Active reading is always better than passive reading.
Active reading (applying strategies to stay engaged with text and to keep thinking about
the information) requires that you purposely do something with the reading material to
help you remember it. Several examples of active reading strategies that will be
addressed in this book include:
previewing all reading assignments so that you signal your brain what to look for
developing questions so that you can answer them as you read
connecting all new information to what you already know
outlining/mapping/drawing your interpretation of the information to demonstrate
your understanding
using pictures, headings, subheadings, and titles to help you make sense of the new
information and organize what you are learning
Comprehension Check
What should you do to truly understand what you read?
How is looking at words different from reading words?
Activity 1C
Identify Active and Passive Reading Strategies
Decide whether each of the following activities is passive or active by writing P
next to the passive activities and A next to those you think are active.
 Reading a textbook chapter from the beginning to
end, straight through
1.
 Writing down everything your professor says
during a lecture
2.
 Rewriting your lecture notes
3.
 Cramming for an exam the night before
4.
 Previewing each chapter and developing questions
5.

 Making a to-do list of weekend activities during a
lecture
6.
 Summarizing what you have just read and then
creating a mind map
7.
 Testing yourself on the information in your book
8.
 Giving a mini-lecture of the chapter information to
an empty room
9.
 Skipping the pictures and charts in the textbook
chapter because you don't have time
10.
Now, truthfully answer the following questions. Honest answers will help you
assess what kind of reader you are and what you need to do to become an expert
reader.
How do you currently try to stay active during lectures and when you read
a textbook chapter?
11.
Do you believe that you are currently an active or passive reader?
12.
Which subjects do you read more actively? Why?
13.
Which subjects do you read more passively? Why?
14.
For each item that you labeled as passive in the first set of questions,
change the language in the statement so that it becomes an active reading
strategy.
15.

1-3 Why You are Already a Natural Learner: Growing Dendrites
Recently Scientists Discovered Something New and amazing about the brain: it continues
to change throughout your life as a result of what you do. The brain you have today is
not the one you were born with. Even before you were born, your brain began shaping
itself to your own environment. It started molding itself according to the early sounds
you heard. After you were born, all of your experiences further shaped your brain. This
ability of the brain to change as a result of experience is called plasticity because, like
plastic, the brain can be molded or shaped. This textbook is going to show you how you
can change your brain and become a better learner to learn faster and more effectively.
Think of a tree in winter with many bare branches and twigs (Figure 1.1). This is what our
brain cells, called neurons (brain cells) , look like after we have learned something. Each
brain cell has one trunk (like a tree trunk), called an axon (the usually long process of a
nerve fiber that generally conducts impulses away from the body of the nerve cell) . Also
like trees, brain cells have many branches and twigs. Finally, like trees, our brain cells
have many roots, called terminals (endings by which axons make synaptic contacts with
other nerve cells) on the axon.
Figure 1.1
A Brain Cell (Neuron) Looks Like this Tree
z0w/Shutterstock.com
Figure 1.2 is an artist's drawing of two large brain cells (neurons) with many other
neurons behind them. As you can see, the neurons in this figure look a little like trees;
the “roots” of the big neuron at the top are touching, connecting to the “branches” or
“twigs” of the big neuron next to it. Where neurons connect is called a synapse. Look at
all the neurons in the background, and notice that they are also connecting to one
another to form a network of neurons (a neural network). Scientists call the branches
and twigs that grow from a neuron dendrites (a short branched extension of a nerve cell,
along which impulses received from other cells at synapses are transmitted to the cell
body) , which, in fact, means “tree-like.”
Figure 1.2
Brain Cells Connect to form a Neural Network

BSIP/UIG Via Getty Images
As you work with, experience, explore, examine, think about, try to figure out, and
practice a specific skill or concept, brain cells (neurons) in your brain grow new
branches and twigs (dendrites) that connect that new knowledge, concept, or skill (Figure
1.3). The more we know, the more we grow. The more we grow, the more we know.
Figure 1.3
Growing Dendrites = Learning
Rita Smilkstein, We're Born to Learn: Using the Brain's Natural Learning Process to Create Today's Curriculum, 2nd ed.,
Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press, 2011, p.53
The neuron at the right in Figure 1.3 is an illustration to represent how dendrites might
grow before and after learning. The more you think about, work with, and practice a
specific new skill, concept, or area of knowledge, the more the dendrites can grow.

1-3a Synapses
Synapses (a structure that permits a neuron to pass an electrical signal to another brain
cell) Connect Related neurons to create a neural network, which is what we have
practiced, learned, and know about a skill or area of knowledge (Figure 1.4). Learning
involves growing dendrites, connecting them at related synapses, and constructing
stable neural networks.
Figure 1.4
A Neural Network of Four Neurons
Source: This is a drawing by Jessica Dodge, used with permission for RS's book We're Born to Learn: Using the Brain's
Natural Learning Process to Create Today's Curriculum (2nd. ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
The more we work on, think about, and practice a specific skill or area of knowledge, a
larger, thicker neural network of specific connected neurons will grow. The neural
network in Figure 1.4 shows four neurons connecting at synapses. It is important to
know how the synapses work because synapses are how our brain connects related
neurons to create neural networks. The more we know and learn, the larger, fuller, and
thicker that network will become.
Synapses and Emotions
When your synapses work well, your neurons are able to connect, which is what makes

it possible for you to remember and use the knowledge and skill that you have learned.
Synapses are affected by emotions, either helping them work well or shutting them
down, so you need to know how to control your emotions so that your synapses will
work well. When brains are learning, feel-good chemicals cause you to feel pleasure,
which may make you feel confident that you can accomplish something or learn
something. You feel good about what you are doing. Your brain does this all on its own,
and you should say, “Thank you, brain!”
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Did you know that intending to do something affects the brain? How can this help
you? Research has shown that when students are given an assignment in class, if
they write down when and where they intend to do it, they are more successful
in completing it. Take advantage of this power. Every time you are given an
assignment, write down when and where you intend to do it. Try it and see for
yourself!
On the other hand, too much anxiety or stress creates chemicals that make thinking
harder. Now you can't think or remember or learn. You need to say to your brain, “I just
need to learn how to do this. It takes time and practice to grow the new dendrites and
neural networks for this new knowledge and skill, but I can do it.” Calmer, more positive
emotions can give you the confidence to be able to learn—and you will be able to learn.
Think of learning as challenging and not stressful.
Activity 1D
Describe a Learning Experience
Think back to a time when you were highly stressed as you tried to read
something new. What were your specific struggles? Did you comprehend it in the
end? If you did, what did you do to understand it? Describe that learning
experience.
Comprehension Check

How can you “grow” new knowledge?
How and why does the brain change when you are learning?
1-4 The Natural Human Learning Process (NHLP)
Can You Guess how Many Neurons you have in your brain? Brain scientists say that the
human brain has one or two hundred billion nerve cells (neurons) and approximately 40
quadrillion connections (synapses) among them. They say this makes the human brain,
which is a three-pound, soft, squishy organ, “the most complex object in the universe.”
The human brain, through human history, has created and made everything human
beings have ever invented and produced. Fortunately, you do not need to know about all
the vast complexities of the brain to learn well. You can learn some things about your
brain that will help you be a more confident, successful learner and creator. Your brain
was born to learn; therefore, you are a natural-born learner. It is important to know
these major points about learning:
Your brain was born to learn, loves to learn, and knows how to learn.
1.
You learn what you practice.
Practice is making mistakes, correcting mistakes, learning from them, and
trying over, again and again.
Making and learning from mistakes are a natural and necessary part of
learning.
2.
You learn what you practice because, when you are practicing, your brain grows
new fibers (dendrites) and connects them (at synapses) into neural networks.
3.
Learning takes time because your brain needs time to grow and connect dendrites,
synapses, and neural networks.
4.
If you don't use what you learn, you can lose the new learning. Newly formed
dendrites, synapses, and neural networks can begin to disappear if you don't use
them—if you don't practice or use what you have learned. They just get absorbed
into the brain tissue and are not stabilized.
5.
Your emotions affect your brain's ability to learn, think, and remember.
Self-doubt, fear, and other negative emotions can prevent your brain from
6.

learning, thinking, and remembering.
Confidence and interest help your brain learn, think, and remember.
Activity 1E
See the NHLP in Action
Think of something you learned to do well outside of school. It could be a sport, a
hobby, an art, driving a car, something around the house, a people skill, maybe
something you did when you were younger but don't do anymore. Think back to
before you knew how to do it. Then think how you went from there to knowing
how to do it. Write down some notes about how you got from not knowing how to
do it to being good at it—maybe not the world's greatest expert, but pretty good.
If directed by your instructor, get together with a few others in your class,
or complete the process by taking notes. Describe the thing you are good at.
Then, if possible, share and compare in the group how everyone learned his
or her thing.
1.
Now share and compare with the whole class. What happened at the very
beginning of learning your new thing? Your instructor will record your
answers. This will be Stage 1.
2.
Then what happened next? Share and compare; then your instructor will
record your answers. This will be Stage 2.
3.
Then what happened next? Share and compare; your instructor will record
your answers. This will be Stage 3.
4.
Keep answering what happened next until there are no more stages to
report.
5.
Did you all learn your different things pretty much this same way? Maybe not
every word in this exact order—but pretty much in a similar way? More than
10,000 people have said they learned this same way. So just remember that
learning takes time and practice.
Research with more than 10,000 students and teachers across subjects, ethnicities,
genders, ages, and levels of education has found, thanks to our amazing brain, that there
is a natural human sequence of stages of learning:
motivation (wanting to or having to learn something)
1.
practice (trying it)
2.
more practice (improving, gaining confidence)
3.
more practice (more understanding, some success)
4.

more skill (more success, becoming natural)
5.
mastery (able to teach it, able to build on it)
6.
This is the natural human learning process (NHLP) (research that shows everyone
learns by the same process) . This research has found that every group, without
exception, reports three to six stages. When fewer stages are reported, the middle stages
usually have been reported as one or two stages of practice and/or the last stages have
been reported as one stage of skillfulness, mastery, and teaching. Activity 1E proves to
those who do it that they are successful, natural learners. In fact, after doing this activity,
you have just proven that you know how to learn, that you have a brain that knows how
to learn, and that you are a natural-born learner.
Table 1.1 shows the results of three NHLP research activities, following the steps you
used in Activity 1E. Two were done with students in community college classes and the
other with a group of college teachers. In each box is the list of the experiences and
descriptions exactly as the individuals in the group reported their experiences. Notice
the similar experiences the different groups reported even though some of the similar
experiences are not at the same stage for each group.
Table 1.1
Natural Human Learning Process Research Results
Stage
Community
College
Students
—Washington
Community
College Students
—North Carolina
College Teachers
—Arizona
1.
Motivation
failed, afraid
and
uncomfortable,
frustrated, want
to quit, ﬁlled
with wonder,
inspired
terrible at it,
excited, scared of
failing, mistakes,
curiosity, nervous,
carefree, hurt,
practice a lot,
watched it, had
to trust someone,
give it all you've
got, picture it in
your head, listen
observe, didn't
have the
aptitude, had
motivation and a
desire to learn,
cried and got
mad and got
stubborn, made
a lot of mistakes,
it was very
physically
painful, there is
anxiety, was
excited
2. Practice
practice, had
someone teach
me, got more
detailed, had
encouragement
from other
people, it
becomes more
comfortable,
made mistakes,
trial and error,
action, learn it,
practice, taking a
class, asking
questions,
frustration,
asking somebody
who knows how
to do it, anxious,
got better, do it,
practice, asked
for help, read
about it, studied,
learned from
mistakes, took
directions from
others

Stage
Community
College
Students
—Washington
Community
College Students
—North Carolina
College Teachers
—Arizona
really start to
go through it
encouragement
3. More
Practice
moved to more
complex,
practice, notice
you're getting
better,
conﬁdence,
observation,
appreciation,
show someone
else how to do
it, really enjoy
doing it,
becomes natural
got good at it,
practice, evaluate
your progress,
conﬁdent,
persistence,
reﬁne,
concentrate,
input from peers
started having
small successes,
feeling satisﬁed,
my conﬁdence
increased, tried
again,
motivation,
received
compliments,
gaining
self-conﬁdence
4. More
Practice
keep evolving,
there's always
more to learn,
other
applications for
it, becomes
second nature
success, you
succeed,
independent, able
to help others
learn, make
money, win, have
fun, compete,
pride, ﬁnd your
career
got more daring,
started winning,
more
compliments,
changed
technique, got
more creative,
started teaching
others, entered
contests,
rewards, started
having fun,
realized there
was more to
learn
5. More
Skill
might move on
to other
activities,
performing
continue, expand,
teach, become an
expert, help
others, learn
something new,
higher level of
diﬃculty
went back to
stage 1 but at a
diﬀerent level,
started selling
my work
6. Mastery
mastery, teach
somebody else
all the ones
before, stop, start
learning
something else,
parallel
applications,
celebrate, repeat
all the stages
teaching others

Stage
Community
College
Students
—Washington
Community
College Students
—North Carolina
College Teachers
—Arizona
again
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw on the brain cell body provided here the amount and length of dendrites
(tree-like branches and twigs) to represent how well you understand the section
“The Natural Human Learning Process (NHLP).” If you don't understand it very
well, draw only a few short dendrites. Then, read the section again and draw
more dendrites to represent your learning progress. How many dendrites you
draw represents how well you think you learned the material. You can use this
method to keep track of your progress as you read this book.
1-5 Reading with Concentration
To Read Well, You Need to Read with Concentration, which is focusing on what you are
reading. Do you ever spend a couple of hours reading only to find that you cannot
remember most of what you have read? If you are unable to concentrate, you won't
remember much of what you read. Engaging with new material—discussing it, using it,
or relating it to what you already know—is a very good strategy for concentrating.
Research is clear that you must concentrate on doing something with the new
information you are reading in order to learn, understand, and remember it. The more
you can actively engage with new information, the more likely you will be able to
remember it.

1-5a Managing Your Attention
If You Could set up a situation where your learning would be guaranteed, would you do
it? If you knew the time you spent studying would result in real knowledge that would
help you do better on exams, would you spend the time? Learning about attention and
concentration cannot be over-emphasized. Many students who struggle with reading
assignments do so because they have trouble staying focused. You can grow dendrites
and create neural networks, which means that certain neural processes take over more
“real estate” or space in the brain. For example, guitar players use their thumb a lot, so
the part of the brain that is devoted to the thumb actually grows larger in guitar players'
brains. And when you pay attention, there is even more change than what is created
simply by usage alone.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
The scientific term for the type of concentration you need in school is selective
attention. Managing your attention is managing your concentration and focus.
This is a skill that you can get better at, and it is essential to being an effective
reader and learner. If you cannot manage your attention, you will have difficulty
in school and on the job.
Consider this research study scientists conducted with monkeys: Scientists had two
kinds of sensory input going into the monkeys at the same time. One input was music,
which goes to the auditory cortex in the brain, the part that enables you to hear. The
second input was to make the monkeys' fingers move by hooking up wires so that pulling
on the wires made the fingers move, much like a puppet. As you learned earlier, if you
use a part of your body repeatedly, it makes a difference in the brain. So researchers
expected two areas of the brain to get larger: the auditory part where the music was
processed and the sensorimotor part where finger movements are registered in the
brain. Now comes the important step: Using juice as a reward, scientists trained half of
the monkeys to pay attention to the music and the other half to pay attention to their
finger movements. Remember, both sound and movement are taking place for all the
monkeys at the same time, but the monkeys are paying attention to either the sound or

the movement. The results were shocking! It turns out that if the monkeys paid attention
to the sound only, the auditory cortex got bigger but not the finger area even though
using the fingers would normally affect the brain. However, if they paid attention to the
finger movements and not the sound, the finger area got bigger but not the auditory
area. In other words, whatever they focused on and paid attention to, those sections of
their brains got bigger.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Studying halfheartedly, without focused attention, wastes your time. A shorter
time of focused attention will probably pay bigger results. The tip? Turn off the
TV, the iPhone, and the Internet, and pay attention. You want to create these
positive brain changes, and now that you know more about how, you have the
power to do so!
So what does that tell you? It may not be enough just to do something or go through the
motions. You need to direct the brain's attention to the task. Both experience and
attention cause the physical structure of the brain to change. Research indicates that
just firing the brain, sending stimuli, even repeatedly, is necessary, but perhaps not
sufficient. To wire the information in the brain seems to require attention. As Robert
Leamnson, a learning expert, says, “There is a biological basis for the different effects of
just reading, and reading with attention. If incoming stimuli are to have a lasting effect,
they must be accompanied by interest.” It turns out that paying attention with interest
may be one of the most important keys to your success in school. This applies greatly to
reading.
Comprehension Check
Think of the monkey research study just described in terms of human
behavior. Why is listening to your iPod while studying discouraged?
What happens in the brain when you study while doing something
else?

Activity 1F
Learn about Yourself
For each statement, score yourself as honestly as you can from 1 (if you strongly
disagree) to 7 (if you strongly agree). A rating of 4 is neutral.
Strongly Disagree
Neutral
Strongly Agree
 *It is easy for me to concentrate on my activities.
1.
 Frequently when I am working I find myself worrying
about other things.
2.
 Time always seems to be passing slowly.
3.
 I often find myself at “loose ends,” not knowing what to
do.
4.
 I am often trapped in situations where I have to do
meaningless things.
5.
 Having to look at someone's home movies or travel slides
bores me tremendously.
6.
 *I have projects in mind all the time, things to do.
7.
 *I find it easy to entertain myself.
8.
 Many things I have to do are repetitive and monotonous.
9.
 It takes more stimulation to get me going than most
people.
10.
 *I get a kick out of most things I do.
11.
 I am seldom excited about my work.
12.
 *In any situation I can usually find something to do or see
to keep me interested.
13.
 Much of the time I just sit around doing nothing.
14.

 *I am good at waiting patiently.
15.
 I often find myself with nothing to do, time on my hands.
16.
 In situations where I have to wait, such as in a line, I get
very restless.
17.
 *I often wake up with a new idea.
18.
 It would be very hard for me to find a job that is exciting
enough.
19.
 I would like more challenging things to do in life.
20.
 I feel that I am working below my abilities most of the
time.
21.
 *Many people would say that I am a creative or
imaginative person.
22.
 *I have so many interests, I don't have time to do
everything.
23.
 *Among my friends, I am the one who keeps doing
something the longest.
24.
 Unless I am doing something exciting, even dangerous, I
feel half-dead and dull.
25.
 It takes a lot of change and variety to keep me really
happy.
26.
 It seems that the same things are on television or in the
movies all the time; it's getting old.
27.
 When I was young, I was often in monotonous and
tiresome situations.
28.
Source: From Farmer, R. & Sunberg, N.D., “Boredom Proneness—The Development and
Correlates of a New Scale,” Journal of Personality Assessment. 50:1. Copyright © 1986
Taylor & Francis. Reprinted with permission.
Do you ever say that you do not like a class or cannot pay attention because it is
boring? Actually, boring is a state of your mind, not something inherent in or part
of the person or material that you call boring. To add up your score for this
activity, score the statements with an asterisk (*) in front of it in the reverse
direction. In other words, for any statements with an asterisk, cross out your
answer and use this scale:
Change 7 to 1

Change 6 to 2
Change 5 to 3
Keep 4 the same
Change 3 to 5
Change 2 to 6
Change 1 to 7
Make this change only for those statements with an asterisk. Now add up your
score and write the number here: 
This is actually a test that scientists use to measure whether a person has a
tendency toward being more bored than most people regardless of what a
particular situation is. In other words, everyone is different in the level of
stimulation that feels good. Some need more, some less. Those who need more
stimulation often get bored easily. Therefore, situations that don't bore most
people might bore them. And situations that bore everyone are even harder to
take if you have a tendency toward boredom in general. Some people are more
likely to get bored in school while others don't find it boring and find it very
stimulating. Do you think you may have a tendency to get bored easily? If you
scored higher than 117, then you are naturally more likely to get bored regardless
of what is going on in the classroom.
Boredom leads to a lack of attention in the brain, and attention is critical to learning. If
you get bored, you have to find a way to get mentally engaged. You will have to
compensate and overcome a tendency to be bored by purposefully increasing your
attention. Here are some ways to fight boredom when it occurs in school:
Take notes. Even if you never look at them again (though you will learn better if
you do), taking notes can help fight the boredom, thus increasing attention and
improving your learning.
Doodle while you listen. The brain can learn when it is relaxed, and doodling may
help the processing, especially if you are listening and not thinking about what you
are doodling.
Mentally outline what you are hearing. Look for the major points. Hunting for
main ideas will help keep you focused even if the material is not interesting to you.
Think about the goal. Emotion drives attention, and attention drives learning. If
you think about how good you will feel if you learn something or get a good grade,
that may activate emotional systems that drive attention.
Remember, boredom is your problem because the bored feeling inside of you affects
your learning and what is boring to you may not be boring to others. No one enjoys being
bored, so use strategies to fight it and engage yourself in what you are learning.

1-5b Fighting Distracters
When You are reading or studying, what distracts you? An important step in improving
your concentration is knowing what prevents you from being able to read and study.
Once you have identified your distracters, you can begin to correct them or, better yet,
prevent them from occurring. There are two types of distracters:
Internal distracters (things that come from within you, like feelings, emotions, or
thoughts, that prevent you from being able to focus on your reading) are those
things that come from within you such as hunger, worry, daydreaming, boredom,
money concerns, anger over a recent fight, price of gasoline, excitement about an
upcoming event, or fear of failure.
External distracters (things in your environment that prevent you from being
able to focus on your reading) are those that come from the environment such as
music, television, family conversations, fighting, phone calls, traffic, weather (good
or bad), or visitors.
It is important for you to confirm what your distracters are so that you can begin to deal
with them.
Activity 1G
Discover Your Distracters
Fold a lined sheet of writing paper in half vertically. Lay it open, and on one half,
write down all your external distracters—the things that you find the most
distracting from your environment. On the other half, write down all of the
internal distracters you experience.
There are proven techniques designed to boost your attention that help you fight your
distracters:
Write in a journal
Use the checkmark monitoring system
Create your learning environment
Develop a daily reading plan
Try them and see which ones work best for you.
Write in a Journal
Using a journal (a technique used to help you to think on paper about what you have just

read and log what learning strategies do and do not work; a way to track and monitor
concentration and progress) helps you analyze your reading strategies and assess your
learning. Journals help you think on paper about what you have read, and identify what
you do (and do not) understand. Journals serve as a first step to explore how you think.
Journaling is a metacognitive strategy—you are writing down what you think and how
you think as you read. As you write, connect new material you have learned from your
textbooks to information you already know about a subject. Journals also help you apply,
monitor, and improve your critical reading strategies. Knowing which strategies work
for you—and which do not—is essential for learning effectively. Some students are
initially resistant to using journals; however, most experience the benefits immediately
and continue to use them, even beyond this course. Why? Because journals work.
Journals usually use writing prompts to help you focus on what you have learned and
read. Your responses to these prompts help you decide how well you have learned new
information and what is unclear and requires follow-up. Journals are different from
marking and note taking from your textbook (you will learn more about marking and
note taking in Chapter 9) because the focus in your journal is your personal learning, not
textbook content. You will actually be analyzing how you learn. You can use the
Comprehension Checks in this textbook as journal prompts to think and write about
what you are learning in each chapter. Another way to use journaling is when your
instructor returns homework assignments to you. You can summarize the instructor's
comments and use them to explore ways to improve your performance. An important
key to learning is to know what works for you and what does not. If you do not do well on
an assignment, analyze your mistakes so you do not repeat them. If you do well on an
assignment, record the strategies you used so you can repeat them. Your journal is a
great place for you to keep track of your progress and plan effective learning strategies.
It is ideal to have one journal for each of your classes, but you could use a spiral
notebook with colored divider tabs, with each section as a journal for each different
class. While there are no absolute rules for journal writing, here are some
recommended guidelines:
Date each entry on the top right side of the page.
If your journal entry is in response to a reading assignment, write down the page
numbers of your reading assignment with your journal entry in case you need to
refer back to it.
Highlight or otherwise mark any questions you have for your instructor.
Highlighting helps you find your questions faster. When you learn the answers to
your questions, write them in a different color pen, perhaps in the margin next to
your questions, so that the right information stands out.
Write a one- or two-word title for each entry to make locating the subjects of
journal entries more efficient.
You can also use a journal to improve your ability to pay attention. This is a useful
strategy if you are bothered by internal distracters such as anxiety or financial or
personal problems. In your journal, write down your worries. Then mentally redirect
yourself back to your studies, knowing that you have already addressed your internal
concerns by writing them down in your journal. This journaling technique temporarily
shelves a problem or worry.

Another use for your journal is to use it to write a letter to discuss your internal
distracters. If there is something or someone that is really bothering you, don't walk
away or give up on your studying. Take five minutes to write a letter in your journal.
Address whatever may be bothering you (anger, excitement, worry). Write down exactly
what you would like to say, at that moment, in a letter. Use all the language you would
like to use regardless of how inappropriate it may seem. Then tear that page out of your
journal, rip it up, and throw it away. This is a simple strategy that sounds ridiculous to
many students, but it works. Somehow concerns are more noticeable right before a
major exam or presentation. The act of writing down your concerns and then throwing
them away helps you mentally (but temporarily) throw the problem away. Obviously it
will not remove the problem forever, but it will allow you to concentrate on the task at
hand. Try it once and see if it works for you.
Activity 1H
Use a Journal
Do you think that keeping a journal would be a good strategy for you? Why
or why not?
1.
What learning strategies do you already use well? Make a list. For each
strategy on the list, explain why it works for you.
2.
Use the Checkmark Monitoring System
The checkmark monitoring system helps you keep track of the number of times you lose
your concentration as you read. Once you become aware of when you lose
concentration, you can begin to focus on why. Every time your mind wanders, you can
make a conscious decision to refocus your attention, which will allow you to finish your
homework. Tracking your attention helps reduce the number of times you get
distracted. If you find yourself thinking about your date this weekend while reading, the
checkmark monitoring system will help redirect your attention away from your
daydreaming and back to your book. Here is how it works:
Start reading a textbook assignment. Every time you lose your attention, make a
checkmark in your textbook.
1.
After you have finished 50 minutes of reading, count how many checkmarks you
made. This number will be your baseline.
2.
As you practice the other attention techniques in this chapter, periodically use the
checkmark monitoring system to assess how effective each technique is for you. As
the number of checks decrease, you will know that your attention is improving.
3.

It is important that you apply the checkmark monitoring system to reading from all of
your courses so that you are able to see if there are differences in how well you
concentrate in different subjects. You won't know this if you use just one textbook. You
should notice a difference in how long it takes you to read different textbooks, as well as
the number of times you get distracted.
Activity 1I
Use the Checkmark Monitoring System
Read from one of your current course reading assignments for 50 minutes, and
apply the checkmark monitoring system.
How many checkmarks did you make?
1.
Why do you think you were as distracted as you were when reading?
2.
Do you think you would make more or fewer checkmarks for a reading in
another course? Explain your answer.
3.
Create Your Learning Environment
If you find that you become distracted easily by external distracters, like cell phones
ringing, the television, people talking, or traffic, it might be helpful for you to create your
own personal study environment. Choose a space that is as private as possible, where
you can organize your study materials so that they are easily accessible. Although the
“perfect” environment varies from student to student, the following list offers general
guidelines to follow:
Turn off your cell phone when you study.
Turn off the television. If you hear it at all, it will be too tempting to shift your
attention from studying. You can reward yourself with a television show when you
have finished studying.
Stay away from the Internet. There are so many tempting and distracting things to
do online. If you don't need it to do your studying, it is best to make it a reward
after a study session.
Have all of your study materials in one place before you begin to study: paper,
pens, books, calculator, notebooks. Having to stop studying to hunt down another

pencil or calculator could destroy your concentration, attention, and desire to
study.
Invest in a bright light. Dim light causes eyestrain and makes you tired faster.
Sit in a firm, not-too-comfortable chair. You want to be alert and ready to work. A
cushy chair may turn your study time into sleep time.
Try not to do your homework in social areas in your home such as the living room
or family room.
Avoid reading college textbooks in bed. You will establish a habit of falling asleep
every time you begin to read. You do not want to connect sleep with reading.
Drink water. Before you study, make certain that you have taken care of your
hunger and you have a bottle of water at hand. A dehydrated brain is sluggish and
causes you to feel tired.
Remember that these are suggestions, so explore the types of environments that affect
your individual needs. If you can't study while alone, how many people do you need to
be around? Is working in the library a public but quiet enough space?
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Researcher Jill Shelton at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri, found that
students exposed to a cell phone ringing in class scored 25% worse on a test of
material that was presented before the distraction. If she fumbled through her
purse for the phone, creating more distraction, students performed even worse.
Turn those cell phones off—in school or wherever you are studying!
What if you have no place to study in your home? What if you share space and cannot
find a good place to study? Always have a plan B. Put all of your essential study materials
in a backpack: pencils, paper, appropriate books, and handouts. Go to your college or
university library. Most academic libraries are collaborative and may seem noisy, but
they all have quiet space. Many have study rooms that you can reserve. Having an
environment to support your learning makes a difference in how well you learn.
Develop a Daily Reading Plan

Students usually intend to read all of the chapters assigned to them, but most have not
developed a plan to ensure that they are able to follow through. Having a written plan—I
will read 16 pages ofChapter 4at 6p.m.—is more of a commitment than thinking that you
will read Chapter 4 sometime today or maybe tomorrow. The more specific you can
make your plan, the more likely you will complete it on time and avoid any distracters.
Making time and following a plan can be your greatest tools for success.
Activity 1J
Create Your Daily Reading Plan
Using the calendar provided, create a daily reading plan for your current reading
assignments for the coming week. Be specific in your plan, and schedule time for
next week's reading assignments in your chart. Knowing how much time you
have available makes it more likely that you will create an authentic plan, so add
in other activities you know will take up your time, like sleeping, class, and work.
 
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday
Saturday
12
a.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
a.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
a.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
a.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
a.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
a.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
a.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
a.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday
Saturday
8
a.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
a.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10
a.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11
a.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12
p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10
p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday
Saturday
11
p.m.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1-6 Learning is State Dependent
It is Commonly Understood in Science that learning is “state dependent.” Put in terms of
education, this means that it is easier to recall information if one is in the same state
during testing as during learning. What is meant by “state”? “State” can mean anything
that affects your senses or your brain. For example, if you are upset, you could say that
you are in an emotional or agitated state. If you are in a noisy environment, then that is
part of the state that you are in. The room you are in is part of your state.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
It may be helpful to think of learning as encoding information in the brain. You
encode through all your senses—what you see, hear, feel, taste, and smell. What
are you encoding when you study? Look around you next time you study and see
what you are putting into the neural network that you are forming with the
information that you learn. What is your learning state? What should be
removed or added to that state?
1-6a Factors that Aﬀect State

As You Read the list of factors that can affect state, think of how you last studied. The
following factors (effects) can influence state:
Environment effects: If you take a test in the same physical environment (room,
place) as where you studied, you will perform better. That is because the
environment is encoded into the brain along with the learning. When you see the
environment again, it tends to fire along with the network that contains the
information that you studied. It is part of the neural network. Therefore, it is easier
to remember.
Emotion effects: Memory, as well as learning, is state dependent. If you are in a sad
state, you are going to start remembering sad events because the sad state of mind
triggers the sad memories. That can lead to a vicious downward spiral where the
sadder you feel, the more you unconsciously retrieve sad memories, and,
therefore, you feel even sadder. This plays out in the classroom so that if you are in
the same focused, calm emotional state as when you studied, you are more likely
to recall the information. You want to create and stay in a focused state of mind
when you study and take a test. If you are joking around in the classroom, it will be
harder to recall the information than if you have an attentive and focused attitude.
That is not to say one can't laugh and enjoy the class. It simply means that at those
moments in class when you are trying to learn the material, it may be helpful to be
in a calm, focused state.
Pathway effects: You are going to learn more about the many pathways in the
brain involved in learning in Chapter 2, but consider these two pathways: auditory
(hearing) and visual (seeing). If you learn the material by the auditory pathway, it
will be easier for you to recall it by remembering what you heard. However, if you
learn it visually, it will be easier to recall it by remembering what you saw. If you
study using both pathways, remembering both what you heard and what you saw,
then you increase your chance of being able to remember the material.
1-7 Habits to Enhance Your Reading
The Following Habits May Help You when reading new and difficult information. They
assist concentration and tend to improve reading effectiveness. However, just like
anything taken to an extreme, they could be considered bad habits if they were practiced
so severely that they hindered your ability to understand information. (For example,
drinking water is considered healthy, unless you try to drink a gallon or two very quickly.
Then water becomes toxic to your system [polydipsia] and dangerous.)
Skimming. Reading only some of the words on a page is called Skimming (reading
only some of the words on a page) . Skimming is a great technique to use before
you read a textbook assignment. Knowing what you are going to read about will
help you mentally prepare for your reading, and skimming will give you an idea of

the amount of time you will need to schedule. Skimming can also be helpful when
you are researching and want to know if certain books and articles are going to be
useful for your research. Skimming the headings and subheadings, dipping into
introductory sentences, and viewing the visuals will let you know if the material is
appropriate and can save you a lot of time.
Rereading. Sometimes when you have trouble understanding information, you
will catch yourself rereading it. Rereading, also known as regression (backward
movement of the eyes over previously read information; rereading) , can be a very
helpful strategy. If you don't understand a word, rereading the sentence the word is
in will help you figure out the meaning by using context clues (more about this in
Chapter 3). Never skip over the difficult parts of a reading assignment. You may
miss important and necessary points, context clues, or the full meaning of a
chapter if you skip over pieces. Rereading gives you an opportunity to increase
your comprehension.
Subvocalization. Subvocalization (reading aloud) is reading aloud. Years before
there was research about learning and the brain, reading aloud was considered a
bad reading habit. However, it is only a bad habit if it doesn't help you to
understand what you are reading. When you are learning new information that is
challenging, it sometimes helps to read the material aloud, especially if it is one of
your strengths. Using both your eyes and voice to read helps you to fully pay
attention to the material at hand. However, not everyone likes to read aloud. This
will be a personal choice only you can make.
Pacing. Using your fingertips to read, or a bookmark placed horizontally under the
line you are reading, is referred to as pacing (using your fingertips or a bookmark
placed horizontally under the line you are reading) . It allows you to follow each
word or groups of words. This technique helps many students read. If you don't
currently pace your reading with your finger or a bookmark, try it to see if it works
for you. The sense of touch sometimes enhances learning. Because you are using
more than your eyes to help you read, your attention is increased; you are more
physically involved with the reading process. This habit can also help you keep
your place if you are interrupted or if you are inclined to daydream.
Comprehension Check
Where in the chapter did you lose concentration or become confused?
Of everything you learned in this chapter, what will you be sure to use
in your other classes?
If you could ask the authors a question about this chapter, what would
you ask?

1-8 Chapter Review
1-8a Practice with a Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Read the title and predict what you think the following passage will be
about.
1.
Based on what you expect the passage to be about, what do you already
know about the subject?
2.
Do you like the topic? Explain how liking the material affects your ability to
read.
3.
What is your state of mind (mood, motivation, and/or energy level)?
4.
Read the following passage, and using the checkmark monitoring system,
make a checkmark in the margin each time you lose your concentration.
5.
Shanghai Girls
By Lisa See
1 “Our daughter looks like a South China peasant with those cheeks,” my father
complains, pointedly
 ignoring the soup before him. “Can't you do something about
them?”
2 Mama stares at Baba, but what can she say? My face is pretty enough—some might
even say lovely—but not as luminescent
 as the pearl I'm named for. I tend to blush
easily. Beyond that, my cheeks capture the sun. When I turned five, my mother began
rubbing my face and arms with pearl creams, and mixing ground pearls into my morning
jook, rice porridge—hoping the white essence would permeate
 my skin. It hasn't
worked. Now my cheeks burn red—exactly what my father hates. I shrink down into my
chair. I always slump when I'm near him, but I slump even more on those occasions
when Baba takes his eyes off my sister to look at me. I'm taller than my father, which he

loathes. We live in Shanghai, where the tallest car, the tallest wall, or the tallest building
sends a clear and unwavering message that the owner is a person of great importance. I
am not a person of great importance.
3 “She thinks she's smart,” Baba goes on. He wears a Western-style suit of good cut. His
hair shows just a few strands of gray. He's been anxious lately, but tonight his mood is
darker than usual. Perhaps his favorite horse didn't win or the dice refused to land his
way. “But one thing she isn't is clever.”
4 This is another of my father's standard criticisms and one he picked up from Confucius,
who wrote, “An educated woman is a worthless woman.” People call me bookish, which
even in 1937 is not considered a good thing. But as smart as I am, I didn't know how to
protect myself from my father's words.
5 Most families eat at a round dining table, so they will always be whole and connected,
with no sharp edges. We have a square teakwood table, and we always sit in the exact
same places: my father next to May on one side of the table, with my mother directly
across from her so that my parents can share my sister equally. Every meal—day after
day, year after year—is a reminder that I'm not the favorite and never will be.
38 of 50
6/25/2014 6:57 PM

STOP Reading
Try not to look back to the passage to answer these questions. This is a way for
you to think about your reading and learn about what you find distracting.
Were you distracted? If yes, what distracted you?
6.
Was it easy for you to read?
7.
What is your state at this moment (focused, angry, happy, calm, positive)?
8.
Did you have to reread any of the sentences? If so, was it distracting or did
it help understand the sentence or passage?
9.
Explain what you think the reading is about, up to this point.
10.
Continue reading the passage. However, this time, sit in front of a television or
radio. Select something you really dislike, and purposely turn up the volume. Or
if you are reading on campus, move to a busy, loud area. Now begin reading
again, and continue to place checkmarks in the margin each time you lose your
concentration.
6 As my father continues to pick on my faults, I shut him out and pretend an interest in
our dining room. On the wall adjoining the kitchen, four scrolls depicting the four
seasons usually hang. Tonight they've been removed, leaving shadow outlines on the
wall. They aren't the only things missing. We used to have an overhead fan, but this past
year Baba thought it would be more luxurious to have servants fan us while we ate. They
aren't here tonight and the room is sweltering.
 Ordinarily an art deco chandelier
and matching wall sconces of etched yellow-and-rose-tinted glass illuminate the room.
These are missing as well. I don't give any of this much thought, assuming that the scrolls
have been put away to prevent their silken edges from curling in the humidity, that Baba
has given the servants a night off to celebrate a wedding or birthday with their own
families, and that the lighting fixtures have been temporarily taken down for cleaning.
7 Cook—who has no wife and children of his own—removes our soup bowls and brings
our dishes of shrimp with water chestnuts, pork stewed in soy sauce with dried
vegetables and bamboo shoots, steamed eel, an eight-treasures vegetable dish, and rice,
but the heat swallows my hunger. I would prefer a few sips of chilled sour plum juice,
cold mint-flavored sweet green bean soup, or sweet almond broth.

8 When mama says, “The basket repairer charged too much today,” I relax. If my father is
predictable in his criticisms of me, then it's equally predictable that my mother will
recite her daily woes. She looks elegant as always. Amber pins hold the bun at the back of
her neck perfectly in place. Her gown, a cheongsam, made of midnight blue silk with
midlength sleeves, has been expertly tailored to fit her age and status. A bracelet carved
from a single piece of good jade hangs from her wrist. The thump of it when it hits the
table edge is comforting and familiar.
Source: From Shanghai Girls: A Novel (pp. 3—4) by Lisa See. Copyright © 2009 by Lisa See.
Used by permission of Random House, Inc and Bloomsbury Publishing.
Check Your Understanding
This time, were you more distracted? If yes, what distracted you?
11.
Was it easy to read with the additional noise and distractions?
12.
Explain what this second half of the passage is about.
13.
Did your state change? Were you anxious, irritated, or annoyed?
14.
Did you have to reread any of the sentences? How many times?
15.
Circle the statement that is a criticism that the father made.
The dinner soup was sour.
a.
The mother spent too much.
b.
His daughter's cheeks weren't pale enough.
c.
The family painting was missing.
d.
16.
Even though you have not read the entire story, explain why you think the
father made the criticism in question #15.
17.
The family appears to be:
18.

Poor
a.
Wealthy
b.
Middle class
c.
Hard working
d.
Why do you think the girl slouches when she is around her father?
19.
What do you think may have happened to the wall sconces and art deco
chandelier?
20.
Chapter Review
1-8b Chapter Summary
Reading for college is different than other kinds of reading. College reading requires
active participation on your part. Understanding how you learn (metacognition), and
purposely using strategies that direct your attention as you learn, take you to a higher
level of thinking called critical thinking. Learning to think critically is complicated, but
necessary. Fortunately, your brain learns naturally. Current research suggests that
people, no matter who they are, learn using the same process. The natural human
learning process (NHLP) includes the following steps: motivation, practice, more
practice, more practice, more skill, mastery. If you understand that you are a natural
born learner, and you know some basic concepts of the how the brain learns, you can
affect your own learning. You can help yourself learn better and faster. Your brain has
neurons, brain cells that connect with one another and create neural networks. As you
learn, your neurons (“trees”) grow more dendrites (“branches”). The more you know, the
more dendrites you grow, and the thicker your “trees” become. A dense neural network
has a lot of information, knowledge, understanding, and/or skill. This process continues
throughout your whole life.
This is helpful information to have as a college student because now you know you can
shape your brain and create thick neural networks by using effective learning strategies
such as:
connecting newly learned information with information you already know

controlling your emotions (good and bad)
practicing which helps build neural networks
managing your concentration and attention
fighting distracters
actively engaging with your reading material
writing in a journal to analyze learning successes and failures
using the checkmark monitoring system to track concentration
controlling your learning environment because learning is “state” dependent
developing a daily reading plan to make reading specific and intentional
Practice good habits to get the most out of what you read. Purposefully choose to learn,
read, and study, and block everything else out. You already know what this feels like.
Think of a time when you were completely absorbed in a video game or texting
someone. Use that same level of paying attention every time you read. Know that
multitasking does not work. Realize that although you may become bored when reading,
you can still actively engage in your reading.
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw the amount of dendrites you imagine that you have now about the
information in this chapter. Compare your drawing of dendrites now with this. If
the amounts are different, explain why.

Chapter Review
1-8c Post Test
43 of 50
6/25/2014 6:57 PM

Critical reading
1.
Active reading
2.
Natural human learning
process (NHLP)
3.
Synapse
4.
Axon
5.
Terminals
6.
Dendrite
7.
Metacognition
8.
Neuron
9.
Journal
10.
Skimming
11.
Regression
12.
Subvocalization
13.
Pacing
14.
External distracters
15.
Internal distracters
16.
a complex thinking and
reading technique that
involves discovering and
taking apart an author's
meaning, evaluating the
author's meaning based on
established standards, and
incorporating the meaning
into the ideas you already
know
a.
research that shows everyone
learns by the same process
b.
applying strategies that keep
yourself engaged with the text
and to keep you thinking about
the information
c.
a short branched extension of
a nerve cell, along which
impulses received from other
cells at synapses are
transmitted to the cell's body
d.
backward movement of the
eyes over previously read
information; rereading
e.
the usually long process of a
nerve fiber that generally
conducts impulses away from
the body of the nerve cell
f.
things that come from within
you, like feelings, emotions, or
thoughts, that prevent you
from being able to focus on
your reading
g.
reading only some of the
words on a page
h.
Part 1: Objective Questions
Match the key terms from the chapter in Column A to their definitions in
Column B.

thinking about how you think;
an awareness of your own
knowledge and an ability to
monitor and control your own
learning
i.
a structure that permits a
neuron to pass an electrical
signal to another brain cell
j.
a technique used to help you to
think on paper about what you
have just read and log what
learning strategies do and do
not work; a way to track and
monitor concentration and
progress
k.
using your fingertips or a
bookmark placed horizontally
under the line of text you are
reading
l.
things in your environment
that prevent you from being
able to focus on your reading
m.
brain cell
n.
reading aloud
o.
endings by which axons make
synaptic contacts with other
nerve cells
p.
Indicate whether the following statements are true (T) or false (F).
 Your brain continues to change throughout your
life.
17.
 Hearing content increases your chances of
remembering it.
18.
 The more you try to figure something out, the
better chance you have to understand it.
19.
 Looking at words is reading.
20.
 Connecting new learning to something you already
know is not necessary.
21.
The checkmark monitoring system helps you increase your concentration.
22.
Circle the best answer to the following multiple-choice questions.
Why are journals helpful?
Journals give you a chance to vent your frustrations.
a.
Journals help you to analyze your learning behavior.
b.
Journals give you a chance to vent your frustrations and help you to
analyze your learning.
c.
None of the responses is correct.
d.
23.
Which of the following is not  an example of active reading?
Reading the heading, subheadings, summary, and questions at the
end of the chapter before reading the chapter thoroughly.
a.
Copying the chapter into a notebook.
b.
Analyzing your reading by making an entry in your journal.
c.
Drawing a picture of the content after reading the chapter.
d.
24.
See if you can remember: Draw the dendrites you would expect to see in
the brain of someone who has very little background regarding the French
language in the left box. Then draw the dendrites you would expect to see
in the brain of someone who speaks French fluently in the right box.
Explain why there is a difference.
25.

Popular Reading
Part 2. Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Based on reading the first and last sentences of this passage, what do you
expect the passage to be about?
1.
What do you already know about the subject?
2.
Create a question to ask yourself about the subject of this passage.
3.
Is your environment well lit? Is it clutter free? Do you have all of your
reading materials so that you won't have to interrupt your reading?
4.
Read the following passage and use the checkmark monitoring system to
make a checkmark in the margin each time you lose your concentration.
5.
From The Fattening of America
By Eric A. Finkelstein and Laurie Zuckerman
1 The next time someone sneezes or coughs your way, you might not just want to worry
about catching their runny nose, stuffy head, and fever—perhaps you should also worry
about catching their obesity. This may sound surprising, but if you read the dense,
nine-page spread in the New York Times Magazine last summer, you would have spent a
few good hours reading about some new and little-known research being done in the
area of infectobesity (the term that Dr. Nikhil V. Dhurandhar coined for contagious “fat”).
The article covered the fascinating work of two scientists: Dhurandhar and Dr. Jeffrey
Gordon.
2 There is now a growing interest in finding viral and bacterial agents that cause (and can
potentially cure) obesity in humans. The goal? To either find a way to inoculate
ourselves against them or cure ourselves if we've already caught the obesity bug.
3 Dhurandhar made a name for himself in obesity research when he noticed something
strange about a plague that was killing chickens in India. Although the chickens were

dying of infection, they weren't wasting away; they were actually gaining weight (and
incidentally maintaining low cholesterol and triglyceride
 levels). Dhurandhar
believes this weight gain is the result of a virus that is also contagious to humans. In fact,
Dhurandhar found that the people he studied who carried antibodies for the chicken
virus weighed an average of 33 pounds more than those who did not carry the antibody.
The antibody-carrying individuals also exhibited the same low cholesterol and
triglyceride levels as the infected chickens.
4 These findings brought him to the United States in search of a lab to conduct further
research. When our government would not allow him to import the virus from India,
Dhurandhar was able to find similar occurrences using several strains of adenoviruses
—the “bugs” responsible for all sorts of nagging coughs, colds, and flus.
5 He has since extended his research to examine antibodies for these adenoviruses in
humans. In one study, he looked at 502 volunteers from around the country, of which
360 were obese, and examined them for the presence of an antibody for the virus.
Among obese subjects, 30 percent had them; among those who were not obese, only 11
percent had them. Another study with twins revealed similar findings. Out of 90 pairs of
twins, those who had been infected with the virus were heavier (an average of 29.6
percent of body fat compared to 27.5 percent).
6 Based on his studies, several pharmaceutical companies are racing to produce a “fat
vaccine.” However, before you go out and get inoculated, we should point out that in his
studies obesity was associated with low cholesterol and low triglyceride levels. For most
obese individuals, their increasing weight results in higher values for both. Moreover,
even in his studies, many obese individuals did not test positive for the antibodies; and
some of those who had the antibodies were thin. Furthermore, even if the association
proves accurate, it is not clear whether individuals get the virus and then gain weight as
a result, or whether those who weigh more might be more susceptible to the virus. So
far, I remain skeptical.
7 At the same time that Dr. Dhurandhar was looking to viruses to help explain the
obesity crisis, Dr. Jeffrey Gordon had a gut instinct that took his obesity research in
another direction.
8 In fact, he became captivated with the human gut or, more specifically, the wonderland
of microorganisms our guts contain. Of the multi-trillion cells in each of our bodies,
Gordon estimates that only 1 in 10 is human—the rest are microscopic organisms like
fungi or bacteria. These organisms are everywhere, on every surface of our bodies; but
the vast majority calls our guts home. We start off in the womb “germ” free, but right
from our trek down the birth canal, we begin to adopt many of these microbes
 from
our mother. “Microbes colonize our body surfaces from the moment of our birth,”
Gordon said in the New York Times Magazine article. “They are with us throughout our
lives, and at the moment of our death they consume us.”
9 Good thing, too. It may sound like science fiction; but in truth, without these microbes
in our bodies, we would be unable to perform many of the tasks necessary for life (i.e.,
creating the capillaries
 that line our intestines or producing the enzymes
 that
metabolize
 cholesterol). But it was the fact that these bacteria assist so much with
digestion that caught Gordon's attention. Gut flora help extract calories from the food we
eat and help store those calories in fat cells for later use. Gordon wondered why it was
possible that two people could eat the exact same foods and engage in the exact same
activities yet have two very different weights, and he began to speculate that these

microorganisms might be the answer.
Source: From Fineklsteing and Zuckerman, The Fattening of America. Copyright © 2008
John Wiley and Sons, Inc. Reprinted with permission.
Check Your Understanding
Did you lose concentration while reading this passage? If yes, what did you
do to get back on track?
6.
Has a cure for obesity been found? Why or why not?
7.
What does infectobesity mean?
8.
In your opinion, would we be better off without the microbes? Explain your
answer and provide support.
9.
Do you enjoy health-related articles? What kinds of articles do you enjoy
reading more?
10.
Chapter Review
1-8d 
 Brain Strength Options

Make a poster that illustrates something that you are a natural learner of,
such as skateboarding, knitting, or cooking. List the stages you went
through and how they affected the outcome or quality of your skill at the
time. Draw appropriate dendrites for each level or stage that you went
through.
1.
Use the Internet to learn more about how the brain learns. Individually or
with no more than three other classmates, prepare a poster, PowerPoint
presentation, Web page, or speech with a handout reviewing and
elaborating on how the brain learns. Include information about neurons
and synapses as well as explanatory information.
2.
For one day, track your attention. Set your phone alarm or keep track of the
time, and every 30 minutes stop and jot down what you are doing and the
level of attention you are giving to the primary task. Use a scale of 1 to 5
with 5 representing the highest level of attention and 1 representing not
even noticing. For example, if your primary task is driving, you may not
even really be paying attention to the road. Notice it while you are driving
and later write down any other tasks you may have been doing, such as
listening to the radio or checking text messages. At the end of the day or the
next morning, look over your list of tasks and attention levels and write a
paragraph discussing how the tasks, multitasking, time of day, and any
other factors affected your attention level. Summarize in a sentence or two
your best attention levels and what was happening at those times.
Conclude with a sentence describing what you learned from this
experience.
3.
Evaluate how you spend your time. First, write down how many hours a
day you think you actually spend on the following: studying, sleeping,
eating, watching television, gaming, using a computer or smartphone, and
socializing with others. Estimate how much extra (or wasted) time you
have per day. Next, create a timeline with half-hour increments throughout
the day from 6 a.m. to midnight for seven days. During the week, write
down what you are doing with that time—the primary, main, or most
important activity only. Do not wait until the end of the day or you may not
remember accurately what you did. Carry the list with you and add to it
every time you are waiting or stopping or changing activities. Then add up
how much time you spent on the items that you estimated. Add the totals
for the week. Write a paragraph about what you learned about yourself and
how you spent your time. What surprised you? What disappointed you?
What changes do you want to make?
4.
Chapter 1: Making Brain Connections to Become an Expert Reader: 1-8d Brain Strength Options
Book Title: College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers

Chapter 2
Remembering What You Read
Chapter Introduction
2-1 What is Memory?
2-2 The Memory Process
2-2a Sensory Input
2-2b Working Memory
2-2c Encoding
2-2d Long-term Memory
2-2e Retrieval
2-3 Chapter Review
2-3a Practice with a Reading Passage
2-3b Chapter Summary
2-3c Post Test
2-3d  Brain Strength Options
Chapter Introduction
“The true art of memory is the art of attention.”
— Samuel Johnson
Student to Student
Monica Fiala
A senior at University of South Florida majoring in psychology

Making Connections
How good is your memory?
1.
What strategies do you use in order
to remember something?
2.
How does memory affect your study
habits? Test taking? Grades?
3.
Can people improve their memory?
Why or why not? If they could, how
would they go about it?
4.
Are some things easier to remember
than others? Why? What would make
the difference? Can you control that?
5.
What interferes with your memory?
6.
What does the phrase garbage in,
7.
Courtesy of Monica Fiala
I've always had trouble retaining information for my exams so I need to work at
it. A lot of times textbooks have information written in a way that is difficult to
understand. I know that as students we need to learn how to read scholarly
journals and things in professional lingo, but when you are learning a subject for
the first time, it's sometimes hard to follow, in my opinion. I do read straight
through at least once, but usually only as a refresher after I've listened to my
professor's lecture. Before that I just skim through the necessary chapters
highlighting and taking notes on the information that stands out to me. I never
know what's important for sure until I listen to the professor's lecture. That's
why I don't fully read the chapter until after the lecture. Then I look for
important information in the chapter. Most of the time the key words and
vocabulary are fairly important to pay attention to. I also try to pick out the
general ideas in the chapter from what I already learned in the lectures. My
system is the best I have been able to figure out. I think it works well for me
because I am repeating the information in my head and I am able to remember it
better.

garbage out mean?
How do you think the brain stores a
memory?
8.
© Cengage Learning
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw on the brain cell how many dendrites you imagine you have for how
much you know about how the memory works.

2-1 What is Memory?
Memory (the process of storing and retrieving information) is the process of storing and
retrieving information. Just like any process, specific steps are necessary. Suppose you
want to bake chocolate chip cookies. If you want the cookies to be the best possible, you
would follow a series of essential successive steps. Using specific ingredients (flour,
sugar, butter, eggs, baking soda, salt, and chocolate chips), you would follow the recipe
step by step (preheat the oven, prepare the pan, measure out the ingredients, mix the
dough, spoon it onto the pan, and cook for a certain amount of time). If you do not follow
all the steps exactly, using the correct order and proper ingredients, you may not end up
with the best cookies possible. In the same way, if you do not follow the steps in the
memory process as you read your textbooks, you may not remember the information as
effectively as possible or perform your best on exams. Knowing how you remember will
give you the cutting edge academically. The more you know about how your brain works,
the easier it will be for you to remember new information.
While it is not well understood how memory works in the brain (as our understanding of
the process is still evolving), some parts of the process are widely accepted. Knowing
something about how memory works in the brain can help you make the best of your
memory and ensure that you are not wasting your time by studying inefficiently. There
are two important facts about memory that most people don't realize:
A memory is not stored in the brain in one piece, like a jpeg or mp3 file. Instead,
a memory is stored in pieces all over the brain. A face will be in one place and the
body of the person in another. Recalling the person's voice will require pulling that
piece from yet another location. Meanwhile, non-human objects are stored in a
different location. So you don't actually retrieve or locate a memory; you
reconstruct it. This is why the police would rather have physical evidence than an
eyewitness account. Memories are not reliable; there are often pieces missing. You
have probably experienced something similar when you and a friend discover that
you recall an event differently. You may have found it hard to understand why
your friend doesn't remember it the same way as you. You may have thought your
friend was wrong and you were right. Because you have to reassemble a memory,
you might leave something out in the process or even accidentally add something
that was not in the original memory (because it got associated with something else
during an earlier recall process). Because memory is distributed in the brain, you

will learn later how to encode something multiple ways so that it will be easier to
recall the entire memory accurately.
Most people do not realize that memory must be encoded, either unconsciously
or consciously. Encoding (doing something consciously with new information so
that it can transfer from working memory to long-term memory) can be thought of
as similar to filing hard copies of information. You make a decision that you need
to keep something, and then you decide how you can store it so that you will be
able to access it again. Unconscious encoding takes place when something happens
that is so powerful or emotional that you can't forget it. For example, you see and
meet someone you find attractive and because you are so interested in him or her,
you remember that person's name immediately. Otherwise, most of the time you
have to make a conscious effort to remember someone's name. A simple
explanation of encoding memory is that a memory you decide you want to keep
must be actively stored in the brain typically in a conscious way. The type of
memory that you most often use when you study must be consciously and actively
put into the brain. Activity 2A demonstrates this concept.
Activity 2A
See how You Organize Information
Set 1
Write in the requested items using the letters provided as the beginning of each
word. The first one is modeled for you.

1. Name a bird beginning with the
letter B
2. Name an animal beginning with the
letter C
3. Name a fruit beginning with the
letter P
4. Name a metal beginning with the
letter I
5. Name a country beginning with the
letter G
6. Name a boy's name beginning with
the letter M
7. Name a girl's name beginning with
the letter J
8. Name a weapon beginning with the
letter S
9. Name a vegetable beginning with
the letter P
10. Name a classic fairytale beginning
with the letter C
11. Name a flower beginning with the
letter P
Set 2
Write in the requested items using the letter provided at the end of each word.
The first one is modeled for you.
1. Name a bird ending with the letter
W
2. Name an animal ending with the
letter G

3. Name a fruit ending with the letter
H
4. Name a metal ending with the letter
R
5. Name a country ending with the
letter Y
6. Name a boy's name ending with the
letter N
7. Name a girl's name ending with the
letter E
8. Name a weapon ending with the
letter W
9. Name a vegetable ending with the
letter T
10. Name a classic fairytale ending
with the letter E
11. Name a flower ending with the
letter T
Compare your answers for Set 1 with your answers in Set 2. Was Set 2 more
challenging? In our culture, our brains are not used to organizing information
right to left. We organize from left to right. If information is not organized in a
way that makes sense to you, you will have trouble retrieving it.
In this chapter, you will learn how to consciously store information. Keep in mind that
creating a memory is a process. Figure 2.1 shows a diagram of the memory process. You
will use Figure 2.1 throughout this chapter to make sense of the memory process.
Figure 2.1
The Memory Process

Source: Used with permission. Copyright Janet N. Zadina, 2010.
The human brain is “arguably the most complex entity known to science.”
 However,
knowing just a few facts about how the brain remembers will help you help yourself and
your brain remember. To begin, remember or review the information about the brain in
Chapter 1.
Activity 2B
Take a Memory Survey
Complete the following survey, which will help you identify the skills you are
currently using and those you will learn and apply to coursework. Read each
statement and respond to it based on your current reading habits. Write yes if the
statement correctly describes you or no if it does not.
 My use of concentration strategies affects how
well I remember information.
1.
 I relate previously learned information to the
information I am currently learning.
2.
 I have to understand information in order to
remember it.
3.
 I do not wait to review my textbooks the night
before an exam. Reviewing consistently and more frequently is necessary.
4.

 I do not have trouble understanding and
remembering information that contains technical vocabulary because I
always look up new vocabulary and create note cards.
5.
 I know why I sometimes forget what I read.
6.
 I use techniques to help me recall what I learned.
7.
 I use memory techniques but realize I need to do
more with the textbook information.
8.
 When remembering new and difficult
information, I read out loud.
9.
 I make a conscious effort to organize textbook
information in my head, on paper, or with other students.
10.
If you didn't answer yes for each response, you will want to focus on this chapter
to help you address each item that does not currently describe you.
Activity 2C
Think about how You Read
Read the following passage regarding your memory. The point of this activity is to
get you thinking about how you currently read textbook selections. Answer these
questions first.
Read the title and predict what you think this passage will be about.
1.
What do you already know about the subject?
2.
What is your state of mind (mood, motivation, and/or energy level)?
3.
Were you distracted? If yes, what distracted you?
4.
Did you need to use the dictionary? Was the passage easy to understand?
5.
In one or two sentences, using your own words, explain what you think the
passage is about.
6.

What are some of the mistaken beliefs regarding our memory?
7.
Why do you think a reading book addresses memory?
8.
Beliefs about Memory are Often Wrong
Rick Nauert, Ph.D.
1 According to experts, people are poor at predicting or acknowledging what they have
learned—a belief that leads to poor judgments.
2 “There's a disconnect among beliefs, judgments, and actual memory,” according to
Williams College psychologist Nate Kornell. Ask people to predict how or what they will
learn and “in many situations, they do a breathtakingly bad job.”
3 Why? A new study by Kornell and colleagues posits that we make predictions about
memory based on how we feel while we're encountering the information to be
learned—and that can lead us astray. Our beliefs about our memory are often wrong.
4 The researchers conducted three experiments, each with about 80 participants from
teenagers to senior citizens.
5 To test the relationships between “metamemory”—or beliefs and judgments about
memory—and performance, they looked at two factors: the ease of processing
information and the promise of future study opportunities.
6 The participants were serially shown words in large or small fonts and asked to predict
how well they'd remember each. In one iteration of the experiment, they knew they'd
have either one more chance or none to study the words; in another, three more
chances or none. Afterwards, they were tested on their memory of the words.
7 As expected, font size affected judgment but not memory. Because the larger fonts felt
more fluently processed, participants thought they'd be easier to remember. But they
weren't.
8 The number of study opportunities did affect memory—and the more repetitions, the
better the performance. Participants predicted this would be so, but significantly
underestimated the improvement additional study would yield. Belief affected
judgment, but not much.
9 In a third experiment, participants were asked questions estimating the influence of
font size and study on their learning. They still thought, incorrectly, that font size made a
difference. But they were 10 times more sensitive to the number of study trials than in
the earlier experiments.
10 This time, they based their answers on their beliefs, not their immediate experiences
and judgments.

11 What fools us? First, “automatic processing”: “If something is easy to process, you
assume you will remember it well,” says Kornell. Second, there's the “stability bias”:
“People act as though their memories will remain the same in the future as they are
right now.” Wrong again.
12 Actually, “effortful processing” leads to more stable learning. And “the way we encode
information is not based on ease; it's based on meaning.” In other words, we remember
what is meaningful to us.
13 It's unlikely we'll start checking our judgments every time we make one, says Kornell,
“That's too slow.” So we'll just have to study more than we think we have to. And to
preserve memories, we'd be wise to keep a journal.
Source: From Nauert PhD, R., “Beliefs About Memory Are Often Wrong,” Psych Central.
Copyright © 2012 Psych Central. Reprinted with permission.
2-2 The Memory Process
The following outline is an overview of the memory process discussed in this chapter.
Figure 2.1 will also help you understand the outline and the memory process as it is
covered in this chapter. As you read this outline, look at Figure 2.1 to see where each
item appears in it.
Sensory Input: First, information must come into your brain through your senses.
1.
Working Memory: Information stays in your working memory very briefly and
then disappears unless it is encoded. Sometimes you have to try to hold
information a little longer in your working memory. For example, you try to
remember a phone number or directions long enough to act on the information.
Two common strategies people use to hold information in their working memory
are:
Rehearsing and repetition
Chunking
2.
Encoding: You must actively encode or store the information if you want it to stay
longer than a very brief time and if you want it available in your long-term
memory. Some common strategies for encoding information are:
Rehearsing and repetition
Chunking
Creating mnemonics
Reformatting
3.

Making associations and connections
Using multiple pathways
Long-term Memory: Long-term memory is where memories are stored for future
reference. There are several kinds of long-term memory; three are discussed in
this chapter:
Procedural: how you do something
Episodic: what happens or happened to you
Semantic: facts and information (the type usually used for school)
Some factors that affect how effectively something is stored in long-term memory
are:
Attention
Environment and real-life experiences
Survival and importance to learner
Context
Existing neural networks
Emotion
4.
Retrieval: Reassembling and recalling the memory (the information) so that you
can do something with it such as recalling it for a test or using the information in
daily life.
5.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Did you know that you can't have learning without memory? Attention drives
memory, and memory drives learning. Without memory, there is no learning.

2-2a Sensory Input
Sensory input is the first step in the memory process. New information enters your brain
through your senses of taste, smell, sight, touch, and hearing, so it is called sensory input
(information coming to your brain through your sense of sight, hearing, touch, taste, or
smell) . However, at this stage the brain retains the information for only seconds or
minutes. Sensory input usually has a limited capacity and can be easily lost unless you
purposely decide to remember information and take action to encode it.
While you do not have as much control with this step as you do with the rest of the
process, you do have some control. Sensory input can be affected by what you pay
attention to. For example, sometimes you do not notice that a room is cold until
someone points it out. Sensory input can also be affected by emotion. If you are
powerfully affected by the beauty of something, the image may remain with you longer.
When you are taking in information that you want to remember, keep in mind that
focusing your attention and caring about the material can make a difference.
2-2b Working Memory
The second stage, working memory (the system in the brain where information is
actively held temporarily while it is being worked with—previously called short-term
memory) , is a temporary holding place for incoming information. Sometimes people
call this short-term memory because it stays in your mind for only a very short period,
such as seconds or minutes. Like sensory input, working memory is temporary and
limited in what it can do; it is not designed for long-term storage. Working memory is
designed to hold something so that you can “work” with it, such as entering a phone
number, finding an address, or remembering what you went into a room to get.
Information can be stored in your working memory for several minutes if you
consciously do something with it to make it last longer than a moment. Two strategies
are easy and helpful.
Rehearsing and Repetition
Something that you probably already do to keep information in working memory is
repetition. You rehearse the information in your head and repeat it over and over. Think
about memorizing a phone number: For example, you locate and enter a phone number
because you want to order a pizza. Most people will think that they can remember 10
numbers (a typical phone number) until they get to the phone only to find that if they
are distracted for a split second, the number is gone. So what do you do? You say the
number over and over in your head until you enter it into the phone. This is called
rehearsal (repeated practice of an activity) .
Chunking

You also use the chunking method when you remember a phone number. Chunking
(memory technique of taking small bits of information and putting them into larger
groups) works by condensing the amount of information you have to learn. Phone
numbers are chunked into three sections: area code, first three digits, and last four
digits. They are divided into these chunks visually when they are written because it is
known that chunking into “bites” makes something easier to remember. According to
current brain studies, the average person can hold onto between five and seven bits of
information at a time, assuming that he or she has intended to remember it. For
example, read the following set of numbers:
382205684
Now cover them up and continue reading. What are the numbers that you just read?
Your difficulty remembering the numbers is partly due to the fact that there were more
than seven items. But more importantly, the numbers did not come to you because you
did nothing to keep them in your working memory. Try the activity again. This time,
pretend the following numbers make up your Social Security number:
382-20-5684
Now, instead of trying to remember nine separate bits of information, try to remember
the three groups of numbers. Repeat the numbers to yourself using this format, and then
cover them up and see if you are able to remember them more effectively. The strategy
you just used is an example of chunking.
Chunking increases the power of your working memory even though your working
memory's capacity remains the same. Suppose you have a small bag that can hold only
seven coins. If you put in seven pennies, the value is going to be only seven cents. But if
you place seven quarters, seven silver dollars, or seven gold coins, its capacity will
remain the same but its value will be significantly enhanced.
You can put chunking to use to help you comprehend what you read. Do you read a
sentence and, by the time you get to the end, you can't remember the beginning? Do you
finish a paragraph and feel that you did not get the main idea? Do you believe that you
have a reading comprehension problem? Actually, sometimes this is not a reading
problem but a working memory problem. Some sentences and most paragraphs are long
and, therefore, hard to hold in working memory. This leads to comprehension problems,
not because you do not understand what you read, but because it is hard to hold it in
your working memory long enough to make the connection between the information at
the beginning and at the end. Here is a key question to help you figure out if this is your
problem: Do you read word by word or do you read in chunks? Expert readers read in
phrases, not individual words. This is another way to chunk information. The important
thing about this strategy is that you read in meaningful phrases. For example, read the
following sentence:
The heavy wool coat that the well-dressed handsome businessman wore was
thoroughly soaked by the strong, windy, needle-like rain that was loudly pouring from
the dark, cloudy skies after an earlier brief period of sunny skies had made everyone
think it would be a lovely day.
That is a long sentence and almost impossible to hold in working memory. However, you
can chunk it into short meaningful segments that you can visualize as you go along and,

therefore, capture the entire meaning. Read it again here, pausing and visualizing where
you see the backslash (/).
The heavy wool coat/
that the well-dressed handsome businessman wore/
over his dark blue suit/
was thoroughly soaked/
by the strong, windy, needle-like rain/
that was loudly pouring/
from the dark, cloudy skies/
after an earlier brief period of sunny skies/
had made everyone think/
that it would be a lovely day.
Was that easier? The key is to chunk the sentence into meaningful units that you can
remember. You decide how the units are meaningful. An effective way to chunk the
sentence is to chunk it after punctuation. Commas, semicolons, and dashes represent
pauses when you read, so that is a natural place to break. Another way to make it easier
to comprehend and recall the information in a long sentence is to rewrite it into several
shorter sentences.
Activity 2D
Chunk a Sentence
Chunk the following sentence into four shorter sentences. You decide what small
amount of information to put into each sentence.
The heavy wool coat that the well-dressed handsome businessman wore was thoroughly
soaked by the strong, windy, needle-like rain that was loudly pouring from the dark,
cloudy skies after an earlier brief period of sunny skies had made everyone think it
would be a lovely day.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Activity 2E
Chunk a Passage
For the following passage, put a backslash (/) as needed to break the sentences
into meaningful chunks. As you read, pause briefly at each slash. Reading aloud
will help you find natural stopping points where you might pause.
Being Prey
Val Plumwood
1 Escaping the crocodile was not the end of my struggle to survive. I was alone, severely
injured, and many miles from help. During the attack, the pain from the injuries had not
fully registered. As I took my first urgent steps, I knew something was wrong with my leg.
I did not wait to inspect the damage but took off away from the crocodile toward the
ranger station.
2 After putting more distance between me and the crocodile, I stopped and realized for
the first time how serious my wounds were. I did not remove my clothing to see the
damage to the groin area inflicted by the first hold. What I could see was bad enough.
The left thigh hung open, with bits of fat, tendon, and muscle showing, and a sick, numb
feeling suffused my entire body. I tore up some clothing to bind the wounds and made a
tourniquet for my bleeding thigh, then staggered on, still elated by my escape. I went
some distance before realizing with a sinking heart that I had crossed the swamp above
the ranger station in a canoe and could not get back without it.
Source: Plumwood, Val. “Being Prey.” The Best American Science and Nature Writing, ed. E.
Wilson and B. Bilger, Houghton Mifflin Company, New York, p. 190.
2-2c Encoding
The most important thing to know about working memory is that you must do
something to retain information. Otherwise, this information will be lost in minutes or
less. To remember information indefinitely, you must transfer it from your working
memory to your long-term memory where information is permanently stored. This is
called encoding (doing something with new information so that it can transfer from
working memory to long-term memory.) .
Working memory is not sufficient enough for applying information to tests or using
information in future situations. To learn, study, or remember over time requires
moving information from working memory to long-term storage. This usually does not
happen automatically, especially with textbook material. Instead, a person must actively
store it, just like putting away groceries in sensible places rather than dumping them
randomly into a pile and hoping that you can find an item later. There are many
strategies available to help you store information so that you can easily remember it for

a test.
Have you ever taken an exam and know that you know the answer? It was “on the tip of
your tongue.” You reviewed the information, but the answer would not come. If you
cannot access information easily, perhaps you did not store it properly. For example,
imagine your instructor having more than 300 students enrolled in four classes during a
semester. She creates a folder for each one to store each student's completed work. Say
you decide to visit her office to review your folder; in order to access it, your instructor
needs a system. She needs to store the files in an efficient and effective way for easy
retrieval—a way that is meaningful for her. If she decides not to organize the files and,
instead, piles them haphazardly on the floor, it will require a lot of time and effort to
find your folder, which will waste your time and hers. If, however, your instructor stores
her files in a file cabinet, in alphabetical order, she can access your folder immediately.
She will have taken the information and reformatted it from a pile of papers into a folder
system.
If information is not organized in a meaningful way for you, it will be difficult for you to
remember it. During an exam, you do not have the luxury of unlimited time to retrieve
the information you want. You need immediate access. The way to organize and study
your information will determine how easily you retrieve it. The following six encoding
strategies will enable you to effectively encode textbook material so that you can
remember it better for future tests. The more of these strategies you use, the stronger
the memory.
Rehearsing and Repetition
This is the same strategy that you use to keep something in working memory because it
involves rehearsing or repeating the information. However, to encode for a longer
period of time, the rehearsal and repetition must be more extensive. You learned in
Chapter 1 that the brain learns by making a connection. The more times you activate a
group of neurons (fire them), the more likely they are to activate again. This is learning.
If you keep activating a group of neurons, you will get a strong network that is “wired”
together, meaning that it will be easier to fire again in the future. This is why scientists
say that “neurons that fire together wire together.” In order to recall information, it is
not enough just to “fire” the appropriate brain network when you study; you also need to
“wire” it. This takes repetition. The following rehearsal and repetition strategies can help
you repeat the material in a variety of ways:
Reviewing. One of the best rehearsal and repetition memory strategies is tried-
and-true reviewing. Read the chapter you are working on aloud and review it
aloud. Reading aloud helps you attend to the new information more effectively
because you use more of your senses as you read and review. It also helps you
block out external distracters such as internal and external noise. If you have been
writing notes, review your notes aloud. If you are using a three-ring notebook, take
your notes and spread them over a table. As you review, you may begin to see
connections that you did not notice before. If your mind is giving you distracting
thoughts (about dinner, about your friends or family), remind yourself that this is
study time and promise yourself that you will pay attention to these thoughts and
concerns after your study time is over.
When you review newly learned information, time of day is as important as the

review process itself. If you attend a lecture today, review today. Most people will
forget 50% of new textbook information within 24 hours if they do nothing with
the information. It is actually easier for your brain to forget information than it is
to learn (understand) and remember it. Schedule regular review sessions for
yourself, perhaps even with a study partner or study group, shortly after you finish
reading a chapter. A few minutes of consistent and same-day review are far more
effective than having to relearn everything in a cram session three weeks later.
Teach it. The highest level of learning is teaching. If you know the information
well, you can teach it to others. Go into a private space of your house, dorm, or
study room. Give a lecture to yourself about the chapter you are studying.
A variation of this activity is for you to connect with other students in a class. Be
responsible for “owning” parts of a textbook chapter and teach them to the others;
they will also be responsible for parts and teach them to you. Explaining
something is an excellent way to find out how well you know and understand the
information. You will know exactly where your weak spots are and can go back and
relearn information. You will reinforce what you know, and you will also find out
what you don't know.
Space it out. Research shows that spaced intervals of repetition are more effective
than a larger block of study time in which you repeat the information over and
over. For example, if you have one hour to study, you are better off studying in two
or three smaller segments than in one long segment. Compare it to eating an
orange. Most people do not generally stuff the entire orange in their mouth for a
reason. The body needs to be able to chew and process the food in smaller
amounts. Or when you know that you are facing a busy day, you do not eat all your
meals in the morning because you won't have time later. You know that your body
can process the energy you are giving it only when spaced out over time. Just like
the body performs more efficiently and uses its resources better under certain
conditions, so does the brain, for several reasons.
Mental fatigue. Just like your body, your brain gets tired after carrying a
heavy cognitive (mental) load. Just like you might lift weights or do cardio in
intervals where you work hard, rest briefly, and work hard again, the same
plan works with learning. If you push too long at one sitting, the brain gets
tired and begins to learn less and less as time goes on. This is called
“diminishing returns.”
Strengthening recall. Cover material for 20 to 30 minutes and then give
yourself a little time to get it out of working memory and start to forget a
little. After 15 or 20 minutes, go back to that material again, but first try to
recall it and then review it again. The process of trying to recall is like trying
to lift a stronger weight—it builds muscle. In this case, it strengthens the
neural network, the memory. When you go to recall it for the test, you will
have practiced recalling it several times.

Primacy/recency effects. Did you know that you are more likely to
remember the first part of new information and the last part, but not so
much of what is in between? That goes for when you are in class or when you
are studying. The scientific reason for this is that the brain pays attention to
beginnings and endings because they are when something new is happening.
It is part of the survival pathway. When everything is just humming along
status quo, the brain does not need to pay as much attention, so it conserves
its resources and does not work as hard. Therefore, the more study sessions
you have, the more beginnings and endings you have, the more you are likely
to remember.
Spacing your sessions over time will save you time and improve performance. The most
effective way to study is to review the information and take a brief break. For example,
study 20 to 40 minutes; then take your morning shower. Study for another session and
then throw in a load of laundry or fill the dishwasher. If you are somewhere else, take a
quick walk or short break. Resist the urge to use technology as that activity uses the
same resources that you need to study. Rest your brain. Be sure not to simply turn to
another subject and study that. Research shows an interference effect where learning
new material interferes with the material that was just learned, so don't study new
material before studying for the test. Studying for a test should always be a review
process. It is also quite appropriate to take a nap or sleep in between study sessions, as
sleep gives the brain time to strengthen the memory network. When you wake up, you
will know the material even better than before you slept, as the memory consolidates.
After your break, review the information again and continue repeating the process.
However, repetition does not just mean going over the same information again and
again in the same way. Use a different sense for the next repetition. For example, the
first time read the material to yourself. The second time, read it aloud, explain it to
someone, write it out, or draw it. Avoid cramming as information recall is only
temporary and usually is not very useful. People cram because they have not started
studying until the last minute. Some people think a Monday deadline means starting
Sunday night. A deadline is not a signal to start working; it means the process should be
almost finished before that date. If you reviewed material only 15 or 20 minutes a day,
think how many times you could cover it before the test, getting faster and faster as time
goes on. You do not have to continue spending a lot of time reviewing material that you
have learned during the process. As they say, work smarter, not harder.
Activity 2F
Teach it
Go to a private area in your home or to a study room on your campus. Review
Chapter 1 of this book for a few minutes, stand up, and teach it. Use the headings
as an outline to help you recall information. Respond to the following questions
about your experience.
Did you realize where in the chapter where you might need to learn
information more effectively?
1.

Did teaching to an imaginary class let you know what you know?
2.
If you found that you had trouble teaching specific information, did you go
back and try to understand it more thoroughly? If so, did you try a different
strategy to help you understand and remember the information?
3.
Chunking
Chunking can be used to encode information, just as it can be used when transferring
sensory input to your working memory. Before you were just chunking something to
remember it for a moment. Now you are working with larger amounts of information
and encoding for long-term memory. There are many ways to chunk information.
Activity 2G
Chunk to Encode
Study the following words for 60 seconds. Then cover them up and list as many as
you can remember.
accounting
animals
art
beauty
business
forest
executive
mountain
corporation
currency
government
river
king
market

museum
painting
nature
politics
rules
song
Were you able to remember all the words from Activity 2G? Most people don't without a
strategy. Go back and review the words. What could you do to help remember them?
How can you chunk this information? Do you see any categories? Instead of trying to
remember 20 separate words (or items), which overloads your short-term memory, you
can chunk the information by placing the words into groups or categories. Try to
determine how some of them are alike. When trying to organize, did you think of
breaking the words into the following groups: alphabetical order, similar categories, or
similarities/differences between items? Alphabetical order could be used. However, why
would alphabetical order not be the most helpful with this group of words? There are 10
different beginning letters, which would make it difficult to group them according to the
alphabet because 10 exceeds the five-to-seven rule. This is not to say you couldn't
organize this way; it is just not the most effective way for this group of words.
Most students find that they can organize the group of words in Activity 2G into four
similar categories. See if you can you figure out the four categories, which will serve as a
trigger to help you remember all of the words. List the four categories that you
discovered:
Comprehension Check
What is chunking?
What are the benefits of chunking?
Provide an example of chunking.
Creating Mnemonics
Mnemonics (memory tricks) are tricks you can use to help you recall information once
you understand and have learned it. The mnemonic you create serves as a trigger to help
you remember information. For example, do you remember learning about Columbus
by repeating the following rhyme? “In 1492, Columbus sailed the ocean blue. He had three
ships and left from Spain; He sailed through sunshine, wind, and rain.” This is a type of
mnemonic. By connecting your course information to a mnemonic, you create a

memory tool for the topic you are studying. There are several common mnemonics:
Acronyms (mnemonic where you create words by using the first letter of each
word or phrase that you intend to remember) are words created by using the first
letter of each word or phrase that you intend to remember. One acronym is
HOMES, which helps people remember the names of the Great Lakes: Huron,
Ontario, Michigan, Erie, and Superior. Another acronym is FACE to remember the
musical notes on sheet music in the spaces of the treble clef. Both HOMES and
FACE are easy to remember because they are familiar words.
Acrostics (mnemonic where you use the first letter of each item to be remembered
to make a phrase or sentence) are created by using the first letter of each item you
need to remember to make a phrase or sentence. For example, suppose you had to
remember the order of classifications in the animal kingdom for a biology test:
kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species. Using the first letter of
each word (K, P, C, O, F, G, S), you could create a variety of sentences using all seven
letters in their correct order. For example, King Peter Calls Often For Great
Spaghetti or King Peter Cries Out For Ground Sausage. Another example is when
people say Every Good Bird Does Fly to recall the notes that are on the lines in
sheet music, EGBDF. The acrostic sentences you create are purely for your use. In
cases in which the order of the keywords does not matter, you can rearrange the
letters in any order. The funnier the phrase, the more memorable it is.
Anagrams (mnemonic created by rearranging the letters in a key word to create
another word, phrase, or sentence) are created by rearranging the letters in a key
word to create another word, phrase, or sentence. Consider the word binary, which
is not a common word but one you may come across in a computer science class.
To help yourself remember, try purposely associating the word binary with the
word brainy. It contains the same letters, but in a different order. You could
remember the word mitochondria, a word you would see in a biology class, by using
the anagram sentence A orchid I'm not. Anagrams are especially helpful when
committing individual words to memory, such as specialized or foreign language
vocabulary. The French word for grapefruit is pamplemousse. You may forget if the
word has one “s” or two. This anagram for pamplemousse may help: Measles Mop
Up.
Analogies (comparison between two different things in order to show a similarity)
are comparisons between two different things in order to show a similarity.
Analogies are a powerful way to make connections. Some examples are:
Shells were the dollars and coins of trade during the ancient cultures.
The snowflake fell to the earth like a tiny feather from heaven.
The giant was like a gentle, frightened child, unaware of his strength and size.
Analogies can also be visual: If “This is your brain on drugs” were the caption to
this photograph, how would you explain the connection? Is it positive or negative?

Key words (words that represent the topic or main idea of the material you are
reading) represent the topic or main ideas of the material you are reading. Instead
of trying to remember an entire chapter word for word, you can use key words as
memory cues by attaching related information to them. For example, if you were
studying endangered species, key words could be pollution (attach related
information on manufacturing, agricultural runoff, and sewage pollution),
commercialization (attach information on the commercial use of turtle shells,
elephant tusks, and rhinoceros horns), and habitat (attach information on the
cutting of old growth forests and strip mining). Key words can also cue you to
details if you chunk them using the same technique.
Today ago kids/Shutterstock.com
Rhymes are an effective way to remember, especially if you prefer learning by
listening. Do you remember “Thirty days have September, April, June, and
November. All the rest have thirty-one, except February, which has twenty-eight
and in Leap Year twenty-nine”?
Songs are a great way to remember information and have been used to share key
information throughout time, including songs about famous heroes, events, and
relationships. Use key points from your notes to create new lyrics for your favorite
song. It is easier for you to remember if you can relate the information to
something you already know.
Activity 2H
Use a Song to Help Remember
Think of any song you know that tells a story based on a real event or thing. Write
two or three sentences explaining the story or motive for the song. Here's an
example using the song, The “Star-Spangled Banner.”

When the American flag was raised to celebrate America's victory in the War of 1812, the
stripes and stars of the American flag were so inspiring to Francis Scott Key that he wrote
a song about them that is now our national anthem. Each time we sing it, it is a reminder
of the making of our country. It reminds us that we are a strong and great country and
that many sacrifices were made for our freedom.
Now write your own song lyrics to help you remember important pieces of
information from a textbook in one of your other courses. Be creative, and use
your favorite song for the melody.
Activity 2I
Use Mnemonics
Read the following passage and then create a mnemonic to help you remember
the information in the passage using one of the mnemonics you just learned
about: acronyms, acrostics, anagrams, analogies, key words, rhymes, or songs.
The Visual Record: Icons
The word icon comes from the Greek eikōn, which means “image.”… Icons portrayed
saints, the Virgin Mary, and sometimes Jesus Christ. They were believed to be genuinely
holy, to capture, in some mysterious way, the holiness of the person whom they
represented. Icons may have arisen from funeral portraits, or they may have been
miniature versions of much larger images on the walls of churches. One of the earlier
examples of icons relates to Saint Symeon Stylites. Symeon was a recluse who lived for
many years on top of a pillar in the Syrian desert. After his death, his reputation for
holiness drew many people to worship at his tomb. Soon, people began to take away
pictures of Symeon. We hear that in far-off Rome, shopkeepers affixed icons of Symeon
to the doorposts outside their shops to ward off evil.
Source: From NOBEL/STRAUSS/OSHEIM/NEUSCHEL. Western Civilization Beyond
Boundaries 6e (p. 210). Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
Your mnemonic:
Reformatting
Reformatting (strategy for making material easier to remember by putting into a format
that is meaningful to you) is a way of making material easier to remember by putting it
into a format that is more visual or more familiar to you. You have probably done some
of the following study strategies in the past without realizing that you were
reformatting.

Put it in your own words. An important part of reformatting is making sure you
understand the vocabulary—reformatting the words into words that you
understand. For example, you can reformat “exemplification” into “giving
examples to show what you mean.” You must understand the language of the
discipline you are studying. Memorizing textbook information you do not
understand is like memorizing nonsense. Just because you memorize something
from a textbook does not mean you understand it and can apply it.
Make it more visual. Sometimes translating paragraph information into a visual
aid, like a table or diagram, is helpful. Using the Internet to search for images of the
concept you are studying is another way to make something more visual and
memorable.
Reorganize it. Sometimes you can reorganize the material in a way that makes it
more meaningful or clearer to you. You can often simplify it by reorganizing it, like
when you create an outline. A lot of text is explanatory to help you understand the
main points that you need to recall for later use. Reorganizing information into a
briefer representation may make it easier to recall.
Activity 2J
Try to Understand What You Don't Know
Read the following paragraph and try to remember the information long enough
to answer the questions that follow.
The Poxitation of Zraxquif
Each day, it has become more important that you bractoliote about Zraxquif. Zraxquif is
a new griebe of zionter. It is poxitated each month in Arizantanna. The Arizantanninas
gristerlate large frialtonda of fevon and then bracter it to quasel Zraxquif. Zraxquif is
becoming one of our most precious snezlaus. Our zionter lescelidge and lack of current
poxitated fevons. It could save millions of lives.
Why is it important to know about Zraxquif?
1.
Where is Zraxquif poxitated?
2.
How is Zraxquif quaseled?
3.
What is Zraxquif?
4.

Were you able to answer the questions? You probably were! By using context
clues, you could answer the questions, but that doesn't mean you understand the
content. What is zionter? What is griebe? What does gristerlate mean? If you
were to be tested on this with the expectation that you understood the language
and meaning, how well do you think you would do? Even though you may have
been able to answer the questions, the words were all nonsense and you do not
truly understand what any of them mean. There have probably been times when
you experienced the same confusion reading passages from specialized
textbooks.
Now read the following passage from a statistics textbook and try explaining it in
your own words.
To determine the F
, establish the level of α and calculate the degrees of freedom.
The F-distribution has two degrees of freedom. The numerator degrees of freedom (df )
is the degrees of freedom associated with the between-groups variance. The
denominator degrees of freedom (df ) is the degrees of freedom associated with the
within-groups variance. For example, if α = .05 and df  = 3 and df  = 6 F
 = 4.76.
Source: Runyon, Richard P., et al. Fundamentals of Behavioral Statistics, 9th Edition,
McGraw-Hill, p. 523.
With this passage, real words are used. If the words were not familiar to you, you
probably felt exactly the way you did when you read the nonsense paragraph:
confused. And if you did not understand the paragraph, you were not able to
explain it in your own words. You really cannot do anything (paraphrase, outline,
draw, or create mnemonics) with information if you do not understand it. If,
while reading any of your textbooks, you find that the content does not make
sense, use the vocabulary strengthening strategies you will learn in Chapter 3.
You might have known what a denominator and a numerator are, but did you
know what F
 and degrees of freedom are? Do not skip unfamiliar
vocabulary; it is crucial to comprehension.
Making Associations and Connections
The more you can relate new information to what you have already stored in your
long-term memory, the easier it is to remember. Remembering one thing leads to
remembering another. For example, if you are trying to remember where you put your
keys, you may retrace your steps. You may recall that you came in through the garage
and put some of the groceries on the stairs and went back for more. Then you put some
groceries on the kitchen counter and went down and got the rest. When you think about
the counter, you remember you tossed the keys on the table as you walked by. One
memory triggers another. It is similar with facts that you try to remember. If you link a
new fact to information that is relevant, then if you have trouble recalling the new
information, you can recall the related information in the hopes that it will maintain the
connection and trigger the recall of the new information.
There are three strategies to help you make strong associations and connections when
critical
N
D
N
D
critical
critical

learning new information:
Exemplification. Exemplification is providing familiar examples to illustrate new
information. An example from your biology class is that plants need light to
bloom. Now think of an example of a plant you know that needs light to bloom.
You know from your own experience that tulips need light to bloom. Now you have
that new information in your long-term memory. Plants, like tulips, need light to
bloom.
Comparison. Be aware of the similarities between what you are studying and
information you already know. If you are learning about the process of
photosynthesis in biology, you can remember it by being aware of similarities
regarding the digestive process in human beings. You can connect the details of the
photosynthesis process (new information) to the human digestive process
(familiar information)—plants need light to grow and humans need food to grow.
When you need to recall for an exam how photosynthesis works, you may more
easily locate the information in your memory with the similarity you identified
regarding the digestive process. Here is an example of an explicit comparison from
a communications textbook:
In short, living without health insurance is as much of a risk as having
uncontrolled diabetes or driving without a safety belt.
Source: Verderber & Verderber. Communicate! 12th Edition, Cengage Learning, 2008,
p. 299.
What is the comparison being made? The level of danger involved in living with an
untreated disease or driving without a safety belt is being compared to living without
health insurance. All are dangerous. Sometimes, however, comparisons may not be
directly stated.
A calorie is a measure of energy expenditure. The calories referred to in diet and
exercises are kilocalories (kcal). A pound of fat stores 3500 calories (kcal). To lose a
pound of fat a week a person must eat approximately 50 fewer calories (kcal) per day
than she expends.
Source: www.itansolariums.com/spaservices-ﬁt-bodywraps.html
When comparisons aren't directly stated, you can create your own. A comparison you
could make about this passage is: The calorie concept is like money in the bank. If you
spend more than you put in the bank, you will lose. However, if you spend less (less
exercise), your savings (fat) will grow.
Addition. Consider adding new information to more familiar information. You can
make even stronger connections between new information and prior knowledge
by doing additional research on a topic. For example, plants need light (new
information), but they also need soil and water (familiar information). If you are
learning about human bones, for example, go to the library and check out
additional information on the skeleton. Keep adding new information to familiar
information, and you will be amazed how much easier it will be for you to

remember. Seek out multiple explanations of a topic. The more you use additional
materials, the deeper you process new information. The deeper you process new
information, the easier it will be to access when you need it.
Activity 2K
Suggest Ways to Make Associations and Connections
Cheryl wants to be a history major. She reads history books in her spare time and
is very good at answering history-related questions. However, in her first class on
the American Civil War, she does poorly on essay tests. She cannot understand
why her extensive factual knowledge is not enough to help her perform well on
essay tests.
What are some possible reasons for Cheryl's poor performance on essay
tests? Be prepared to share your answers with the class.
1.
Give some suggestions to help Cheryl make more effective associations and
connections in order to remember details about the American Civil War.
2.
Activity 2L
Establish Connections
Read the following passage. See how many connections you can make between
what you learn in the passage and what you already know about Egyptian life,
death, and religion. Use the chart following the passage to write down these
connections.
Life and Afterlife
1 Egyptian life was full of religious practices, from daily rituals and seasonal festivals to
ethical teachings and magic. Egyptian religion tended toward syncretism—that is, the
blending of mutually opposed beliefs, principles, or practices. For example, Egyptian
mythology taught variously that the sky was a cow, was held up by a god or by a post, or
was a goddess stretched over the earth. No one was troubled by such inconsistencies, as
a modern worshiper might be, because Egyptians believed that a fundamental unity
underlay the varieties of nature.
2 Egypt's religion had many greater and lesser deities, including human, animal, and
composite gods. Various animals, from cats and dogs to crocodiles and serpents, were

thought to represent the divine. Important deities included Thorth, the moon-god and
god of wisdom; Nut, goddess of the sky; Ptah, a creator-god; Osiris, who invented
agriculture and became lord of the dead; Horus, son of Osiris, a sky-god imagined as a
giant falcon; and Isis, wife of Osiris and mother of Horus, a mother-goddess. Temples
were numerous and lavish.
3 Egyptian religion focused on the afterlife. Unlike the Mesopotamians, the Egyptians
believed that death could be a pleasant continuation of life on earth. Hence, they
actively sought immortality. The wealthy built tombs that were decorated with paintings
and inscriptions and stocked with cherished possessions for use after death. The most
cherished possession of all was the body, and the Egyptians provided its preservation
through their mastery of the science of embalming—thus, the Egyptian mummies.
Source: From NOBEL/STRAUSS/OSHEIM/NEUSCHEL. Western Civilization Beyond
Boundaries 6e (pp. 20–21). Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
Brainstorm everything you believe you know or think you know about
Egyptian life, mythology, customs, and death. The more you know, the
easier it will be for you to remember the information in this passage.
1.
Fill in the chart provided here. On the left side of the chart, list important
information from this passage. On the right side, list what you know. This
type of thinking takes practice but serves as a great study guide.
2.
What You Learned from
Passage
Related Information That You
Already Know
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Activity 2M
Connect by Making Comparisons
Read the following passages and write a comparison for each one. Remember
that the act of making a comparison forces your brain to make a connection,
which will become a trigger to help you remember key information. There is no
one right answer. First, ask yourself what is being discussed. Then, ask yourself
what you can compare it with that is very familiar to you.
The acronym RAM stands for random access memory, which is the main memory the
computer uses to write, store, and retrieve information while the computer is running.
Source: www.ammas.com
RAM is like 
. Explain why.
1.
A very important type of interaction is competition among organisms for scarce
resources. Organisms also exploit each other by consuming each other and by
parasitism, a symbiotic relationship in which one organism benefits at the expense of
another.
From RUSSELL. Biology, Exploring the Diversity of Life, Volume 1, 1e (p. 61). Copyright ©
2010 Cengage Learning.
Organisms are like 
. Explain why.
2.
Design is essentially the opposite of chance. In ordinary conversation, when we say “it
happened by design” we mean something was planned—it did not occur just by accident.
From LAUER/PENTAK. Design Basics 7e (p. 4). Copyright © 2008 Cengage Learning.
Design is like 
. Explain why.
3.
Many students have an unrealistic fear of math. Before they take a class, they are
convinced that it will be a disaster and that they will fail. Their fear is often unfounded
and based on their own imagination.
Math is like 
. Explain why
4.

The vice-presidential ritual demonstrates a phenomenon of political optics: few men or
women look qualified before they get into office, either by winning it or taking the place
of a fallen predecessor. Or, conversely, those who look abundantly qualified beforehand
may prove to be disappointing. Presidential politics is inventive, bizarre, and addicted to
surprise.
Source: Lowi, Ginsberg and Hearst. American Government: Readings and Study Guide, 2nd
Edition. W.W. Norton and Company: New York, p. 147.
Vice-presidential ritual is like 
. Explain why.
5.
Using Multiple Pathways
The final method for encoding or studying is putting the information into memory using
as many pathways as possible. This means using your senses. You need to say it, hear it,
see it, write it, and/or draw it. Attempt to work with whatever you are studying from your
textbooks using as many pathways as possible. For example, when you preview your
reading assignment, you might make an outline; therefore, you are seeing and writing.
As you begin to read and look for main ideas, you might state the main idea aloud as you
write it in your outline. Say the details as you write them.
If there is a visual aid in the textbook, see if you can redraw it in your notes. If there is
not an illustration, you should draw one. Would it be helpful to have a diagram or
illustration to make the information clearer? For example, suppose you are reading
about the process of how neurons fire together to make a connection at the synapse. You
could draw two neurons and connect them at the synapse as described in Chapter 1. Now
you have a strong visual to help you remember.
If you really want to boost your intensity of learning new information, record yourself
reading your outline using your smartphone or computer recording device and play it
back when you are walking, doing dishes, or folding laundry. Now you are using the
auditory pathway. If you can visualize information as you listen, you are incorporating
an additional pathway. Just as when you are working out in a gym and do two things at
once, such as lifting hand weights while stepping up and down onto a step, you are
increasing the intensity of the workout by engaging multiple pathways in the body. When
you work with the new information in as many ways as possible at the same time, you
are increasing the intensity of the learning process.
2-2d Long-term Memory
Long-term memory (the brain's system for storing, managing, and retrieving
information for future use over the long term) is the next step in the process. Your goal
is to get the information from sensory input and working memory and then, through
encoding, into long-term memory. Long-term memory can be compared to putting your
clothes in the closet rather than throwing them on the bed. You might throw your
clothes on the bed, a chair, and other places around your home temporarily, but it is not

effective for finding what you want when you want it. Sometimes you want to find
something for a special event that you have not worn in a long time. You must get it out
of storage—the closet. Long-term storage in the brain is where information is kept that
you can later retrieve when needed.
Scientists have identified several types of memory and refer to the types by varying
names, so it can get complicated. To keep it simple, here are three kinds of long-term
memory using the most common names:
Procedural memory (the memory system for how we do things, particularly skills
and procedure) is what you use when you tie shoelaces, brush your teeth, or text
message. The clue is in the name itself—it involves a procedure. Procedural
memories are much easier to remember because they are heavily practiced when
being encoded. For example, when you learned to drive a car, you had to repeat a
procedure over and over until it became automatic. Once you encode a memory
like that, the procedure seems to automatically take over when you engage the
first step and you do not have to think about the rest of the procedure. For
example, have you ever started driving on your day off and suddenly caught
yourself automatically taking the route to work because you were lost in thought?
Or you suddenly arrive somewhere and did not even think about the driving?
While procedural memory is not usually involved in the type of material presented
in textbooks, it can be in some courses. For example, if you are studying to be an
emergency medical technician, your textbook may describe a procedure that you
would use under a certain circumstance. However, the formation of procedural
memory does not come as a result of reading about a procedure in a textbook; it
comes from actually doing the procedure. It is sometimes referred to as
kinesthetic memory, motor memory, or muscle memory. Your body carries some
of the memory, as you do some things without even thinking about them.
Episodic memory (the memory system for remembering personal events and
situations, memory of what happened) also contains a clue in the name. What is an
episode? This is the type of memory that enables you to recall what you have done
or experienced. This type of memory can be very easily recalled because it is a
memory of your life and may have been emotionally encoded. On the other hand,
we do not remember most of the events in our daily lives because they are not
encoded into long-term memory. Events with more emotional impact are generally
encoded because emotion is a powerful encoder; those episodes are more easily
recalled. Other details, like what you ate two weeks ago Thursday, are not easily
recalled. However, if you ate a special birthday dinner at your favorite restaurant,
you may recall dozens of details about the memory. Episodic memory is what we
use to remember our life and personal history.
Semantic memory (memory of words, ideas, meanings, and concepts) (sometimes
called declarative memory because you can declare it on a test, for example) is the
type of memory that you use in order to study. While procedural and episodic
memory can occur naturally, semantic memory involves effort in the encoding
process. This is the memory that you primarily use when taking tests. You can
strengthen semantic memory by properly encoding for retrieval.

Tip from the Brain Doctor
A new study reveals something important about when information is easily lost
or more likely to be stored. Researchers discovered that if a person knew that he
or she could easily find the information online by doing an Internet search, he or
she was significantly less likely to recall the information later. However, if the
person knew he or she would not have access to the information online, he or
she was more likely to remember it. It is likely that you could find most of the
information in your textbook on the Internet. However, if your instructor
requires you to memorize the information from the text, then you have to make
a special point of reminding your brain that this information will not be easily
available to you and that you need to store it. Keep this in mind when you start
the encoding process, and you will be more effective at remembering later.
Factors Aﬀecting Long-term Memory
Several things, some beyond your control, affect how easily and how well you store
information in your long-term memory. See if you can find ways to make reading easier
and to remember what you intend to remember.
Attention. Attention is critical, as you learned in Chapter 1. For example, everyone
can remember when they first heard about the terrorist attacks on September 11,
2001. (What type of memory is that?) You can remember where you were and what
you were doing because you were really paying attention. The information was
permanently stored in your memory because some of the other factors you will
read about here were also involved.
Emotion. When information has an emotional connection to you, it is more easily
remembered. If it is powerfully emotional, you do not have to work at encoding it.
In fact, you might not even be able to stop it from encoding. If the brain believes
that something is important, it is more likely to remember it. Sometimes feelings
in the body, such as goose bumps or feelings of excitement, tell the brain to pay
attention and remember. However, you can sabotage yourself by worrying and
feeling insecure or afraid. These emotions make it harder to think and learn. So
remind yourself, if you studied and reviewed periodically, you have created the
conditions for good recall.

Survival and/or importance to learner. This factor is huge when it comes to
information being stored in long-term memory. Think again of the 9/11 terrorist
attacks. They were instantly stored in long-term memory because of your
relationship to survival and the fact that the event was very important to you. The
best you can do with this factor is to try to think of the material you are studying as
important, even if only for the test.
Environment and real-life experience. This has a huge impact on long-term
memory. Remember when you learned how to use a new smartphone, software, or
social networking tool? If you think the information has real-life relevance, you
will be more likely to recall it. If it relates to something important in your
environment, it may be stronger in your long-term memory. How can you activate
this factor? Try thinking of how the information might apply in real life.
Context. The context (the environment) in which you learn something can become
part of the memory itself. You do not learn in isolation. You are in your
environment—all of the sights and sounds and objects and activities around you.
That environment creates a context in which the learning is embedded. Perhaps
you recall the expression on the teacher's face and that the classroom was really
hot and everyone was in a bad mood that day. That context was built into the
memory. Sometimes context strengthens a memory. You might even be able to
activate this by consciously thinking about the context in which you learned
something or the context in which the information would be useful. It is easier to
recall information, for example, when you take a test in the same room in which
you studied for the test.
Existing neural networks. The more you already know about a subject, the easier
it may be to add new information to your network. You can actively affect this
factor by deliberately connecting the information to what you already know.
Sometimes more than one factor will be used when encoding to longterm memory. For
example, remember when you learned to use social media. How did the factors affect
you? Were you excited and confident or did you have fear of the new technology that
made it hard for you to think? Was it real life and meaningful or something that you
were pressured into by your family or friends? Did the context affect your attention? If a
relative was just showing a program to you as she or he used it, you might not pay as
much attention as if someone was showing it to you so that you could stay in touch with
your family. Did your existing neural networks (typing skills, video gaming skills, or other
skills) affect your ability to learn to use the technology? How important was it to you?
Was your social “survival” affected?
Comprehension Check

Explain the difference between procedural memory and semantic
memory.
What, up to this point in the chapter, is unclear?
Activity 2N
Examine Your Factors
Using the following examples, examine how the factors affected your learning.
Think about your memory of how to use a new cell phone. That memory is
called 
 memory. Circle the factors that contributed
to your ability to remember that skill over a long period of time.
Attention
a.
Emotion
b.
Survival and/or Importance to Learner
c.
Environment and Real-Life Experience
d.
Context
e.
Existing Neural Networks
f.
1.
Think about the last time you studied for a test. Circle the factors that
contributed to your ability to store that information well.
Attention
a.
Emotion
b.
Survival and/or Importance to Learner
c.
Environment and Real-Life Experience
d.
Context
e.
Existing Neural Networks
f.
2.
Think about a time that you felt you were in danger. Circle the factors that
contributed to your ability to store the memory of that event.
Attention
a.
Emotion
b.
3.

Survival and/or Importance to Learner
c.
Environment and Real-Life Experience
d.
Context
e.
Existing Neural Networks
f.
2-2e Retrieval
The final stage of memory is being able to retrieve the information when you need it.
Retrieval (recall and reassemble information from your memory) means that you can
recall and reassemble the information as needed. But you have probably experienced
times when that step failed and you could not remember something. Maybe you had the
“tip of my tongue” experience where you know it is in there but you just cannot find it.
That is normal. You do not want to panic when you cannot recall something for the test,
as that will make it even harder to remember. There are better ways to get that
information back into active working memory.
First, think back to the context in which you studied the information. Put yourself
mentally back there. Does that trigger the information? If not, mentally think through
the encoding process. Did you make a mnemonic? Use the mnemonic to retrieve the
information. Did you associate it with something? If you did, then thinking about the
associated information should bring it back. Continue mentally listing the encoding
steps until you can recall which one(s) you used and try to find the information.
If you still cannot retrieve the bit of information, again, do not panic. If you encoded it,
you can probably find it. Move ahead to another question. Information involved in
subsequent questions may trigger associations or context encoded with the missing
information and bring it back into working memory. Remember that no one's memory is
perfect; memory itself is not a perfect process. That is why it takes so much time and
effort during the encoding process. You may have had a great deal of information to
cover, making it harder to recall every last bit of information. On the other hand, be sure
to question yourself and think about your encoding process. Did you “fire it until you
wired it”? Did you engage in enough retrieval practice? In order to improve your overall
memory skills and your study and test-taking performance, it is important to evaluate
your procedures and look for ways to improve.
Tip from the Brain Doctor

What does the phrase garbage in, garbage out mean? You cannot get information
out in a meaningful way if you did not put it there in a meaningful way. Context
makes information more meaningful.
Comprehension Check
Of everything you learned in this chapter, what will you be sure to use
in your other classes?
If you could ask the authors a question about this chapter, what would
you ask?
2-3 Chapter Review
2-3a Practice with a Reading Passage
This Practice with a Reading Passage is intentionally different from others in this
textbook to give you an opportunity to thoroughly apply all of the stages of
memory. As you read, you will work through activities to test your ability to apply
what you have learned about the memory process.
Stage One: Sensory Input
This is the stage where you take in information through your senses—in this case
by reading.
Activity A
Read the following passage.
The New Rules of Social Networking
By Ferris Jabr
He Stands Alone

1 Males are far less likely than females to mention significant others in the “About Me”
sections of their MySpace profiles, perhaps because they're inherently less inclined to
define themselves through their relationships.
Teacher's Pet
2 “OMG, r u kidding me? My prof just friended me on FB!” One-third of surveyed students
believe faculty should not be permitted access to Facebook, citing concerns of identity
management and privacy. Males are more than twice as likely to be OK with faculty
presence on Facebook.
Last Night Rocked
3 “Things got pretty crazy at your party last night and your caring friends have already
started uploading incriminating photos and anecdotes.” Studies show that comments
indicating misbehavior increase males' perceived physical attractiveness, but the same
kind of comments have the opposite effect on females.
Be My Friend?
4 According to one study, having too few or too many Facebook friends greatly decreases
your social attractiveness: 300 was judged the optimal number. Any more and you start
looking desperate.
Your God Here
5 Many Facebook users mute aspects of their lives that might be very meaningful to
them for the sake of creating acceptable online personas. For example, only 13 percent
make explicit claims of religious identity (versus 85 percent in the U.S. census).
Leveling the Field
6 Despite students' reluctance to integrate teachers and professors into online social
networks, instructors who disclose information about their social lives on their
Facebook profiles increase student motivation and create a more comfortable classroom
climate.
Source: From Ferris Jabr, “The New Rules of Social Networking,” Psychologytoday.com (November 2008). Copyright ©
2008 Psychology Today. Reprinted with permission.
Stage Two: Working Memory
This stage occurs as you read, enabling you to comprehend long sentences and
paragraphs and make sense of the material. In this stage, you must first
understand the vocabulary and concepts in order to comprehend what you read
and put it into working memory.
Activity B
Using what you know, see if you can figure out these words from the passage
using the context (words and sentences) around them. Think carefully about the
meaning of the sentence and what the word might mean. Reformat that sentence
by writing a synonym (a word that has a similar meaning), then read the sentence
again, inserting your synonym, and see if it makes sense. If not, change the

synonym. You may have to consult a thesaurus or dictionary.
1. inherently
(paragraph 1)
2. inclined (paragraph
1)
3. citing (paragraph 2)
4. presence
(paragraph 2)
5. incriminating
(paragraph 3)
6. optimal (paragraph
4)
7. personas
(paragraph 5)
8. explicit (paragraph
5)
9. integrate
(paragraph 6)
Stage Three: Encoding
Now start working with the encoding process. You will not always be able to use
every strategy for every stage, but the more you use, the better.
Rehearsing and Repetition: If you were studying for a test, you might
review all the main ideas repeatedly over a series of days. You will not
practice this strategy in this activity.
Chunking: Recall that chunking is breaking something into meaningful
units so that there are not so many pieces to remember all at once. In this
case, to remember six facts about social networking, you want manageable
chunks.

Activity C
In each paragraph of the reading, circle a keyword that will remind you of the
information. For example, “alone” could be the keyword for the first paragraph.
Creating Mnemonics: Creating a mnemonic can help you recall
information for a test.
Activity D
Create an acrostic.
Write the first letter of each keyword in the headings of the passage.
1.
Then choose words that start with each letter to make a sentence that you
can remember.
2.
Now using the first letter from the key words, write the original word from
which you took the key word. Write it in your own words if you like.
3.
Using the key words, write the original headings as they appeared or in
your own words:
4.
Making Associations and Connections: The next strategy in encoding is to
make associations and connections between the new material and what
you already know.
Activity E
Answer the following questions to activate what you already know that relates to
the information in this passage.
Have you experienced any of what is described in the reading on social
networks?
1.
Do you think males and females behave differently online? If so, how?
2.
How do you feel about your professors visiting your social networks? Do
you visit theirs?
3.

Do you hide things online? What sort of things do you find it best not to
reveal?
4.
Reformatting: Paragraph format makes things harder to remember. You
can often reformat paragraphs into an outline or, even better, into a list.
Each of the six paragraphs in the passage has a heading, so there are six
items in the numbered list to remember. You still need to do more
reformatting to help you remember the information in that list of rules.
Notice that the headings or titles may be there to get your interest, but they
are not necessarily specific enough to help you recall the six rules.
Therefore, reformat the headings to include the main ideas.
Activity F: Part One
Write the headings of each paragraph of the passage.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
You can see that these rules are actually statements about how people behave. To
reformat this information, rewrite it in your own words. For example, “He Stands
Alone” could be rewritten as “Males, much more than females, don't give
information about their relationships online maybe because they don't think of
themselves in terms of their relationships.”
Activity F: Part Two
Rewrite the headings of the passage in your own words. Include information that
makes the main point of the paragraph clear.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
Using Multiple Pathways: Another method of storing information in your
memory is to see how many different ways you can encode the information
you want to remember. In this passage, the information to remember is the
list of rules.
Activity G
Draw a picture that symbolizes each rule. For example, to remind you of the
information about how people may not reveal religion, you could draw a
religious symbol. Say the rules aloud as you write them out. That gives you triple
coding: visual, motor, and auditory.
Stage Four: Long-Term Memory
You have now completed the encoding process, so the information should be in
long-term memory. In this chapter, you learned six factors that affect how easily
the material will be encoded and how likely it will be stored in long-term
memory. See how these factors affected your encoding of the information you
learned about social networking
Activity H
Write a sentence for each factor explaining how that factor influenced or
increased your ability to recall this information in the future.
Attention
1.
Environment and real-life experiences
2.
Survival and importance to learner
3.
Context
4.
Emotion
5.
Existing neural networks
6.
Do you think you have enough factors to hold the information long term (until

the test or until you need it in real life)?
Stage Five: Retrieval
The final stage of the memory process is the one that is most important to
you—getting the information out when you need it!
Activity I
Write a paragraph summarizing the passage without looking at it or your notes.
Hint: Using your acrostic may help. See how well you can remember the
information, and add as much detail as you can recall.
Chapter Review
2-3b Chapter Summary
Without memory, learning cannot occur. Memory is the active process of storing and
retrieving information. To learn well in your classes and to get information stored in
your brain (and keep it there), you have to actively do something with new information.
Memories are stored in places and parts all over your brain. To ensure that memories or
any new information get stored well and are retrievable, they must be encoded. For
factual information, which involves semantic memory, encoding means actively storing
information in a conscious way.
The stages of the memory process are sensory input, working memory, encoding,
long-term memory, and retrieval. Sensory input is that which comes to you through your
senses. Working memory is where information stays briefly, unless you actively begin to
engage with it. Some of the ways to engage with information that is in your working
memory are through rehearsing, repetition, and chunking. Information can then be
encoded. Ways to encode information include rehearsing and repetition, chunking,
creating mnemonics, reformatting, making associations and connections, and using
multiple pathways. Encoding information leads to long-term storage.
There are many factors that can affect long-term memory storage, both positively and
negatively, including attention, environment, survival/importance to the learner,
context, emotion, and existing neural networks. Once information makes it to long-term
storage, it can be retrieved, which means the information is pulled together from
different parts of your brain when you need to use it.
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment

Draw the amount of dendrites you imagine that you have now about
how the memory works. Compare your drawing of dendrites now with
what you drew at the beginning of this chapter. If the amounts are
different, explain why.
Chapter Review
2-3c Post Test

Memory
1.
Sensory input
2.
Working memory
3.
Rehearsal
4.
Chunking
5.
Encoding
6.
Mnemonics
7.
Acronyms
8.
Acrostics
9.
Anagrams
10.
Analogies
11.
Key words
12.
Reformatting
13.
Long-term memory
14.
Procedural memory
15.
Episodic memory
16.
Semantic memory
17.
mnemonic where you use the
first letter of each item to be
remembered to make a phrase
or sentence
1.
doing something with new
information so that it can
transfer from working
memory to long-term memory
2.
repeated practice of an activity
3.
memory of words, ideas,
meanings, and concepts
4.
strategy for making material
easier to remember by putting
into a format that is
meaningful to you
5.
the system in the brain where
information is actively held
temporarily while it is being
worked with—previously
called short-term memory
6.
the process of storing and
retrieving information
7.
the memory system for how
we do things, particularly skills
and procedure
8.
words that represent the topic
or main idea of the material
you are reading
9.
memory tricks
10.
information coming to your
brain through your sense of
sight, hearing, touch, taste, or
smell
11.
Part 1: Objective Questions
Match the key terms from the chapter in Column A to their definitions in
Column B.

memory technique of taking
small bits of information and
putting them into larger
groups
12.
mnemonic where you create
words by using the first letter
of each word or phrase that
you intend to remember
13.
mnemonic created by
rearranging the letters in a key
word to create another word,
phrase, or sentence
14.
comparison between two
different things in order to
show a similarity
15.
the brain's system for storing,
managing, and retrieving
information for future use
over the long term
16.
the memory system for
remembering personal events
and situations, memory of
what happened
17.
The five steps in the memory process are
18.
List the six strategies you can use to help you encode new information.
19.
Imagine you are in a biology class. Using the five steps of the memory
process and Figure 2.2, explain how you could memorize the parts of a
plant cell. (Note: You don't have to actually memorize them; just explain
how you would.)
Figure 2.2
Plant Cell Structure
ducu59us/Shutterstock.com
20.

Popular Reading
Part 2: Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Based on the title, what do you expect this passage to be about?
1.
What do you already know about the topic of this passage?
2.
What is your state of mind (mood, motivation, and/or energy level)?
3.
Read the following passage, and using the checkmark monitoring system,
make a checkmark in the margin each time you lose your concentration.
4.
Project Runway Spices Up Sleepy Classrooms
By Katy Steinmetz
1 Reality TV wears a lot of hats: entertainment, talent search, portrait of culture at its
most vapid
 and voyeuristic.
 But it has another, lesser-known function: spicing
up bland college courses.
2 In the spring issue of Journal on Excellence in College Teaching, Brad van Eeden-
Moorefield, an associate professor of human development and family studies at Central
Michigan University, presents the results of his 2006 study on the effects of modeling a
research-methods class after Project Runway. The show makes budding fashion designers
vie for a grand prize by competing in weekly challenges. And though it's hard to imagine
a realm farther removed from the sexy world of fashion than a small-town campus in
sleepy Mount Pleasant, Mich., van Eeden-Moorefield's Project M (the M is for
Methodology) proved successful. By the end of the semester, 100% of the students said
they thought the curriculum should be used in future classes. They reported being more
invested and also retaining more material. And perhaps most important, they said they
actually had fun in a class in which students are trained to write theses, academic papers
and similarly mind-numbing (but necessary) stuff.
3 So what is it about Project Runway, a show that each week has German supermodel
Heidi Klum dismissing a contestant with a cool “Auf Wiedersehen,” that made the
Michigan students dive into developing data-collection strategies and writing abstracts?

 The answer is, of course, the age-old spirit of competition. Although the most
disappointing students weren't voted off the class roster at regular intervals, faculty and
student judges ranked teams almost weekly in 11 challenges based on how the students
applied research skills, whether in writing a literature review or understanding ethics.
“It's human nature. People want to win. People want to excel,” says Christine Walsh, who
was a senior in the class when van Eeden-Moorefield first tried the method in 2006. “You
can shove a bad test grade in your folder. When you're presenting in front of peers and
professors, you want to be on your best game.” (The prize and grand finale for Project M
involved a grade bump, mentorship and presentation at a college-wide exhibition.)
4 There is also the element of reaching young people through a pop-culture platform,
which turned a class that elicits soporific
 images of spreadsheets and bibliographies
into something relatable. “Research methods is an important skill, even for people who
[will never] inject lab rats with anything,” says van Eeden-Moorefield, explaining that
Project M made students less apprehensive about—and less bored by—the topic. He has
continued to use the format since its 2006 debut and has achieved good if not better
results by honing the method and incorporating suggestions from students, like giving
second- and third-place winners a little prize action too.
5 In a 2004 study examining why people like reality TV, Steven Reiss, a professor
emeritus
 of psychology at Ohio State University, found that reality shows allowed
people to repeatedly and vicariously
 experience some of their basic desires,
specifically their yearning for status and vengeance, the latter being closely tied to
human enjoyment of competition. “The message of reality television—that millions of
people are interested in watching real-life experiences of ordinary people—implies that
ordinary people are important,” Reiss wrote. And injecting some student exhibitionism
into a class often governed by teacher-centric lectures and handouts “helps break down
some of that power hierarchy,” van Eeden-Moorefield says.
5 But there are also factors particular to Project Runway and similar shows that came
into play, one of the biggest being its interactive form of critique, which often comes
from the show's resident mentor, Tim Gunn. University of Tennessee law professor
Michael Higdon has been giving lectures for years on why teachers should be more like
Gunn, a silver-haired, bespectacled fashionisto (and former academic) who guides
contestants before they present their creations to the judges. Higdon believes there is an
essential overlap between teaching and talent-competition reality shows like Project
Runway—at their basic levels, individuals are given a particular task and critiqued on
their different approaches to completing that task, and giving meaningful criticism that
is specific and informed, delicate yet honest, is integral to improvement. “Tim Gunn is
the master of critique,” Higdon says. “His slogan is ‘Make it work.’ There are some
teachers who will just dictate to their students, and that just doesn't work.”
7 Van Eeden-Moorefield says he took on Gunn's role and let others do the judging. In
presenting their work to a panel of judges, students, like the competing designers on TV,
are exposed to a variety of critical perspectives, something van Eeden-Moorefield says is
important in getting them to assess their approaches without getting defensive. In one
challenge, students were asked to summarize previous research regarding their
particular topic but to do so in the form of comic-book storyboards, a quirky assignment
that could elicit very different reactions from peers compared with professors'. “You're
getting feedback, you're getting challenged,” Walsh says. “Part of it isn't awesome, but
that's the reality of life.”
8 Although van Eeden-Moorefield's study merely presents a promising method, Jane Cha,

executive producer and co-creator of Project Runway, says she can see how the show's
formulaic approach would be appealing to teachers. “[The contestants] hit on the same
beats every time, but they can still be creative,” says Cha, who understands all too well
the burden teachers face in returning to the same basic material year after year. “The
designers know what to expect,” she says. “So the onus
 is on us to make [the
challenges] more interesting every single time.”
Source: From Katy Steinmetz, “Project Runway Spices Up Sleepy Classrooms,” TIME Magazine (Aug. 02, 2010).
Copyright © 2010 Time Inc. Reprinted with permission.
Check Your Understanding
Circle the best answer to the following multiple-choice questions.
What were the results of the 2006 study mentioned in the reading?
All of the students endorsed the study.
a.
All of the students reported being more invested in the class.
b.
All of the students reported that they retained more.
c.
All of the given answers.
d.
5.
What is Project M?
an experimental teaching method that has student teams compete
with one another
a.
an experimental teaching method that has student teams help each
other
b.
an experimental teaching method that has student teams design
fashions
c.
an experimental teaching method that has students on a reality TV
show
d.
6.
According to Christine Walsh, a student in van Eeden-Moorefield's class,
why did Project M work?
People like reality TV.
a.
People did not want to be voted out of the class.
b.
People like to perform.
c.
People like to win.
d.
7.
According to Professor Steven Reiss, why do people like reality TV?
8.

It is real and not fiction.
a.
It allows people to enjoy being watched and judged by their peers in a
fair competition.
b.
It allows people to enjoy something over and over, by their imaginary
participation in something.
c.
It is a form of learning.
d.
What are soporific images?
graphic pictures
a.
images that cause people to sleep
b.
images of sophomores in college
c.
images of students sleeping
d.
9.
Answer the following short-answer questions.
What class are you currently taking that you think Project M might work
for? Why?
10.
How could the success of this experiment be credited in part to the idea of
survival, one of the factors affecting long-term memory?
11.
How can the students' emotional response to this teaching experiment
affect their learning in a positive way? How can it affect learning in a
negative way?
12.
Why might the idea of “dictating to students” not work well as a teaching
method? Explain your answer using what you learned in this chapter.
13.
How do student presentations enhance learning for other students?
14.

Do you think Project M is a good idea for a college class? Why or why not?
15.
Chapter Review
2-3d 
 Brain Strength Options
Select one of the following. You will present this to the class or instructor in the
format associated with the project. The product should contain enough
information to provide a thorough review of the material.
Diagram the memory process in a poster using circles, boxes, and lines to
show relationships.
1.
Outline the material in the memory process in a handout. Use headings and
subheadings as needed.
2.
Illustrate the memory process using pictures and captions, as in a comic
strip.
3.
Create a PowerPoint presentation about the memory process.
4.
Working with four classmates, divide up the stages of the memory process.
Each one of you will teach your part to the classroom. You will be the
“expert” on that part of the process, so know it well and explain it clearly.
All steps in the memory process must be covered by your group.
5.
© 2014 Cengage Learning Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this work may by reproduced or used in any form or by any
means - graphic, electronic, or mechanical, or in any other manner - without the written permission of the copyright holder.

Chapter 3
Developing Your College Vocabulary
Chapter Introduction
3-1 Develop a Strong Vocabulary
3-2 Context Clues
3-2a Types of Context Clues
3-3 Word Part Analysis
3-3a Prefixes
3-3b Suffixes
3-3c Roots
3-4 Specialized Vocabulary
3-4a Exam Terminology
3-5 Methods to Help You Learn and Remember Vocabulary
3-5a Word Maps
3-5b The Card Review System (CRS)
3-5c Sounding it Out
3-6 Chapter Review
3-6a Practice with a Reading Passage
3-6b Chapter Summary
3-6c Post Test
3-6d  Brain Strength Options
Chapter Introduction
“One forgets words as one forgets names. One's vocabulary needs constant fertilizing or
it will die.”
— Evelyn Waugh
Student to Student
Erin Bishop
I have always been a word geek. Even as a little girl I had to know the meaning of
a new word. When my mom was working on her master's degree, I would talk to
her as she did her homework, and when a new and fascinating word came up, I
would go and get the dictionary. I remember when I learned the word psychotic I
walked around for a week telling people that their behavior was psychotic. The
best trick that I know for memorizing vocabulary is to try to find a way to use the
word in a sentence every day.
A junior at University of Phoenix majoring in psychology and minoring in

Making Connections
What does a person's vocabulary say
about him or her?
1.
Of all the people you know or have
met, who has the best vocabulary?
What makes it the best?
2.
How do you personally acquire new
vocabulary words?
3.
How does your vocabulary compare
with other people's vocabulary?
4.
There are several types of vocabulary
a person could have. You may have a
vocabulary that you use with friends,
at work, or in school. List all the types
of vocabularies that you can think of.
Give examples of words in these
vocabularies.
5.
What does it mean when a politician
or celebrity is quoted and gets upset,
saying, “You took my words out of
context”?
6.
What does it mean when something
is in context?
7.
biology with plans to continue on to medical school
Courtesy of Erin Bishop
In my classes, technical vocabulary is very important because most of the
diagnoses in psychology and the terms in biology are not commonplace. So you
have to know the proper name and meaning, and the proper use of the word until
you know it by heart. I just make flash cards with the words and meanings on
them. When I have a test coming up, I cover my refrigerator with flashcards of
terms and key phrases so every time I open the refrigerator, I see the word. This
helps me remember things a lot easier because, well… I open the refrigerator a
lot!

© Cengage Learning
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw on the brain cell how many dendrites you imagine you have for how
much you know about vocabulary.
3-1 Develop a Strong Vocabulary
Developing a strong vocabulary has many benefits. Increasing your vocabulary increases
your ability to think critically about new information. Knowing more words means you
not only increase your reading comprehension, you also develop your listening
comprehension. When you know more vocabulary, college lectures will begin to make
more sense. You may not have made the connection to the words in your reading with
those used in your professor's lectures because words are sometimes spelled differently
from how they sound. Also, many college courses build upon each other, so learning the
language of entry-level courses will better prepare you for the next level.
Owning your own dictionary and thesaurus or being able to access them online will be
worth the investment. There are also smartphone applications for dictionaries and
thesauri; just search the words for which you need definitions. Your reading
comprehension is at stake, and using a dictionary and thesaurus will help you to begin
developing good reading habits. The more words you learn, the easier it will be for you to
understand, remember, and learn what you are reading. You cannot learn a concept if
you do not understand the key words in it. Understanding a word's meaning is very
different from just recognizing or knowing how to pronounce the word; meaning is the
key to understanding. Most students' reading difficulty stems from their weak

vocabulary, and many do not take the time to look up new words. Begin using the new
words in your conversations. The more you use them, the easier it will be for you to
remember the words and their meanings.
There are two important ways you can try to figure out the meaning of unfamiliar words
without having to immediately consult a dictionary:
Pay attention to context clues. Context clues (using the words around a word to
determine meaning) are the words around a word. These clues will help you figure
out the meaning of a word without having to stop and look it up. This is how most
people learn new vocabulary.
1.
Know and understand word parts. Knowing word parts allows you to make an
educated guess regarding the meaning of the word. This strategy is known as
word-part analysis. There are three primary word parts:
prefixes
suffixes
roots
2.
3-2 Context Clues
Read this sentence:
I could charge the expense of the dinner on my credit card and you could pay me the
cash. Conversely, you could charge it on your credit card and I could give you the
cash.
What does conversely mean? 
How did you figure it out? 
Write a sentence using conversely. 
If you figured out the meaning of conversely, you used context clues. If you were not able
to figure it out, you may not be familiar with context clues. Read the following sentence:
Although Karl is usually quite polemical during study sessions, today he didn't argue
at any time during the session.
See if you can locate two clues to the meaning of the word polemical. The first clue tells
you that Karl is usually polemical during study sessions. The second clue helps define the
meaning of the word—today he didn't argue at any point. After reading the two clues, you
can work out that polemical means “argumentative.”
Even if you think you can figure out the meaning of a new word using context clues, you
never want to assume you know the meaning. Read this next example to see why just
thinking you understand the context clues is not always enough.
Nancy looked everywhere for pencils, pens, and paper. In the storage room, she found,
to her surprise, a dearth of supplies.
Tip from the Brain Doctor

The brain does not like memorizing vocabulary out of context because it is not
meaningful. Remember, learning means making connections! It is best to learn a
new word in context—in the sentence in which it is used. When you are reading
online, you may notice that some words are in color or underlined to stand out.
Often, these links take you to a definition of the word. This is an easy way to learn
vocabulary because you are storing it right along with the information that you
are reading—in other words, in context—which will make it easier to remember.
What do you think dearth means? It seems like it should mean “a lot” or “surplus,” but it
actually means “shortage,” “lack,” or “absence.” If you assumed it meant a lot, your
understanding would be completely wrong. Depending on what you are reading, it may
not be practical to look up every new word. If, however, you are reading a textbook, you
should take the time to look up and learn the meaning of unknown words, with or
without context clues. If you are reading for pleasure, it may not be necessary. Ask
yourself, “Can I keep reading, not knowing a troublesome word?” If not, then look it up.
Activity 3A
Begin to Use Context Clues
Read the following sentence, and think about what the underlined word means.
The little boy was thin and dirty. He hadn't eaten anything in days and was famished.
When the boy's mother came into the room and gave him a slice of dry bread, the little
boy stuffed it quickly into his mouth.
What does famished mean?
1.
Explain how you figured out the meaning of famished
2.
Tip from the Brain Doctor

Using context clues is very natural for the brain because it is always searching for
meaning and making connections. Reflecting on a word and looking at the words
around the unknown word for a context clue can take advantage of the brain's
natural desire to make sense of things.
3-2a Types of Context Clues
Authors use different types of context clues in their writing to help you define an
unfamiliar word.
Punctuation. Authors use punctuation to set words off from the rest of a sentence
through the use of commas, dashes, brackets, or parentheses. For example, when
commas surround a word or words, they set them off from the rest of the sentence;
when dashes set a word or words off, they emphasize their importance; and when
parentheses or brackets set them off, they indicate the words are less important.
An author may also restate material in between punctuation in order to make the
meaning more clear, as in these examples. Note how the word to be restated is
followed by a comma.
Karla's father, Mr. Jones, is a nice guy.
The tiny Pomeranian, a breed of dog, stole the show.
Synonyms. Authors use synonyms, words that mean the same or similar to an
unfamiliar word, as clues.
The little girl was famished; in other words, she was starving.
The hockey player was angry, or ireful, when he skated off the ice.
The following words are often used to introduce synonyms:
or
also known as
in other words
the same as
Antonyms. Authors also use antonyms, words that mean the opposite of unfamiliar
words, as clues.
The new movie by Joe Daida was unimaginative, unlike his first, which was so
creative.
Our new contract was immaterial; however, it was meant to be important.
Tip from the Brain Doctor

We have many more words in our receptive vocabulary (words that we
understand when we see or hear them) than we do in our expressive
vocabulary (words that we actually speak). Receptive and expressive
pathways are different brain pathways. In order to remember a new
vocabulary word you are reading, it is best to speak it aloud. That way you
are incorporating both the receptive and expressive pathways and making
the memory stronger. In order to “fire and wire” the expressive pathway,
you need to actually speak aloud. Many times you will hear a word in your
head just fine, but find that when it comes to saying it, you cannot
pronounce it. This is because you have not formed the pathway by actually
speaking it aloud. Say new words aloud and you will remember them better
and be more likely to add them to your expressive, speaking vocabulary.
The following words are often used to introduce antonyms:
on the other hand
however
although
unlike
Deﬁnitions. Authors provide a brief explanation of what a word means.
Photosynthesis is the process plants use to convert sunlight into energy.
Maria used the fine grater, also known as a microplane, to shred cheese on top of
the pasta.
When authors use definitions as context clues, the following words are often used:
is
is known as
also known as
is the same as
is called
means the same as
i.e. (a Latin abbreviation meaning “that is”)
Examples. Authors use examples to illustrate what a word means.
Sensory input involves new information coming into the brain from a person's
senses, such as hearing a news report on the radio.
Examples are often introduced by words like:
for example
such as
for instance
e.g. (a Latin abbreviation meaning “for example”)

Personal experiences, opinions, and knowledge. Authors often provide their
readers with personal or additional information to enhance the point they are
making and help define difficult words and concepts.
Having known Sheila all of her life, she came forward of her own volition; no one
can talk her into doing anything she doesn't want to do.
Activity 3B
Identify Diﬀerent Context Clues
See if you can figure out the meaning of the words in boldfaced type by using
context clues in the following sentences. Then determine the type of clue the
author uses. Highlight or underline the clues. The first one is done as an example
for you.
Example: My mother's brooch, a silver pin, was her treasure. It was the only
piece of jewelry her husband ever gave to her.
What is the definition of brooch?
What type of clue did the author give you?
In other words, the precocious little girl was unusually bright for her age.
What is the definition of precocious?
What type of clue did the author give you?
1.
A mala, a string of prayer beads, is worn by Hindu monks.
What is the definition of mala?
What type of clue did the author give you?
2.
The nefarious little child hid her true self from everyone around her. Only I
knew. When no one else was looking, she stuck out her evil tongue as she
kicked the dog.
What is the definition of nefarious?
What type of clue did the author give you?
3.
Although writing songs is not always a lucrative profession, I know that I
would not want to do anything else. Singing with others and making music
are far more important than money.
What is the definition of lucrative?
4.

What type of clue did the author give you?
Jed is a very morose young boy, unlike his sister who is always happy.
What is the definition of morose?
What type of clue did the author give you?
5.
Activity 3C
Practice with Context Clues
Select the definition of the boldfaced word by using context clues to determine
the word's meaning.
The cookies were a simple way to assuage the angry students for having to
wait so long to see a counselor. Their angry frowns were quickly replaced
by smiles.
increase
a.
criticize
b.
soothe
c.
hide
d.
1.
Even with his busy schedule, Brad Pitt keeps up a voluminous
correspondence with his fans in America and abroad. He writes to millions.
sizeable or numerous
a.
see clearly
b.
loud
c.
fake
d.
2.
The politician took a pedagogic approach with his speech, hoping that
those attending would learn something meaningful from it.
incomplete
a.
something that opens the door
b.
brightens
c.
instructional
d.
3.
The adoring fan stared at his hand, touched by Lady Gaga. When asked how
he felt about being touched, he smiled and took a long time to respond. He
then said it was ineffable.
hateful
a.
boring
b.
incapable of being expressed in words
c.
4.

critical
d.
Some people flip a coin to make all of their decisions. It is a very capricious
way to live.
certain
a.
unpredictable
b.
green
c.
expected
d.
5.
List the six types of contexts clues authors use and provide an example for each
type.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Activity 3D
Use Context Clues in a Passage
Read the following passage about code cracking during World War II, and
determine the meaning of the boldfaced words. Remember to make connections
to what you already know as you read.
What do you know about this topic?
1.
Why do you think it might be difficult to translate the Navajo language?
2.
The Language Barrier
Simon Singh
1 One war correspondent described the difficulties of communication during the heat of
jungle battle: “When the fighting became confined to a small area, everything had to
move on a split-second schedule. There was not time for enciphering and deciphering.
At such times, the King's English became a last resort—the profaner the better.”
Unfortunately for the Americans, many Japanese soldiers had attended American
colleges and were fluent in English, including the profanities. Valuable information
about American strategy and tactics was falling into the hands of the enemy.
2 One of the first to react to this problem was Philip Johnston, an engineer based in Los
Angeles, who was too old to fight but still wanted to contribute to the war effort. At the
beginning of 1942 he began to formulate an encryption system inspired by his childhood
experiences. The son of a Protestant missionary, Johnston had grown up on the Navajo
reservations of Arizona, and as a result he had become fully immersed in Navajo
culture. He was one of the few people outside the tribe who could speak their language
fluently, which allowed him to act as an interpreter for discussions between the Navajo
and government agents. His work in this capacity culminated in a visit to the White

House, when, as a nine-year-old, Johnston translated for two Navajos who were
appealing to President Theodore Roosevelt for fairer treatment for their community.
Fully aware of how impenetrable the language was for those outside the tribe, Johnston
was struck by the notion that Navajo, or any other Native American language, could act
as a virtually unbreakable code. If each battalion in the Pacific employed a pair of Native
Americans as radio operators, secure communication could be guaranteed.
3 He took his idea to Lieutenant Colonel James E. Jones, the area signal officer at Camp
Elliott, just outside San Diego. Merely by throwing a few Navajo phrases at the
bewildered officer, Johnston was able to persuade him that the idea was worthy of
serious consideration. A fortnight later he returned with two Navajos, ready to conduct a
test demonstration in front of senior marine officers. The Navajos were isolated from
each other; and one was given six typical messages in English, which he translated into
Navajo and transmitted to his colleague via a radio. The Navajo receiver translated the
messages back into English, wrote them down, and handed them over to the officers,
who compared them with the originals. The game of Navajo whispers proved to be
flawless, and the marine officers authorized a pilot project and ordered recruitment to
begin immediately….
4 At the time of America's entry into the Second World War, the Navajo were living in
harsh conditions and being treated as inferior people. Yet their tribal council supported
the war effort and declared their loyalty: “There exists no purer concentration of
Americanism than among the First Americans.” The Navajos were so eager to fight that
some of them lied about their age or gorged themselves on bunches of bananas and
swallowed great quantities of water in order to reach the minimum weight requirement
of 55 kg. Similarly, there was no difficulty in finding suitable candidates to serve as
Navajo code talkers, as they were to become known. Within four months of the bombing
of Pearl Harbor, 29 Navajos, some as young as fifteen, began an eight-week
communications course with the Marine Corps.
5 Before training could begin, the Marine Corps had to overcome a problem that had
plagued the only other code to have been based on a Native American language. In
Northern France during the First World War, Captain E.W. Homer of Company D, 141st
Infantry, ordered that eight men from the Choctaw tribe be employed as radio operators.
Obviously none of the enemy understood their language, so the Choctaw provided
secure communications. However, this encryption system was fundamentally flawed
because the Choctaw language had no equivalent for modern military jargon. A specific
technical term in a message might therefore have to be translated into a vague Choctaw
expression, with the risk that this could be misinterpreted by the receiver.
6 The same problem would have arisen with the Navajo language, but the Marine Corps
planned to construct a lexicon of Navajo terms to replace otherwise untranslatable
English words, thus removing any ambiguities. The trainees helped to compile the
lexicon, tending to choose words describing the natural world to indicate specific
military terms. Thus, the names of birds were used for planes, and fish for ships (Table
3.1). Commanding officers became “war chiefs,” platoons were “mud-clans,”
fortifications turned into “cave dwellings” and mortars were known as “guns that squat.”
Table 3.1
Navajo Code Words for Planes and Ships
Planes and
Ships
Code Word
Navajo
Fighter plane
Hummingbird
Da-he-tih-hi
Observation
plane
Owl
Ne-as-jah
Torpedo plane
Swallow
Tas-chizzie
Bomber
Buzzard
Jay-sho

Planes and
Ships
Code Word
Navajo
Dive-bomber
Chicken hawk
Gini
Bombs
Eggs
A-ye-shi
Amphibious
vehicle
Frog
Chat
Battleship
Whale
Lo-tso
Destroyer
Shark
Ca-10
Submarine
Iron ﬁsh
Besh-lo
7 Even though the complete lexicon contained 274 words, there was still the problem of
translating less predictable words and the names of people and places. The solution was
to devise an encoded phonetic alphabet for spelling out difficult words. For example, the
word “Pacific” would be spelled out as “pig, ant, cat, ice, fox, ice, cat,” which would then
be translated into Navajo as bi-sodih, wol-la-chee, moasi, tkin, ma-e, tkin, moasi. The
complete Navajo alphabet is given in Table 3.2. Within eight weeks, the trainee code
talkers had learned the entire lexicon and alphabet, thus obviating the need for
codebooks which might fall into enemy hands. For the Navajos, committing everything
to memory was trivial because traditionally their language had no written script, so they
were used to memorizing their folk stories and family histories. As William McCabe, one
of the trainees, said, “In Navajo everything is in the memory—songs, prayers, everything.
That's the way we were raised.”
Table 3.2
The Navajo Alphabet Code
A
Ant
Wol-la-chee
B
Bear
Shush
C
Cat
Moasi
D
Deer
Be
E
Elk
Dzeh
F
Fox
Ma-e
G
Goat
Klizzie
H
Horse
Lin
I
Ice
Tkin
J
Jackass
Tkele-cho-gi
K
Kid
Klizzie-yazzi
L
Lamb
Dibeh-yazzi

M
Mouse
Na-as-tso-si
N
Nut
Nesh-chee
O
Owl
Ne-ahs-jsh
P
Pig
Bi-sodih
Q
Quiver
Ca-yeilth
R
Rabbit
Gah
S
Sheep
Dibeh
T
Turkey
Than-zie
U
Ute
No-da-ih
V
Victor
A-keh-
di-gJini
W
Weasel
Gloe-ih
X
Cross
Al-an-
as-dzoh
Y
Yucca
Tsah-as-zih
Z
Zinc
Besh-do-gliz
8 At the end of their training, the Navajos were put to the test. Senders translated a series
of messages from English into Navajo, transmitted them, and then receivers translated
the messages back into English, using the memorized lexicon and alphabet when
necessary. The results were wordperfect. To check the strength of the system, a
recording of the transmissions was given to Navy Intelligence, the unit that had cracked
Purple, the toughest Japanese cipher. After three weeks of intense cryptanalysis, the
Naval codebreakers were still baffled by the messages. They called the Navajo language a
“weird succession of guttural, nasal, tongue-twisting sounds… we couldn't even
transcribe it, much less crack it.” The Navajo code was judged a success. Two Navajo
soldiers, John Benally and Johnny Manuelito, were asked to stay and train the next batch
of recruits while the other 27 Navajo code talkers were assigned to four regiments and
sent to the Pacific…
9 The reputation of the code talkers soon spread, and by the end of 1942 there was a
request for 83 more men. The Navajo were to serve in all six Marine Corps divisions and
were sometimes borrowed by other American forces. Their war of words soon turned
the Navajos into heroes. Other soldiers would offer to carry their radios and rifles; and
they were even given personal bodyguards, partly to protect them from their own
comrades. On at least three occasions code talkers were mistaken for Japanese soldiers
and captured by fellow Americans. They were released only when colleagues from their
own battalion vouched for them….
10 Altogether, there were 420 Navajo code talkers. Although their bravery as fighting
men was acknowledged, their special role in securing communications was classified
information. The government forbade them to talk about their work, and their unique
contribution was not made public. Just like Turing and the cryptanalysts at Bletchley
Park, the Navajo were ignored for decades. Eventually, in 1968, the Navajo code was
declassified; and the following year the code talkers held their first reunion. Then, in
1982, they were honored when the U.S. Government named August 14 “National Navajo
Code Talkers Day.” However, the greatest tribute to the work of the Navajo is the simple

fact that their code is one of very few throughout history that was never broken.
Source: From The Code Book: The Evolution of Secrecy from Mary (Queen of Scots to
Quantum Cryptography (pp.195–196) by Simon Singh. Copyright © 1999 by Simon Singh.
Used by permission of Doubleday, a division of Random House, Inc. and Fourth Estate, a
division of Harper Collins (UK).
Using context clues, provide definitions for the following words from the
passage.
correspondent (paragraph 1)
3.
enciphering (paragraph 1)
4.
deciphering (paragraph 1)
5.
profaner (paragraph 1)
6.
formulate (paragraph 2)
7.
immersed (paragraph 2)
8.
culminated (paragraph 2)
9.
impenetrable (paragraph 2)
10.
virtually (paragraph 2)
11.
plagued (paragraph 5)
12.
jargon (paragraph 5)
13.
lexicon (paragraph 6)
14.
ambiguities (paragraph 6)
15.
obviating (paragraph 7)
16.
cryptanalysis (paragraph 8)
17.

2.
transcribe (paragraph 8)
18.
vouched (paragraph 9)
19.
forbade (paragraph 10)
20.
Activity 3E
Use Context Clues in Textbooks
Read the following passages adapted from college textbooks. Using the authors'
context clues, define each boldfaced word. Then, from the options provided,
circle the answer closest in meaning to your definition.
Coleoptera means “sheath wings,” a reference to the armored forewings on a
beetle.
Source: Adapted from Imes, R. The Practical Entomologist. New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1992, p. 94.
1.
What do you think coleoptera means?
Which answer is closest in meaning to your definition?
hairy legs
a.
armored forewings on a beetle
b.
fur
c.
Alcoholism exacts a horrible toll on the drinker and the drinker's family, but
the damage doesn't stop there. Drunk driving, workplace losses, and
overburdened health care systems are only some of the larger-scale loss issues
related to alcohol abuse.
Source: Halonen, J. and Santrock, J. Psychology: Contexts and Applications. New York:
McGraw Hill, 1999.
What do you think exacts means?
Which answer is closest in meaning to your definition?
diminishes
a.
demands
b.

3.
4.
5.
feels
c.
The assassination created an emotionally charged atmosphere that the new
president, Lyndon Baines Johnson, adroitly exploited. Seizing the moment,
Johnson cleverly added new provisions to the legislation.
Source: Adapted from Judd D. and Swanstrom, T. City Politics: The Political Economy
of Urban America, 7 
 Edition, New York: Longman, 2010, p. 191.
What do you think adroitly means?
Which answer is closest in meaning to your definition?
skillfully
a.
civilly
b.
frantically
c.
Just when an appliance seems sold out and least available, it becomes most
desirable. Many customers do agree to purchase at this time. Thus, when the
salesperson invariably returns with the news that an additional supply of the
appliance has been found, it is also with a pen and a sales contract in hand.
Source: Adapted from Cialdini, R. Influence: Science and Practice, 5th ed. Boston:
Pearson, 2009, p. 202.
What do you think invariably means?
Which answer is closest in meaning to your definition?
never
a.
sometimes
b.
always
c.
Given ideal conditions, populations of many organisms can grow
exponentially; that is, they can expand at a constant rate per unit of time. This
can produce an enormous population.
Source: Adapted from Cunningham, Cunningham and Easton. Environmental
Science: A Global Concern, 10th ed. Boston: McGraw Hill, 2008, p. 128.
What do you think exponentially means?
Which answer is closest in meaning to your definition?
grow slowly
a.
th

grow tremendously
b.
grow openly
c.
Comprehension Check
In your own words, write your definition of what context clues in
textbooks are.
What does it mean to understand a word in its context?
3-3 Word Part Analysis
In addition to context clues, you can use word parts as clues to determine the meaning
of unfamiliar words. There are three primary word parts:
prefixes
suffixes
roots
Figure 3.1
Word Parts
More than 50% of English vocabulary comes from ancient Greek and Latin, so when you
learn some words parts that come from the original Greek and Latin words, you can
figure out many English words. Table 3.3 shows examples of English words based on
Latin word parts.

Table 3.3
English Words from the Latin Root duc Using Preﬁxes and Suﬃxes
duc = a Latin root as in the Latin word ducere = to
lead
abduct
(preﬁx ab- = away, leads
away)
induce
(preﬁx in- = leads in)
conduct
(preﬁx con- = with, leads
together with)
introduce
(preﬁx intro- = leads
into)
conductor
(suﬃx -or = the one who
does it)
introduction
(suﬃx -tion = an action)
deduct
(preﬁx de- = away, leads
away from)
produce
(preﬁx pro- = forward,
leads forward)
educate
(preﬁx e- = out, leads it
out)
reduce
(preﬁx re- = back, leads
backward)
educator
(suﬃx -or = the one who
does it)
reducing
(suﬃx -ing = an action
happening)
The following sentences use words from Table 3.3 that are based on Latin word parts.
A good educator will introduce students to how to produce good writing without
having to reduce their creativity.
A criminal might abduct a child in order to induce the parents to pay ransom.
We try to conduct peaceful interrelationships by reducing everyone's stress.
You may deduct your business expenses from your income tax.
See how many word parts you already know. Read this sentence:
My computer got some malware on it.
What word associated with computer ends in -ware?
What are words that mean “bad cancer” or “bad nutrition” (just two of many
possible examples) that begin with mal-?
Therefore, malware means:

Describe the strategy that you just used to figure out the word.
Write a sentence using the word malware.
3-3a Preﬁxes
Prefixes (word part, syllable, or syllables placed at the beginning of words) are word
parts or syllables placed at the beginning of words. They can change the meaning of a
word. For example, consider the prefixes a-, bi-, homo-, and hetero- when each one is
attached to the root word sexual, which means “intimately involving” or “having sex.”
asexual
not intimate; not having
or involving sex
bisexual
intimate with both (two)
sexes
homosexual
intimate with the same
sex
heterosexual
intimate with the opposite
(diﬀerent) sex
The word sexual is common to all of the words. Each prefix changes the word's meaning.
Knowing a prefix can help you figure out the word's meaning.
Activity 3F
Learn Common Preﬁxes
Using a sheet of paper, cover up the prefix definition column for the following
list of prefixes. Next to each prefix, write down what you think the definition of
that prefix is. You may be familiar with the words using the prefixes, which will
help you to determine what the definition of the prefix is. Check your responses
by uncovering the prefix definition column.
Table 3.4
Common Preﬁxes
Preﬁx
Word(s) Using
the Preﬁx
Preﬁx Deﬁnition
a-
aside, atheist
not, away from
ab-
abhor
away from

Preﬁx
Word(s) Using
the Preﬁx
Preﬁx Deﬁnition
ac-
accede
to, toward
ad-
adhere, advance
to, toward
ambi-
ambidextrous
both
amphi-
amphitheatre
around, on both
sides
annu-, anni-
annual
year
ante-
antecedent
before
anti-
antibiotic
against, opposed
to
audi-, aur-
audio
hear
auto-
autograph
self
bene-
beneﬁcial
well, good
bi-
biped, bilingual
two
bio-
biography
life
carn-
carnivore
flesh
circum-
circumvent
around
co-
cohesive
with, together
com-
company
with, together
con-
convenient
with, together
corp-
corporation
body
cred-
credible
believe
de-
detach
away, from
dem-
democracy
people
dis-
disengage,
distrust
apart, no longer,
not
e-
emit
out, out of
ef-
eﬀaced
out of, from
em-
empower
make, or cause
to be

Preﬁx
Word(s) Using
the Preﬁx
Preﬁx Deﬁnition
ex-
exit
out of, from
extra-
extraordinary
beyond
hetero-
heterogeneous
diﬀerent, other
homo-
homogenized
same
hyper-
hyperactive
more than usual
hypo-
hypodermic
below, under
il-
illegal
not
im-
imposter
not, into
in-
instill
not, into, toward
ir-
irrational
not, into
kilo-
kilometers
thousand
mal-
malicious,
malfunction
wrong, bad
meta-
metabolic
after, change
mis-
misconduct
wrong
mono-
monologue
one, single
multi-
multidimensional
many, much
neo-
neophyte
new
non-
nonsense
not
ob-
object
against
omni-
omnipotent
all
op-
opposed
against
over-
overwork
above, too much,
beyond
pan-
panacea
all, every
para-
paranormal
beside, near
ped-
pedestrian
foot
per-
persecute
through

Preﬁx
Word(s) Using
the Preﬁx
Preﬁx Deﬁnition
poly-
polygon
many, several
port-
portable
carry
post-
postpone
after, behind,
later
pre-
precede
before, in front
of
pro-
propel
advancing
forward
proto-
prototype
ﬁrst
quad-
quadruple
four
re-
readmit
again, back,
against
retro-
retrospect
backward,
behind
se-
secede
apart, away from
semi-
semiannual
half, partly
sub-
submarine
under, below
super-
superimpose,
superlative
above, beyond
sym-
sympathy
with, together
syn-
synchronous
with, together
techn-
technician
skill, art
trans-
transform
across, over,
change
tri-
triangle
three
ultra-
ultramodern
very, beyond
un-
unbelievable
not
under-
undermine
beneath, lower
uni-
uniform
one
Activity 3G

Use Preﬁxes
Use the following prefixes to create two words for each.
1. ab-
2. con-
3. corp-
4. derm-
5. hypo-
6. proto-
7. sub-
8. super-
9. trans-
10. uni-
Activity 3H
Identify Preﬁxes and Build Words
Identify the appropriate prefix being defined, and then provide two words using
each prefix.
The first one is modeled for you.
A prefix that means “out of, from”: 
a.
b.
1.
A prefix that means “half”: 
a.
b.
2.
A prefix that means “together, with”: 
a.
b.
3.
A prefix that means “under”: 
a.
b.
4.
A prefix that means “one”: 
5.

a.
b.
A prefix that means “thousand”: 
a.
b.
6.
A prefix that means “forward”: 
a.
b.
7.
A prefix that means “carry”: 
a.
b.
8.
A prefix that means “against”: 
a.
b.
9.
A prefix that means “three”: 
a.
b.
10.
3-3b Suﬃxes
A Suffix (word part attached to the end of a word) is a word part attached to the end of a
word. Suffixes usually do not change the meaning of a word as much as prefixes do,
though they can change verbs to the present, past, or future tense. Did you know that
different verb tenses use suffixes (-ed and -ing)? For example, the verb stay can be stayed
yesterday or will be staying tomorrow. A suffix can also change the way words are used.
For example, the verb laugh can be changed to an adjective by adding the suffix -able,
which means “able to be”:
laugh + -able = laughable means “able to be laughed at”
Usually when you add a suffix to a root word, the spelling of both stays the same such as
with laughable. But there are times when the spelling of a root word changes when you
add a suffix:
educate + -tion → education (e drops)
Following are several rules that serve as a general spelling guideline, but if you are
unsure, it is always a good idea to use a dictionary to check the spelling.
For most words that are short, have one syllable, and end in a single consonant,
double the last letter in the word when you add a suffix:
hum + -ing → humming
1.
For most longer words with more than one syllable that end in l, double the last
consonant when adding a suffix:
2.

control + -ed → controlled
For longer words with stress on the last syllable that end in a single consonant,
double the last letter:
begin + -er → beginner
prefer + -ing → preferring
3.
When a word ends in a consonant and a suffix starts with a consonant, you do not
need to double the last letter of the word:
commit + -ment → commitment
4.
Activity 3I
Learn Common Suﬃxes
Using a sheet of paper, cover up the suffix definition column for the following list
of suffixes. Next to each suffix, write down what you think the definition of that
suffix is. You may be familiar with the words using the suffixes, which will help
you to determine what the definition of the suffix is. Check your responses by
uncovering the suffix definition column.
Table 3.5
Common Suﬃxes
Suﬃx
Word(s) Using
the Preﬁx
Preﬁx Deﬁnition
-able, -ible
legible
able to be
-al, -ic
angelic, comical
like, pertaining
to
-an, -or, -er
musician, worker
person who
-ance
resistance
state of, action
-ant
participant
causing, being
-ation
information
state, condition
-ful
harmful,
beautiful
full of
-fy
simplify, magnify
to make
-hood
brotherhood
condition
-ible
divisible
capable
-ion
vision
state of being
-ious
suspicious
characterized by
-ism
symbolism
system

Suﬃx
Word(s) Using
the Preﬁx
Preﬁx Deﬁnition
-ist
scientist
agent, doer,
specialist
community
condition, degree
-ive
active
tending toward
-ize
legalize
to make
-less
heartless
without
-ly
slowly
like
-ment
movement
state of being
-ness
happiness
state, quality
-or
actor
performer of
action
-ous
frivolous
characterized by
-ship
friendship
condition, state
-some
awesome
tending to
-tion
election
act, process
frailty
state, condition
-ward
homeward
direction
-y
cloudy
full of
Activity 3J
Create Words with Suﬃxes
Write a word using a suffix that fits each definition provided. The first one is
done for you.
1. able to bend
2. like a father
3. full of hurt
4. one who
provides
instruction
-ity
-ty

5. without a
home
6. one who
specializes in
biology
7. to make
alphabetical
8. without
money
9. state of
censoring
10.
characterized
by harmony
3-3c Roots
A word's Root (a word's most basic part) is its most basic part. As word parts, roots can be
found anywhere in a word, whereas prefixes typically appear at the beginning and a
suffix typically at the end. It provides the reader with the core meaning of a word. For
example, suppose you read in your local newspaper that an amateur aquarist has added
two rare fish to his collection. Looking at the first part of the word, aqua, which means
“water,” you could safely guess that the aquar-ist (-ist means “one who specializes in it”)
has something to do with water. Because the fish live in water, he would have to keep
them in an aquarium, so it would be reasonable to conclude that the aquarist is someone
who keeps or maintains aquariums.
Activity 3K
Learn Common Roots
Using a sheet of paper, cover up the definition column for the following list of
roots. Next to each root, write down what you think the definition of that root is.
You may be familiar with the words using the roots, which will help you to
determine what the definition of the root is. Check your responses by uncovering
the root definition column.
Table 3.6
Common Roots
Root
Word(s) Using
the Preﬁx
Preﬁx Deﬁnition
anthrop
anthropology
man
aqua
aquarium
water

Root
Word(s) Using
the Preﬁx
Preﬁx Deﬁnition
audio
audition
hear
bibl
bibliography
book
bio
biography
life
cap
capture
take
capit
capital
head
cede
precede
to go
chron(o)
chronological
time
cred
credible
believe
cur
current
run
dict
dictate
tell, say
dog
dogma
thought, idea
duc
conduct
lead
equ
equal
equal
fact
factory
make
ﬁd
ﬁdelity
trust
geo
geography
earth
graph
autograph
write
gyn
gynecologist
woman
hemi
hemisphere
half
ject
trajectory
throw
lith
monolith
stone
logo, logy
biology
study, thought
man
manual
hand
mit, mis
transmit
send
mort
mortal
death
path
empathy
feeling
peri
periscope
all around

Root
Word(s) Using
the Preﬁx
Preﬁx Deﬁnition
philo
philosophic
love
phobia
xenophobia
fear
poli
metropolitan
city
rupt
disrupt
break
scop
telescope
see
scrib, sript
prescription
write
sect
section
cut
sen, sent
sentiment
eel
spec, spick,
specit
spectacle
look
tract
detract
drag, draw
vac
vacuum, vacant
empty
ver
verify
true
verb
verbose
word
vert
convertible
turn
vis
visible
see
viv
vivid
live
Activity 3L
Use Roots
Create two words for each of the following roots.
1. spec
2. scribe
3. sect
4. graph
5. hemi
6. bio

7. phobia
8. mort
9. cede
10. aqua
Activity 3M
Identify Roots
Each of the following words contains one or more prefixes or suffixes. Identify
the root of each word. Do not include any prefixes or suffixes in the root word
you write. The first one is modeled for you.
1. mindfulness
2. sinfulness
3. absent
4. predict
5. motorcycle
6. ectoderm
7. theist
8.
misanthropist
9. biography
10. subtract
Activity 3N
Deﬁne Words Using Word Parts
Underline the root in each of the following words; then review the list of prefixes
and suffixes to write a definition of the word.
remit
1.
circumscribe
2.

credible
3.
reject
4.
predict
Provide a definition for each of the following words using your knowledge
of word parts. You can refer back to all the prefixes, suffixes, and roots that
you have learned in this chapter. Try not to use a dictionary. The first one is
modeled for you.
Example: infidelity
5.
confidential
6.
autonomous
7.
bibliography
8.
posthumous
9.
misogynist
10.
chronological
11.
emit
12.
3-4 Specialized Vocabulary
All course subjects have their own unique vocabulary. In order to do your best in your
courses, it is important for you to learn the language of your discipline or field of study.
Your instructors will use specific words from the discipline and will expect you to
understand and use the same vocabulary. Before you move to the next level in your
major, you should begin to master the discipline's specialized vocabulary (words
common to specific disciplines) . Your lectures will make more sense, and you will
remember more.
Knowing a discipline's specialized vocabulary will also help you to answer essay
questions. For example, read the following paragraph taken from a textbook for a film

course. It would be critical for you to know the language of this course in order for you
to really understand and remember the information. Circle all of the words that you
think would be considered specialized.
The opening scene of L'eclisse demonstrates the extraordinary complexity and power of
Antonioni's compositions. The first shot of the film is a close up of a lamp and books with
a white object resting on top of the books. Significantly, this composition lacks any
apparent human presence. After a few seconds, though, the camera pans right to reveal
Ricardo sitting at his desk. The white object on top of the books turns out to be his elbow.
His body is bisected by a pyramid sculpture and bordered by a second lamp on the right
of the frame.
Source: Prince, Stephen. Movies and Meaning: An Introduction to Film. Allyn and Bacon: Boston, 1997, p. 283.
Activity 3O
Identify Your Courses' Specialized Vocabulary
Identify 10 course-specific words from one or more of your current courses.
These should be words that you have been hearing in lectures and seeing in your
textbooks for those courses. Also provide their definitions.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Activity 3P
Use Context Clues to Deﬁne Specialized Vocabulary
Identify the prefixes, roots, and suffixes of the words in boldfaced type in the
following passage from a marketing textbook. Then use the context clues
surrounding those words to see if you are able to define them.
After marketers select a target market, they direct company activities toward profitably
satisfying that segment. Although they must manipulate thousands of variables to reach
this goal, marketing decision making can be divided into four strategies: product,
pricing, distribution, and promotion strategies. The total package forms the marketing
mix—the blending of the four strategy elements to fit the needs and preferences of a
specific target market. Each strategy is a variable in the mix.
Source: Boone and Kurtz. Contemporary Marketing Wired, 9th ed. The Dryden Press: Fort
Worth, Texas, 1998, p. 24.
target market
1.

segment
2.
variables
3.
strategies
4.
distribution
5.
promotion
6.
marketing mix
7.
3-4a Exam Terminology
Apart from knowing specialized vocabulary, it is equally important that you understand
exam terminology, which includes some unfamiliar terms. You may know all of the
content, but if you do not understand what is being asked of you in an exam question,
your answer may be wrong. For more assistance with test-taking terminology and skills,
refer to the Appendix on test-taking strategies.

illustrate
1.
outline
2.
justify
3.
compare
4.
criticize
5.
contrast
6.
summarize
7.
define
8.
enumerate
9.
explain
10.
describe
11.
prove
12.
analyze
13.
evaluate
14.
state the meaning of a word or
concept
a.
list and explain each point
b.
acknowledge the points of
similarity
c.
use a chart, word picture,
diagram, or concrete example
of something
d.
acknowledge the points of
difference
e.
make a judgment based on
specific criteria
f.
look at individual parts and
examine each critically
g.
summarize by using a series of
headings
h.
tell how to do, or make clear by
giving an example
i.
tell about, give an account of or
characteristics of something
j.
state your opinion—you can
either support or not support
an issue, but support your
opinion using examples
k.
show good reasons for, give
evidence to support your
position
l.
provide a brief overview of the
main points in paragraph form
m.
establish the truth by
providing factual evidence or
logical reasons
n.
Activity 3Q
Learn Exam Terminology
Match the key word on the left with the correct definition on the right to see
how much you understand exam terminology. The first one is modeled for
you.
3-5 Methods to Help You Learn and Remember Vocabulary

There are methods you can use to help you make connections with unfamiliar words.
You can create word maps, use a card review system, and sound it out. Remember that
making strong connections will allow you to create pathways for easy access to the
meaning of new words. It is also important to understand new words beyond their
definitions, like knowing what part of speech a word is, for example, whether it is a noun
or a verb. This will help you see how words are used in sentences so that you can to use
them correctly. The more connections you make, the more likely you will remember
new vocabulary.
3-5a Word Maps
A Word Map (a visual way to represent a word) is a visual way to represent a word. When
you create a word map using the steps explained here, you should understand its
meaning and how to use it. The goal is to begin using your new vocabulary in your
everyday life. Suppose you wanted to learn the word precede; Figure 3.2 is an example of
a word map you could create.
Figure 3.2
Word Map for Precede
© Cengage Learning
There are seven steps to creating your own word map:
Circle 1—Vocabulary Word. Draw a circle in the center of a page or index card, and
write the new vocabulary word in the center.
1.
Circle 2—Original Sentence. Draw another circle anywhere around the center
circle, label this Original Sentence, and write in it the sentence in which you found
the vocabulary word (including the page number, if the word is from a textbook).
Connect this circle by a line to the center circle.
2.
Circle 3—Prediction. Draw another circle, and write in it your prediction of what
you think the word means, using context clues and word part analysis. Label this
Prediction, and connect the circle by a line to the center circle.
3.
Circle 4—Dictionary Deﬁnition. Draw another circle, and write in it the actual
definition from a dictionary. Label this Definition, and connect the circle by a line to
the center circle.
4.
Circle 5—Your Own Sentence. Draw another circle anywhere, and write in it your
own sentence using the vocabulary word. Label this My Sentence, and connect the
circle by a line to the center circle.
5.

2.
Circle 6—Part of Speech. Draw another circle, and write in it what part of speech
the word is—adjective, noun, verb, or adverb. Label this Part of Speech, and connect
the circle by a line to the center circle.
6.
Circle 7—Antonym. Draw one last circle, and write in it an antonym (a word that
has the opposite meaning) of the vocabulary word. Label this Antonym, and
connect the circle by a line to the center circle.
7.
Some students like to use different colors for each component of their word map. Just
like road maps, word maps help guide you to understand and remember new vocabulary
words.
Activity 3R
Create Word Maps
Create word maps for the following words after reading each paragraph.
Undaunted
1.
Andrew had never played hockey. His friend David asked him to go to the local ice arena
to play a game. He borrowed equipment, pulled on his old skates, and hit the ice, literally.
He fell hard, hurting his hip. Undaunted, he picked himself up and headed to the net to
score his first goal.
© Cengage Learning
Concocted
It was the first time he had spoken publicly since early November, when stories first
filtered out that his father and would-be marketer had concocted a pay-for-play scheme
to sell Cam's services to Mississippi State. This much is fact: Cecil Newton told NCAA
investigators it happened, and the NCAA deemed that, according to the information it
currently has, Cam Newton knew nothing about the scheme.
Source: Hayes, Matt. “Cam…a lot.” Sporting News. Week of December 20, 2010, p. 34.

3.
4.
© Cengage Learning
Flak
Her folks, Carole and Michael Middleton, really have the high-pressure job: introducing
themselves to the Queen on the big day. They joined a shooting party at Balmoral at
Will's invitation, but she wasn't on hand. Carole has already taken flak, for apparently
chewing gum at William's 2006 graduation from Sandhurst Military Academy (a source
contends it was a lozenge).
Source: Westfall, Zuckerman, and Corcoran. “Doing It Her Way.” People, March 7, 2011, p.
62.
© Cengage Learning
Ravenous
After I leave the office, I like to hit the gym and work out for an hour or two. However, it
always leaves me ravenous—I get so hungry, I lose all self-control. The way home is lined
with fast-food restaurants. Instead of waiting to eat a healthy meal at home, I always
seem to find myself in line, waiting for Wendy's, Micky D's, or a Whopper. So much for
working out.

© Cengage Learning
3-5b The Card Review System (CRS)
Another effective method for remembering and learning vocabulary is the card review
system (CRS) (a vocabulary-building activity where words and their definitions are
written on note cards for easy and frequent review) . By creating note cards with
vocabulary words and their definitions, you will continue to make connections to the
words. Note cards are also easy to carry with you, and you can review them while
waiting in line, on public transportation, or between classes. This is one way to practice
rehearsal and repetition techniques, which are effective ways to store information in
your working memory and encode it to your long-term memory. Figure 3.3 shows an
example note card.
Figure 3.3
Example Note Card for Facade
© Cengage Learning
To create a card for the CRS, follow these steps:
Write down the vocabulary word on the front of a 3 × 5 index card.
1.

Look up the word in a dictionary. On the back of the card, write how the word
should be pronounced and identify what part of speech it is (noun, verb, adjective,
adverb).
2.
Write down the word's definition.
3.
Then write a sentence using the word.
4.
Write down an antonym of the word (a word that is opposite in meaning).
5.
Draw a picture to help you remember the word's meaning. This will help create a
new pathway for the word and trigger your memory about the word's meaning.
You do not have to be an artist; the picture only has to make sense to you.
6.
When creating cards for specialized vocabulary from textbooks, write down the name of
the book, the page number where you first read the word, and the exact sentence in
which the word was used on the front of the card. When reviewing for exams, it is
helpful to have the context of the word so you can review it using course content. See
Figure 3.4 for an example.
Figure 3.4
Example of a Specialized Vocabulary Note Card for Rational Numbers
© Cengage Learning
As you create more and more cards with vocabulary words that you encounter in your
reading, organize the words in chronological order (in the order you found them in your
textbooks) to help you remember the source and context of each word (if you are
organizing your cards by course). Or you can organize your cards alphabetically if that
makes more sense for you. Some students find it convenient to punch a hole in the top
left-hand corner and place the cards on a ring to keep the cards together and organized.
Remember to carry the cards with you so that you can review them when you have a few
free minutes each day, like when you are waiting for a class to begin. Reviewing your
cards whenever you have time will help you to quickly learn the words and is a painless
and effective way to learn any type of vocabulary. When you can, review the words by
saying them out loud. Recording new words and playing them back can be especially
useful because you are using several senses (speaking and hearing) to learn them.

ă
pat
ā
Pay
â
care
ä
father
b
bib
ch
church
Activity 3S
Use the Card Review System (CRS)
Read the following passage, identify all of the words you are not familiar with,
and practice using the CRS by creating a card for each unfamiliar word.
The same Indians who gave the world quinine also gave it coca, which Indian farmers
cultivated in approximately the same area at the foot of the Andes. One of the traditional
uses of coca was a ritual antiseptic applied to the body of the patient by a healer. More
commonly, the leaves of the coca bush are masticated or made into tea that appeases the
body and alleviates pain as well as the discomfort of thirst, hunger, itching, and fatigue.
Source: Weatherford. J. Indian Givers: How the Indians of the Americas Transformed the
World. New York: Crown Publishers, p. 190.
3-5c Sounding it Out
Improving your vocabulary includes knowing a word's meaning as well as its
pronunciation. A third technique for remembering and learning new words is to sound
them out. Sometimes saying a word out loud triggers a memory of having heard the
word before. For example, you may see the word calamari. If you sound it out, you recall
hearing it in a restaurant and eating it and make the connection that it is octopus.
Pronouncing a word will help you remember it and will give you the confidence to use
the word. Sounding out a word creates a learning pathway in the brain from something
unfamiliar (the new word) to something familiar in your brain (words you already know
that have similar sounds and related meanings).
If you are unsure about how to pronounce a new word, look it up in a dictionary.
Dictionaries usually include pronunciation guides in the front to help you understand
what the marks mean. Consider the word eclectic. One dictionary has this guide: e'klek tik.
The mark before klek shows that this syllable is emphasized. Sound it out. Some
dictionaries also include a pronunciation guide at the bottom of every page. Online
dictionaries usually provide an audio pronunciation that can help you confirm exactly
how the word is pronounced. For example, if you had never seen and did not know the
word knee, how would you sound it out? And what about the word pneumonia? Or
psychology?
Activity 3T
Use Pronunciation Keys
Using the pronunciation key here, sound out the following phonetically spelled
words and then write them in the spaces provided, using the correct English
spelling. The first one is modeled for you.
1. tə-mā-tō
2. sī-n-ti-ﬁk
3. tō-nāl
4.
kän-trə-dikt

d
deed, milled
ĕ
pet
ē
bee
f
fife, phase, rough
g
gag
h
hat
hw
which
I
pit
ı̄
pie, by
î
pier
j
judge
k
kick, cat, pique
l
lid, needle
m
mum
n
no, sudden
ng
thing
ŏ
pot
ō
toe
ô
caught, paw, for, horrid, hoarse
oi
noise
took
û
urge, term, firm, word, heard
v
valve
w
with
y
yes
z
zebra, xylem
zh
vision, pleasure, garage
5. nīt kləb
6. ter-ə-bəl
7. äk-tə-pəs
8. mir-i-kəl
9. kä-lij
10. hi-pə-
pä-tə-məs

ə
about, item, edible, gallop, circus
boot
ou
out
p
pop
r
roar
s
sauce
sh
ship, dish
t
tight, stopped
th
thin
th
this
ŭ
cut
ər
butter
Compare your answers for this activity with other students in your class. Did any
of you have different words? Try sounding the words out together again to see if
you can agree on the correct word.
Comprehension Check
What strategies presented in this chapter create pathways in your
brain for learning new vocabulary?
Why is creating many pathways better than creating only one?
3-6 Chapter Review
3-6a Practice with a Reading Passage

Prepare to Read
Based on the title, what do you expect the passage to be about?
1.
What do you already know about the subject?
2.
Physics Major Has a Name for a Really Big Number
By Steve Chawkins
1 When Austin Sendek was growing up in Northern California, he was never allowed to
use the regional slang term “hella.” Now the 20-year-old physics major at UC Davis uses
“hella” often—and he's trying to get scientists from Boise to Beijing to do the same.
Sendek, who was forced to use “hecka” as a child, has petitioned an international
scientific body to make “hella” the name for the hitherto
 nameless, unimaginably
huge, seldom-cited quantity of 10 to the 27
 power—or 1 followed by 27 zeros.
Austin Sendek, a 20-year-old UC Davis student, is trying to get scientists from Boise
to Beijing to use the term “hella” to denote the unimaginably huge, seldom-cited
quantity of 10 to the 27
 power.
© Nathan Morgan Photography
2 It started as a joke, but Sendek's Facebook petition to the Consultative Committee on
Units, a subdivision of the Bureau International des Poids et Mesures, has drawn more
than 60,000 supporters. Its chances for formal adoption by the global weights-
and-measures community are hella dim, but Google was so taken with Sendek's modest
proposal that it incorporated “hella” in its online calculator.
3 “As Google goes,” Sendek says hopefully, “so goes the world.”
4 “Hella,” a term many Southern Californians find as irritating as teary-eyed renditions
of “I Left My Heart in San Francisco,” is used mainly to make adjectives more intense, as
in: “This lentil pizza is hella healthful!” It also can convey simple exuberance:
 “That
party at Sunshine's house? Hella!”
5 “Hella” probably derived from “helluva” and, for reasons unknown, morphed into
“hella” in the Bay Area before taking wing in the 1990s. In 2001, Gwen Stefani and her
band No Doubt—out of Orange County—took it national with their mega-hit “Hella
Good.”
6 “A lot of people around the U.S. know it comes from Northern California, where there
have been so many contributions to science at Davis, Berkeley, Stanford and Lawrence
Livermore,” Sendek says of”hella.” “It would be a really good way to immortalize
 this
part of the state.”
7 As for slang in scientific terminology, at least one linguist says right on. “Anything that
th
th

takes vernacular
 speech and treats it well—gives it its props—is fine with me,” said
Carmen Fought, a professor at Pitzer College in Claremont. In a Facebook posting, a
friend of Fought related the regional pride he felt on overhearing a Berkeley teenager
use “hella”: “I nodded and smiled and thought to myself, ‘Keep the torch lit, my young
friend.'”
8 For Sendek, the idea sprang from a physics class. “I asked my lab partner how many
volts were in this electric field and she said, offhandedly, ‘Oh, man—there's hella volts,'”
he recalled. “It kind of clicked.”
9 At Google, software engineers, who are accustomed to planting “Easter eggs”—hidden
delights—in their programs, got wind of “hella” through one of Sendek's friends and
installed it in the service's calculator. Now users can find out, with a little finagling, that
our $13-trillion national debt, when expressed in hella-dollars, is a pleasingly tiny 1.3
times 10 to the minus 14 . Of course, Google also planted pig Latin
 and Klingon
in its translator function, so its embrace of “hella” may not reflect a rigorous
intellectual assessment of the term.
10 For that, the world's scientists turn to the Consultative Committee on Units, an
advisory body of the International System of Units—which in French, the language of
weights and measures, is more stylishly known as the Systeme Internationale, or SI.
Hella's chances at the committee's next meeting, in September, are remote. In an e-mail
to colleagues, Ian Mills, the British chemist who serves as the CCU's president, wrote that
“it will be received with smiles—but I doubt that it will go further!”
11 The SI is not known for whimsy.
 It generally chooses prefixes suggested by Greek
or Latin. In 1991, the last time prefixes were added to the world's quantitative
lexicon,
 the choices were “zepta” for 10 to the 21  and “zetto” for its tiny cousin in
the realm of negative numbers, and “yotta” and “yocto” for 10 to the 24
 and 10 to the
minus 24
. (Above 1,000, prefixes are selected at every third power: “mega” for 10 to the
sixth, “giga” for 10 to the ninth, etc.).
12 “The biggest question is whether the scientific community needs a prefix for 10 to the
27
,” said Ben Stein, a spokesman for the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
“Zepta” and “yotta” haven't exactly caught fire, he said, and the science is delving
ever deeper into the unimaginably small—a realm Sendek's proposal does not address.
13 Sendek, who skis for UC Davis when he's not pounding the drum for large quantities,
insists that the term would simplify scientific descriptions. The theoretical diameter of
the universe, he points out, is 1.4 hellameters.
14 Still, he acknowledges that getting an official blessing for a term that means a million
billion trillion is a long shot, despite headlines around the U.S. and a surge of pro-hella
sentiment on his home turf.
15 “There's not a huge chance of it happening,” he says, “but maybe if they're having a
great day.”
Source: From Steve Chawkins, “Physics major has a name for a really big number,” Los Angeles Times (July 6, 2010).
Copyright © 2010 Los Angeles Times. Reprinted with permission.
Check Your Understanding
What did college student Austin Sendek petition to do with the term hella?
He petitioned for the right to use the term in his classes, even though
he was forbidden to use the term as a child.
a.
He petitioned an international scientific body to have the term
officially stand for the numerical amount of 10 to the 27
 power.
b.
He petitioned an international scientific body to have the term
officially stand for the numerical amount of 27,000.
c.
He petitioned an international scientific body to have the term
d.
3.
th
st
th
th
th
th

officially used on Facebook.
According to the passage, the word hello's chances for formal adoption by
the global weights-and-measures community are:
great
a.
possible
b.
likely
c.
not likely
d.
4.
What did Google do with the word hella?
Google added it to its online calculator.
a.
Google added it to its home page.
b.
Google added it to its translator function.
c.
Google added Klingon to its translator function.
d.
5.
What other prefix is added to the world's quantitative lexicon?
mini
a.
hella
b.
mega
c.
gimongous
d.
6.
Sendek points out that the theoretical diameter of the universe is:
.14 hellameters
a.
14 hellameters
b.
140 hellameters
c.
1.4 hellameters
d.
7.
If adopted, the term hella would be a:
suffix
a.
prefix
b.
root
c.
context
d.
8.
What slang terms can you think of that have become part of the larger
culture and seen in print or heard on television?
9.
What slang words can you think of that are still known only to an exclusive
group?
10.
Can you think of a slang word that would be good to describe a really big
number?
11.

Do you think the word hella will be adopted by the scientific community?
Why or why not?
12.
Chapter Review
3-6b Chapter Summary
College students are expected to grow their vocabularies throughout their college
careers. To increase your vocabulary, actively use context clues, words around an
unfamiliar word, to help you discover a word's meaning. Authors will use different types
of context of clues—like punctuation, synonyms, antonyms, definitions, examples, and
personal experiences, opinions, and knowledge—to help readers uncover the meaning of
unfamiliar words and to make their meaning more clear. Analyze the parts of a
word—prefixes, roots, suffixes—so you can see how the parts fit together to create
meaning. If context clues and word part analysis do not help you to understand the
meaning of a word, consult a dictionary. Every academic discipline has specialized
vocabulary, and textbooks will include a rich variety of new words that you will probably
be unfamiliar with. Challenge yourself to look up unfamiliar words as you encounter
them in your reading material. If you are a biology student, you shouldn't just memorize
words such as endothermic for a test; you will need that word for a lifetime. Knowledge
builds as you progress in your field.
Make a firm vocabulary foundation for yourself by committing new vocabulary words to
memory by drawing word maps, using the card review system (CRS), and sounding words
out. Purposefully create pathways in your brain. Hearing the word and seeing the word
creates different pathways in your brain. Remember that the greater number of
pathways activated, the better the learning.
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw the amount of dendrites you imagine that you have now about
vocabulary. Compare your drawing of dendrites now with what you
drew at the beginning of this chapter. If the amounts are different,
explain why.
Comprehension Check
Where in the chapter did you lose concentration or become confused?
If you could ask the authors a question about this chapter, what would
you ask?

Chapter Review
3-6c Post Test

context clues
1.
prefix
2.
suffix
3.
root
4.
specialized vocabulary
5.
word map
6.
card review system (CRS)
7.
a vocabulary-building activity
where words and their
definitions are written on note
cards for easy and frequent
review
a.
word part attached to the end
of a word
b.
a visual way to represent a
word
c.
using the words around a word
to determine meaning
d.
word part, syllable, or syllables
placed at the beginning of a
word
e.
a word's most basic part
f.
words common to specific
disciplines
g.
a
8.
terr
9.
circum
10.
hypo
11.
ver
12.
rupt
13.
post
14.
bio
15.
ism
16.
mis
17.
dem
18.
cred
19.
anti
20.
ist
21.
ness
22.
around
a.
life
b.
not, away from
c.
people
d.
true
e.
believe
f.
against, opposed to
g.
land
h.
after, behind, later
i.
wrong
j.
break
k.
below, under
l.
system
m.
state, quality
n.
one who does, doer, studies,
agent
o.
Part 1: Objective Questions
Match the key terms from the chapter in Column A to their definitions in
Column B.
Match the prefixes, suffixes, and roots from the chapter in Column A to their
definitions in Column B.

Which of the following is not a type of context clue?
definition
a.
punctuation
b.
duplication
c.
example
d.
23.
When using the CRS, which of the following should be written on the front
of your note card?
part of speech
a.
word
b.
definition
c.
pronunciation
d.
24.
Using a dictionary, create a word map for the word homonym.
© Cengage Learning
Using the context clues you have learned in this chapter, define the
following boldfaced words and identify the type of context clue used.
25.
I never met a more apathetic group of participants; they were completely
indifferent and unresponsive to the needs of those around them.
Define apathetic: 
Type of context clue: 
26.
A homestead is the home and adjoining land occupied by a family.
Define homestead: 
Type of context clue: 
27.
I don't think he can be believed; in other words, a witness can lose all
28.

justify
30.
compare
31.
contrast
32.
summarize
33.
explain
34.
analyze
35.
bring out the points of
similarity
a.
bring out the points of
difference
b.
look at individual parts and
examine each critically
c.
make clear, make plain, tell
how to do, make clear by giving
an example
d.
show good reasons for, give
evidence to support your
position
e.
provide a brief overview of the
main points
f.
credibility after being caught in a lie.
Define credibility: 
Type of context clue: 
His argument was specious and false, and it will send him home.
Define specious: 
Type of context clue: 
29.
Match the selected testing terminology in Column A with its definition in
Column B.
Part 2: Objective Questions
Prepare to Read
Based on the title and heading, what do you expect this passage to be
about?
1.
What do you already know about the topic?
2.
Learn Something New—Your Brain Will Thank You
By Gary Marcus
1 The idea that learning a new skill—say juggling, cooking, or playing guitar—can be like
an addiction is no joke.
2 I should know. As a college professor/scientist, who has written about the dynamics of
narcotics and self-control, I have spent the last 3 1/2 years all but addicted to learning to
play guitar. Despite lacking anything that might remotely resemble musical talent, I find
no day is complete without at least a little bit of time on the guitar.
3 Even listening to music can be a little like a drug. A brain imaging study that came out

last year proved what many scientists long suspected: Listening to music can lead the
brain to release the neurotransmitter dopamine. Dopamine is the brain's universal
signal for pleasure, an internal system that tells the brain (sometimes rightly, sometimes
wrongly) that it is doing the right thing.
4 Drugs elicit dopamine artificially by fooling the brain, while activities like sex and
eating elicit dopamine naturally. Listening to music taps into the dopamine system in
part because hearing something new is a signal that the brain is learning something, and
we have evolved to enjoy acquiring new information.
5 Shortcuts like drugs, however are fleeting. Although narcotics can elicit dopa-mine
fairly directly, over time it takes a bigger and bigger dose to get the same rush, and can
lead people to destroy families, risk their health and even lose their lives.
6 Learning new things is a lot safer, and ultimately a lot more satisfying.
7 There is a myth that children (and for that matter adults) don't really enjoy learning
new things, but as every video game maker has realized, the truth is just the opposite.
From “Space Invaders” to “Halo,” “Grand Theft Auto” and “Zelda,” practically every video
game is in part about mastering new skills.
8 As video game designers realized long ago, if you can keep a player poised on the
knife's edge of conquering new challenges, neither too easy and too hard but square in
what the cognitive psychologist Vygotsky called the Zone of Proximal Development, you
can keep gamers engaged for hours. As long as we constantly feel challenged but never
overwhelmed, we keep coming back for more and constantly sharpen new skills.
9 The trouble, though, with most video games lies in what they teach, which often stays
with the game when the game is complete. A game that makes you good at shooting
aliens may have little application in the real world.
10 Learning a more lasting new skill—be it playing guitar or learning to speak a foreign
language—can equally harness the brain's joy of learning new things, but leave you with
something of permanent value, in a way that neither drugs nor video games ever could.
It leaves you with a sense of fulfillment, which goes back to what pioneering
psychologist Abraham Maslow called “self-actualization.”
11 As Aristotle realized, there is a difference between the pleasures of the moment
(hedonia), and the satisfaction that comes from constantly developing and living one's
life to the fullest (eudaimonia). In recent years, scientists have finally begun to study
eudaimonia. Research suggests that the greater sense of purpose and personal growth
associated with eudaimonia correlates with lower cortisol levels, better immune
function and more efficient sleep.
12 From the strict “Selfish Gene” perspective—in which all that we do is driven by the
self-perpetuating interests of our individual genes—hobbies like playing music rarely
make sense, especially for mere amateurs. But maybe the art of reinvention and
acquiring new skills, even as adults, can give us a sense of a life well-lived.
13 According to a 2009 Gallup Poll, 85% of Americans who don't play a musical
instrument wish that they could. Why not start today? As it happens, this week is
National Wanna Play Music Week, a perfect time to pick up a new skill that will bring
satisfaction throughout life.
14 What stops many people from learning something new is the thought that they are
too old, not good enough or just plain busy. If my own experience is any guide, none of
these matter much. Taking up an instrument (starting at age 38) has been one of the
most challenging but rewarding things I've ever done.
15 So long as your goal is growth rather than stardom, learning something new may just
turn out to be one of the most rewarding things you ever do. Your brain will thank you
for it.
Source: From “Learn something new - your brain will thank you” by Gary Marcus. Copyright © 2012 by Gary Marcus.
Reprinted by permission. http://thechart.blogs.cnn.com/2012/05/10/learn-something-new-your-brain-
will-thank-you/

Check Your Understanding
Using context clues, define dopamine as it is used in paragraph 3. Then list
two activities that produce dopamine.
1.
Provide your own definition for the Zone of Proximal Development, based on
what you read about it in reference to “gamers.”
2.
Use an Internet search to see what else you can learn about the two Greek
words hedonia and eudaimonia. How are the two words similar and
different? How does doing extra investigating on difficult words help your
understanding of the reading?
3.
Analyze the word parts and provide a definition of the following words:
remotely (paragraph 2):
universal (paragraph 3):
4.
Using context clues, define the word imaging in paragraph 3.
5.
Create a word map on a separate piece of paper for a word unknown to you
from the reading passage.
6.
Create a CRS card for a word unknown to you from the reading passage.
7.
Define self-actualization. Then explain how you could use a journal to help
you understand what the author means by self-actualization.
8.
Chapter Review
3-6d 
 Brain Strength Options

From the list below, select one individual activity and one group activity.
Find something in a magazine, advertisement, or article that provides a
context clue. You may use articles from the Internet. Hint: The clue may be
a picture. Remember, it must be a clue to the meaning of a word not an
explanation of a product in an advertisement. This is an individual activity.
1.
Find an example of each type of context clue using sentences from a
textbook or making up your own sentences. Make a poster or presentation
with the sentences, and label each example accordingly. The poster or
presentation will be used in class to enhance other students' learning about
context clues. This is a group activity of no more than three people.
2.
Write a song using new vocabulary with context clues in the lyrics. Use at
least five new-to-you words in the song. Sing the song to the class, and
provide written lyrics either on handouts or projected on a screen. The
lyrics must be turned in before your performance for your instructor's
approval. This is a group activity of no more than three people.
3.
Create a graphic novel or cartoon that includes at least five vocabulary
words in which the picture or story line contains context clues to the
meaning of the words. You may use any type of context clues. This is an
individual option.
4.
Photocopy five context clues from another textbook, label them with the
type of context clue, and submit them to your instructor. No students
should have the same excerpts even if they use the same textbook in other
courses. This is an individual option.
5.

Chapter 4
Locating Stated Main Ideas
Chapter Introduction
4-1 Main Ideas Help you Understand Your Reading
4-2 Recognizing Topics, Main Ideas, and Details
4-2a Understanding Topics
4-3 Identifying Stated Main Ideas
4-3a Strategy One: Question Yourself
4-3b Strategy Two: Look in the Usual Spots
4-3c Strategy Three: Notice Word Clues
4-3d Strategy Four: Categorize an Author's Points
4-4 Mind Mapping with Main Ideas
4-5 Chapter Review
4-5a Practice with a Reading Passage
4-5b Chapter Summary
4-5c Post Test
4-5d  Brain Strength Options
Chapter Introduction
“Once you learn to read you will be forever free.”
— Frederick Douglass
Student to Student
Preston Tindall
When I read, I go from beginning to end and take notes. I figure out the topic
from the headings and subheadings and I fill in the rest as I go along. I typically

Making Connections
What is a theme park? Why is the
word theme used? Could you use the
term main idea to describe the park
instead of the word theme? Explain.
1.
Have you ever heard the phrase main
idea? Describe the context in which
you have heard it used.
2.
How would you define the term main
idea?
3.
If you had a suggestion for how to
improve the packing and shipping
procedures in an office where you
worked and you were asked to write a
4.
don't read the summary at the end because it gives it all away. It tells you
everything. I like to figure it out as I go.
A recent graduate of Baker College with a major in marketing and business
marketing
Courtesy of Preston Tindall
I usually don't have trouble as I read because I have a lot of background
knowledge in the subject matter. If I do have a problem, though, I reread and
sometimes ask someone else who knows more about the topic than I do.
Vocabulary is possibly the hardest part of reading in my discipline. Sometimes I
come across a word in print that I don't understand initially, but then usually
when I sound it out, I hear it and then recognize it. I guess I know more words by
ear than I do by sight, but that's probably normal.
My current knowledge base helps me as I approach new material. I have a couple
of apps on my phone to help me such as Word of the Day, Business Weekly, and
Wall Street Journal.

memo explaining your suggestion,
what would be the main idea of your
memo? How would you get your idea
across?
How do you think an author helps the
reader see his or her main idea?
5.
© Cengage Learning
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw on the brain cell how many dendrites you imagine you have for how
much you know about stated main ideas.

4-1 Main Ideas Help you Understand Your Reading
Being able to Identify the stated main idea (major points the author makes about the
topic directly stated in a sentence) of what you are reading is a major first step toward
understanding college-level material. Once you can recognize the main idea, you can
prioritize information and concentrate on thoroughly understanding and remembering
what is most important. If you cannot distinguish the main idea from other ideas (called
details, which you will learn more about in Chapter 5), you can wrongly assume that all
the information is of equal importance and feel you have to memorize everything in
order to do well on exams. Attempting to memorize an entire chapter is not practical
and, fortunately, not necessary.
Just like learning how to work a new cell phone, learning to find the author's main idea
may not be easy at first. When you first get a new phone, it may be frustrating and
time-consuming to do simple functions, like use the speakerphone or adjust the volume.
However, after a learning curve (a time where something starts out hard and with
practice gets easier as time goes on), you find that you can use your cell phone without
even thinking how to do it. The same is true of finding the main idea in a text. At first you
may feel frustrated, but once you get good at figuring it out, you will experience the
reward of “aha” as you comprehend your reading. Remember: Knowledge is power.
4-2 Recognizing Topics, Main Ideas, and Details
To understand what main ideas are, it is helpful to distinguish them from topics and
supporting details. A topic (a word or phrase that is the subject of a reading) is what a
reading is about, the subject of a reading. It can be stated in a word or a phrase. Usually,
the title of an article or chapter will offer a hint about what the topic is. For example, the
title of this chapter, “Locating Stated Main Ideas,” is also its topic, what this chapter is
about.
A main idea is the major point the author makes about the topic. A topic and main idea
are not the same thing. The main idea is a complete thought, usually in the form of a
sentence, and gives more detailed information about the topic. The topic is just a word
or phrase.

Topic
Older college students
Main Idea
Students over the age of 40 are entering
college in record numbers.
Each main idea is supported by evidence or details called supporting details (ideas that
prove, clarify, justify, or otherwise support the main idea) . Details, which will be
discussed in Chapter 5, are more specific than a main idea. They prove, clarify, justify, or
support a main idea.
All college reading contains topics, main ideas, and details. Topics are the most general
ideas, and details are the most specific. To demonstrate the general-to-specific
relationship between topics, main ideas, and details, examine the mind map in Figure
4.1. Mind maps (line drawings that show the relationship between ideas) are line
drawings that show the relationship between ideas. They begin with the most general
idea at the top, or in the center, and then visually separate out the topic, main ideas, and
supporting details. The mind maps that are at the beginning of each chapter of this
textbook demonstrate this as well.
Figure 4.1
Example of a Mind Map for Topic Older College Students
© Cengage Learning
4-2a Understanding Topics
Topics are the general ideas of what you are reading. A chapter title can tell you what the
topic is. See Table 4.1 for examples of possible topics of textbook chapters.

Table 4.1
Topics of Textbook Chapters
Textbook
Chapter Topic
earth science
climate
change
psychology
addiction
history
Gulf War
However, it is important to remember that a topic is not the main idea. For example, the
Gulf War might be the topic in your textbook. What about the Gulf War? That is a pretty
big topic. The main idea might be reasons for the Gulf War, a comparison of the Gulf War
with the war in Vietnam, or the people involved in the Gulf War.
Consider the following passage. It is like something you might find thumbing through a
magazine while standing in line at the grocery store:
Melissa and Josh – Together!
1 Last Saturday, almost three years to the date of their own wedding, Melissa and Josh
found themselves walking down the aisle again, this time as wedding guests of their dear
friends Brad and Jodi. Both of them were beaming, looking more like the bride and
groom. When they were seated, they sat very closely together, holding each other's
hands. No one would have thought that these two would ever speak to each other again,
let alone appear so happy and in love. Just four months ago, the news of Melissa's
indiscretions with her director, John Gorshing, sent the couple into a whirlwind. She had
been in Paris, working on her most recent film, Goth Vamps. When the news hit the
tabloids, the couple came close to calling it quits. It seems now that they're back together
in spite of their relationship struggles.
2 “They have never been closer,” their friends say. However, their pending split seemed
to consume the public for weeks…that's all anyone seemed to talk about. But Saturday,
the dark clouds lifted. Their entrance into the church caused visible approval and relief.
3 Before today, the last photo taken captured Melissa crying and running from the
endless stream of paparazzi, who waited like vultures for bits of her suffering. They
waited in bushes, in cars, under porches hoping to get “the golden ticket” shot.
4 During his most recent TV interview, Josh said that it was time to move on without
Melissa. Things had reached a point where it was unlikely that they could amend their
relationship. He was in the process of moving out of their home in Santa Monica.
5 But Saturday, lots of people congratulated them on their reunion. “It seems that they
will make their third anniversary after all,” adds a wedding guest. “I'm feeling for Brad
and Jodi though. Although Melissa and Josh tried to keep a low profile during the
ceremony, all eyes were on them anyway. But the twosome didn't stay long. They never

intended to take attention away from the bride and groom.” Not wanting to cause
additional commotion they left immediately following the ceremony.
6 Their romantic plans? Some say they were headed to their honeymoon hut on a private
island in the Pacific.
This short article is one you could easily read without much effort, and quickly identify
the topic. What do you think it is? If you thought the topic is Melissa and Josh being
together, you would be correct. The title, “Melissa and Josh—Together!,” focuses your
attention on that topic right away. Many phrases in the passage continue on that topic:
“Both of them were beaming, looking more like the bride and groom,” and “When they
were seated, they sat very closely together, holding each other's hands.” What do you
think the main idea is? What is the passage focused on? What point is made about their
being together? The last sentence in the first paragraph tells you: “It seems now that
they're back together in spite of their relationship struggles.” Sentences throughout the
article explain why their relationship was at risk (“Just four months ago, the news of
Melissa's indiscretions with her director, John Gorshing, sent the couple into a
whirlwind.”) and what the status of their relationship is now (“But Saturday, lots of
people congratulated them on their reunion”).
Magazines usually have shorter articles with familiar information, and you might be
wondering how discussing this type of leisure reading helps with college reading. The
reading skills you use to quickly determine the topic from a magazine article can also be
used to determine topics of college reading assignments. For both leisure and academic
reading, you look at the title and glance at, or skim (to scan or look over something
quickly) , the reading to get an idea of content.
Activity 4A
Identify the General Topic
When determining topics, it is helpful to compare ideas and decide which ones
are general and which are more specific. The more general ideas are likely to be
topics. Read the words in each group, and circle the word that is likely to be the
topic in each set. The first one is modeled for you.
apple
peach
fruit
lemon
1.
dogs
rottweiler
golden lab
poodle
2.
Lady Gaga
3.

pop stars
Britney Spears
Katy Perry
Bachelor of Arts Ph.D.
college degrees
Master's
4.
Michigan
states
Illinois
Colorado
5.
humerus
phalanges
sternum
bones
6.
Saab
Audi
Mustang
car
7.
Buddhism
Catholicism
Sikhism
religions
8.
keyboard
computer system
monitor
hard drive
9.
egg salad
10.

sandwiches
ham and cheese
BLT
Think about this activity for a moment. Did you struggle a bit to come up with any
of the answers, specifically #6? Did unfamiliar words make it difficult? If you do
not know what phalanges are, you could have had difficulty identifying the topic
of the words in that list. Look up unfamiliar words as you read to help your
comprehension.
Activity 4B
Decide the Topic
For each list, think about what the separate items have in common and decide
what the general topic is. The first one is modeled for you.
Topic: 
flats
heels
boots
clogs
1.
Topic: 
cancer
Parkinson's
HIV/AIDS
muscular dystrophy
2.
Topic: 
Golden Gate
Brooklyn
Ambassador
London/Tower
3.
Topic: 
Facebook
4.

2.
Google +
YouTube
Twitter
Topic: 
lacrosse
hockey
baseball
soccer
5.
Activity 4C
Identify Topics in Paragraphs
Read the following passages, and determine what the topic is for each.
From a magazine article titled “Grouchily Ever After: It's the Good-Natured
Grumbling that Keeps Our Marriage from Crumbling”
1.
Shared humor is a litmus test of love, a key predictor in whether a couple will stay
together. A recently completed study backs me up. In it, University of California,
Berkeley, psychologists Patrick Whalen and Robert Levenson looked at stress among
long-married couples measured in terms of blood pressure, heart rate, and sweating, and
they found that affectionate humor (but not teasing and sarcasm) makes us calmer and
more responsive to our partners during anxious times. The upshot: We like them more
because they make us feel better. So of course, we'll hang out with them longer. We
already intuitively knew this, but it's nice to have science on our side.
Source: Newman, Judith. “Grouchily Ever After: It's the good-natured grumbling that
keeps our marriage from crumbling,” Reader's Digest September, 2010. p. 111.
Topic: 
From a newspaper article titled “Sensible Option”
1 With gasoline prices on the rise, it's important to make sure your vehicle's engine is
running effectively and efficiently. April is National Car Care Month and an ideal time to
talk with a professional automotive technician to see if repowering your vehicle with a
remanufactured/rebuilt engine is the right choice for you.
2 A rebuilt engine gets better gas mileage and emits fewer pollutants than worn out
engine. If your car or truck is experiencing major engine damage, but is in relatively

3.
4.
5.
good shape otherwise, repowering it with a remanufactured/rebuilt engine is sensible
financial option that is much more cost effective than purchasing a new or used car.
Source: Carter, Ken. Livonia Observer and Eccentric. Sensible Option. Thursday, 2012,
April 26, p. A-12.
Topic: 
From a journal article titled “About Faces, in Art and in the Brain”
Almost all creatures, from dogs to canaries, gorillas to penguins, salamanders to
crocodiles, kangaroos to spiders, and certainly members of our human family, manifest
the same formula for facial composition: a forehead, two eyes, a nose, a mouth, and a
chin that are in the same relative positions. Why was nature so consistent in composing
faces? Essentially, the arrangement optimizes survival: the eyes located high for a
commanding view of the world, the nose turned down to avoid rain, and the mouth
situated to ingest food that has been perused
 by the nose and eyes above it.
Source: Solso, Robert, L. “About Faces, in Art and in the Brain”. Cerebrum: The Dana Forum
on Brain Science, 6(3), 2004, 8.
Topic: 
From a book titled Rethinking Homework: Best Practices That Support
Diverse Needs
Homework is a long-standing education tradition that, until recently, has seldom been
questioned. The concept of homework has become so ingrained in the U.S. culture that
the word homework is part of the common vernacular,
 as exemplified by statements
such as these: “Do your homework before taking a trip,” “It's obvious they didn't do their
homework before they presented their proposal,” or “The marriage counselor gave us
homework to do.” Homework began generations ago when schooling consisted primarily
of reading, writing, and arithmetic, and rote learning dominated. Simple tasks of
memorization and practice were easy for children to do at home, and the belief was that
such mental exercise disciplined the mind. Homework has generally been viewed as a
positive practice and accepted without question as part of the student routine. But over
the years, homework in U.S. schools has evolved from the once simple tasks of
memorizing math facts or writing spelling words to complex projects.
Source: Vatterott. Rethinking Homework: Best Practices That Support Diverse Needs. ASCD,
2009, p. 1.
Topic: 
From a book titled The Learning Paradigm College
Academic success or learning for its own sake in a classroom setting does not offer most

students any significant personal rewards. If we separate learning and cognitive
development in the classroom from the external rewards tied to it—grades, graduation,
college admission—we discover that most high school students find learning in the
classroom setting neither motivating nor rewarding and find failure to learn neither
unpleasant nor threatening. Most of those students who thrive academically in high
school do so through an exercise of will, managing to devote a high level of attention to
matters they find intrinsically unrewarding.
Source: Tagg, J. The Learning Paradigm College. Anker Publishing Company, Inc., 2003, p.
46.
Topic: 
Previewing to Determine Topic
Previewing (looking over your reading material before you thoroughly read it, looking
for specific things to mentally prepare yourself to read) is a strategy that helps you
mentally prepare for reading new material. It is skimming with a goal. To preview, you
skim the reading assignment, reading the title, introduction, headings, subheadings,
visuals, and, if there is one, chapter summary. Once you have done this, you should be
able to predict the topic. Based on your more thorough reading of the assignment, you
can then determine whether your topic prediction is accurate or needs revising.
Previewing will be addressed in more detail in Chapter 9.
Previewing a reading is similar to the process you go through when finding out about a
movie. If you were looking for a good matinee, you might check the Web site of your
local theater to see the list of movies offered. The title Taken 2 might not mean anything
to you initially, but then you remember statistics about it from television, how it was a
box office hit, holding the number one spot for weeks. Intrigued, you investigate further
by viewing a movie trailer and reading reviews. From this, you figure out that the topic
of Taken 2 is a action movie about a kidnapping, a sequel to the 2008 hit movie Taken. You
think you would be interested, so you decide to see it.
As you approach a reading assignment, use the same approach. Anticipating what you
are about to get from a movie or a reading helps you ready your brain to receive it. As
you take in the movie or reading, your brain actively works toward making meaning and
begins to form networks. Previewing and identifying the topic help you connect the new
information to what you already know and to see connections within the new
information.
4-3 Identifying Stated Main Ideas
The main idea of a reading, paragraph, journal article, or whole textbook chapter is the
principal point that an author makes about a topic. It is what the author believes and
emphasizes as the central point of his or her writing. Main ideas often are stated directly,
or explicitly, in the text. In textbook chapters, you usually find the main idea in a

sentence or two in the opening paragraphs. In other types of readings, the stated main
idea can generally be found in the first one-third of the reading, though there are no
rules of where the main idea can go. The main idea can be found anywhere within a
reading. There are various strategies to help you identify stated main ideas in a reading.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
You now know that when you learn new material you grow new dendrites that
connect to the information that you already know. You realize that you are firing
neural networks in the brain. Previewing is a way of making it easier for the brain
to learn. When you preview the new material, you start the networks firing
together, which is an important step before you begin wiring, another way of
saying learning. This previewing establishes the categories (topics) or the
framework of the neural network so that you can make the connections. Taking
the time for this step makes the best use of your reading and studying time
because you are making it easier for your brain to learn.
4-3a Strategy One: Question Yourself
The first step toward understanding an author's main point is to have in mind the
question “What is this all about?” before you start reading. Then preview your reading
assignment to get an idea of the topic. Remember to look at the title, any headings,
visuals, and the chapter summary to get an idea about the content of the reading. Then
read the first couple of paragraphs and develop questions based on what you think the
reading is about—the topic. Continue reading the reading all the way through, asking
yourself questions about what you are reading, like “What is the most obvious, most
important, or most repeated point the author makes about the topic?” The answer to this
question most likely will be the main idea, and it is useful to highlight it in green (or
another “main idea” color that you choose) and then write down the main idea in your
own words.
The following short passage shows the questioning strategy put into practice. After
reading the title but before reading the passage, ask yourself, “What is this all about?

What is the topic?” After reading the passage, ask, “What is the author telling me
specifically about the topic? What point is the author making?”
Try answering these questions in your head as you read.
The Development of the Brain Sciences
What is the passage about? What is the topic of the passage? If you said brain science or
the study of the brain, you would be correct. The title tells you right away what the topic
is.
The brain is biology's greatest challenge. Perhaps in a sense it is the greatest challenge
for science as a whole, beyond moon landing, the ultimate particles of the physicist and
the depths of astronomical space. The engineering of a space shot or of a giant particle
accelerator
 or radio telescope, the mathematics to analyze the results, the vision to
design or to ask the questions in the first instance, are all the products of human
society—a society itself made possible only when humans had evolved to be human—to
possess that key feature that distinguishes them from animals, the human brain… .The
task of this book is to attempt an explanation of the functioning of the brain, in terms
which relate its unique properties…to the ground rules that are known to operate in the
rest of biology.
Alena Hovorkova/ Shutterstock.com
Source: Rose, S. The Conscious Brain. NY: Vintage Books, 1976, p. 21.
What important information is presented about the topic?
Brain science is a tremendous challenge
Ability to analyze separates humans from other animal
Task of the book the author discusses is to explain functions of brain as it
relates to biology
1.
What is the main idea of the passage? Highlight it using a green highlighter.
2.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
One way the brain learns is by making associations. You can use highlighters to
make associations and to make the main idea stand out. Use certain highlighter
colors for specific purposes, so that each color becomes associated with the

purpose, which can make it easier to analyze and organize information. Here is
how it works: You could use the green highlighter for all main ideas. From now
on, as you are reading your textbooks, you could always highlight every main
idea with green, which will not only remind you to look for the main idea, so that
you are organizing the information logically in your memory, but will also help
you to go back and refer to it. This is a thinking and memory strategy.
Comprehension Check
What is the difference between a topic and a main idea? Restate the
most important points of what you have read up to this point.
What does not make sense to you up to this point in the chapter?
Activity 4D
Question Yourself
Before reading the first passage, ready your mind to receive the passage by asking
yourself the question “What is this all about?” Then follow these steps:
Read the title and quickly preview each passage. (This task usually
reveals the topic.)
Develop questions based on what you think the passage will be about.
Read the passage, looking for the answers to your questions.
After reading the passage, ask yourself the more specific questions,
“What is the most important point the author makes about the topic?
What idea is supported by all of the sentences in the passage?” Highlight
in green the sentence in the passage that best answers these questions.

2.
The first two reading passages are from nonfiction essays, the type of reading you
might encounter in an English or humanities class. The final two are passages
from textbooks. The questioning technique works for any reading.
From a book titled Stealing Buddha's Dinner
1.
1 So I began stealing food.
2 I would bring a book with me, pretending to be on my way to the basement to do some
reading. If Rosa was in the living room she couldn't see the kitchen but could hear
everything, so I had to move silently. More often than not she would be working at the
dining table, in full view of the kitchen. I would wait for her to go to the bathroom or
become otherwise distracted, then hoist
 myself up onto the counter, open the
cupboard, reach for the cookies—I knew exactly where they were, of course—and take
away a handful, hiding them behind my book. All done in a matter of seconds. In the
summer, I tucked popsicles into the waistband of my shorts, shielding the evidence with
another book. I honed my method over the years so that I could slide in and out of the
kitchen with nearly entire meals carried between my shorts and T-shirt. I brought my
spoils up to my bunk bed, where they could be hidden under the sheets if necessary. If
Crissy and Anh were there in a tattletale mood, I would retreat to Noi's closet. I sat there
often, peaceful amongwas reinforced when Barack her ao dais, hand-knitted sweaters,
and sensible shoes, reading, writing notes to myself, and eating my contraband.
Source: Nguyen, Bich Minh. Stealing Buddha's Dinner. NY: Penguin Books, 2007, p. 41.
From an article titled “Take Advantage of the Short-Word Economy of
English”
1 When I was a kid, I read everything, including the backs and sides of cereal boxes. I still
try to read everything, even on airplanes, killing time not just with novels and
newspapers but also product catalogs and the text on airsickness bags. Since I can read a
little Spanish, I also enjoy studying the bilingual safety-information cards.

3.
4.
© Eye-Stock/Alamy
2 Now the Spanish equivalent of the phrase “safety information” is “information de
seguridad.” It takes three Spanish words to translate two English words, twenty-two
letters to translate seventeen. hypothesize
3 My suspicion was reinforced when Barack Obama's supporters chanted one of his
campaign catch phrases: “Yes we can.” There's a lot of meaning squeezed in those three
words and eight letters. Or how about this for economy: “To be or not to be….”
Source: Clark, Roy Peter. “Take advantage of the short-word economy of English,” The
Glamour of Grammar: A Guide to the Magic and Mystery of Practical English. NY: Little,
Brown and Co., 2010, p. 49.
From an anthropology textbook
Cultural Anthropology and Sociology
1 Cultural anthropology and sociology share an interest in social relations, organization,
and behavior. However, important differences between these disciplines arose from the
kinds of societies each traditionally studied. Initially sociologists focused on the
industrial West; anthropologists, on nonindustrial societies. Different methods of data
collection and analysis emerged to deal with those different kinds of societies. To study
large-scale, complex nations, sociologists came to rely on questionnaires and other
means of gathering masses of quantifiable
 data. For many years, sampling and
statistical techniques have been basic to sociology, whereas statistical training has been
less common in anthropology (although this is changing as anthropologists increasingly
work in modern nations).
2 Traditional ethnographers
 studied small and nonliterate (without writing)
populations and relied on methods appropriate to that context. “Ethnography is a
research process in which the anthropologist closely observes, records, and engages in
the daily life of another culture—an experience labeled as the fieldwork method—and
then writes accounts of this culture, emphasizing descriptive detail” (Marcus and Fischer
1986). One key method described in this quote is participant observation—taking part in
the events one is observing, describing, and analyzing.
3 As the modern world system grows, sociologists now do research in developing
countries and in other places that were once mainly within the anthropological orbit. As
industrialization spreads, many anthropologists now work in industrial nations, where
they study diverse topics, including rural decline, inner-city life, and the role of the mass
media in creating national cultural patterns.
Source: Kottak, Conrad. Anthropology: Appreciating Human Diversity, 14  Edition. NY:
McGraw-Hill, 2011, p.14.
From a political science textbook
The Two Revolutions Compared
th

1 If the American Revolution was a revolution of sober goals, the French Revolution was
one of infinite expectations. In the beginning, the French revolutionaries believed
everything was possible for the pure of heart. The extremists' goals were utopian,
and to realize them they were forced to use extreme means, including terror. Incredibly,
America's best-known radical, Thomas Paine, found himself in a French prison during
the revolution because his politics were not sufficiently extreme. In the thirteen
colonies, most of the revolutionaries were political moderates.
 In France, moderates
were executed or imprisoned.
2 The American Revolution, with its more modest aims, managed to produce the first
great example of republican government in the modern age. France had no such luck.
Yet the many revolutionary movements of the twentieth century were influenced far
more by the French than the American example. It is understandable why the French
Revolution—with its desire to eradicate
 poverty and its compassion for the
oppressed—has fired the imagination of revolutionaries everywhere.
Source: From MAGSTADT. Understanding Politics: Ideas, Institutions, and Issues 9e (p. 451).
Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
4-3b Strategy Two: Look in the Usual Spots
When authors write an use one main idea that is central to the whole work. This kind of
main idea is called a thesis (a main idea of an entire work of writing) . Within the essay
or chapter, though, other sections or even single paragraphs can have their own central
points. These central points are main ideas for the smaller parts (sections and
paragraphs) of a larger work. One way to think of the difference between these types of
main ideas is to think of a football game. The main idea of the entire game is Win the
game. The plays within the game have smaller objectives or main ideas. One play might
have the main idea of Get the first down. Another play might be Run out the clock so the
other team can't score. All of the plays in a football game support or help the larger main
idea. The same is true in reading; main ideas of sections or single paragraphs help the
larger main idea (thesis).
Authors want to make their ideas clear. To achieve this goal, they usually put stated main
ideas in predictable places. The main idea of a paragraph, also called the topic sentence
(the main idea of a paragraph) , can be placed at the beginning, middle, or end of a
paragraph. The following paragraph from a sociology textbook begins with a topic
sentence:
On some level culture is a blueprint that guides and, in some cases, even determines
behavior. Think about it; for the most part, people do not question the origin of the
objects around them, the beliefs they hold, or the words they use to communicate and
think about the world “any more than a baby analyzes the atmosphere before it begins to
breathe it” (Sumner 1907). Much of the time people think and behave as they do simply
because it seems natural and they know of no other way
Source: From FERRANTE. Seeing Sociology: An Introduction 1e (pp. 52—53). Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
In this next paragraph, excerpted from the same sociology textbook, the main idea is in

the middle of the paragraph:
Passing on Culture
The process by which people create and pass on culture suggests that it is more than a
blueprint. Babies enter the world and virtually everything the child experiences—being
born, being bathed, being toilet trained, learning to talk, playing, and so on—involves
people. The people present in a child's life at any one time—father, mother,
grandparents, brothers, sisters, playmates, caregivers, and others—expose the child to
their “versions” of culture. In this sense people are carriers and transmitters of culture
with a capacity to accept, modify, and reject cultural experiences to which they have
been exposed and to selectively pass on those cultural experiences to those in
subsequent generations. As a case in point, consider that Christmas is celebrated in the
United States as if everyone in the country participates in the festivities. Businesses close
on Christmas Eve and Day; public schools give children the week of Christmas off ; stores,
houses, and streets are decorated as early as October; and television commercials and
shows run Christmas themes for a month or more. Yet despite this exposure many
people in the United States reject this cultural option, as this reflection from one of my
students illustrates: “I grew up in a religion that did not celebrate Christmas or Easter
even though we called ourselves Christian. … While growing up I never challenged these
practices. I just did what I was told.”Yet this same student as an adult decided to
celebrate Christmas and other holidays that her family rejected in her youth. “Now that I
am older and have a child. … This year was the first year I put up a Christmas tree. I
didn't know how to decorate it and I didn't know any Christmas carols but I learned. I
decided that I don't want my children growing up the way I did.”
Source: From FERRANTE. Seeing Sociology: An Introduction 1e (p. 50). Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
In this last paragraph from a communications textbook, the main idea is the last
sentence in the paragraph:
I first learned about hegemony
 sitting in my undergraduate introduction to
communication course when my instructor, a smart, interesting, and attractive TA
named Brent, said the word in passing. My classmate Cindy asked Brent to explain the
term. I had never heard the term before, so I was glad when she asked for clarification.
Brent asked whether it was easier for him to get students to do an assignment by helping
them want to do it or by threatening to beat up the class. While the class was still
thinking about where he was headed with this, Brent added: “If we want to do it, then the
teacher doesn't have to force us. The teacher doesn't have to do much at all.” He then
explained that wielding power is easiest when those without power (students, in this
case) want those with power (the teachers) to be in control. Teachers give assignments
and, because students want to get good grades and to please their teachers, the students
do them. Even knowing, as students do, that not all students can get As or succeed in the
same way, even knowing that they are able to change the balance of power in the
classroom, students will continue to strive to please the teacher. Participating in an
imbalanced system that guarantees that not everyone will succeed—that is, students
don't want everyone to get As or our As wouldn't mean as much—might seem a little
strange; yet, we do the work because we see it as “good for us.” This is hegemony; this is
domination by consent.
Source: Warren, John T. and Fassett, Deanna L. Communication: A Critical/Cultural Introduction. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications, Inc. 2011, p. 46.
In journal articles, editorials, or short essays consisting of more than one paragraph, an

author is likely to put the main idea of the whole piece (thesis) at the beginning,
somewhere in the introductory paragraphs or the first third of the writing. Authors also
frequently restate the main idea at the end of a reading in the concluding paragraph.
In textbooks, authors normally state the main idea of a chapter in the beginning, during
the introduction to the chapter, and usually in very direct language: In this chapter, we
will focus on the two most treatable causes of obesity. It is also common for textbook
authors to restate the main idea of a chapter in their conclusion and again in the chapter
summary. However, sometimes main ideas in a chapter or a longer reading are not
stated directly. They are called implied main ideas and will be discussed in Chapter 7.
4-3c Strategy Three: Notice Word Clues
Authors frequently use word clues (words and phrases that signal what logical path the
author's ideas are taking) , words and phrases that signal what logical path the author's
ideas are taking. Just as GPS navigation systems in cars guide drivers along unfamiliar
roads, word clues provide readers with directions for understanding the main idea and
details. They indicate changes in the course of an author's thinking, and by using them,
you can follow an author's thought path, no matter how winding it is. For the purpose of
understanding the concept of a main idea, word clues are introduced in Activity 4E to
help you to recognize that all details support the main idea, either directly or indirectly.
More instruction on the concept of word clues and details can be found in Chapter 5.
Activity 4E
Figure Out Word Clues
Three types of word clues are especially helpful when looking for main ideas.
Read these three passages and determine what these types of word clues are.
Example 1
Read the following passage. What type of words are being used repeatedly
throughout the passage to help you focus on specific ideas? Highlight the main
idea in green. Then, circle the words you think draw your attention to certain
ideas.
Learning to develop your ability to read will help you to prepare for the world of work.
Develop a solid vocabulary and especially your ability to organize large amounts of
information. Above all, learn how to eff ectively locate the main points of all reading
materials. In summary, take the time to develop and strengthen your reading skills;
reading well has benefits beyond college.
Word clues that are used to get your attention and indicate which ideas are
especially important to remember are referred to as emphasis word clues
(words and phrases used to signal what is most important in a reading) . You

would be correct if you noticed that the word clues in Example 1 all emphasize
an idea. Table 4.2 provides some examples of emphasis word clues. When you
see these words, slow down and pay attention; they may signal the main idea.
Table 4.2
Emphasis Word Clues
most
importantly
thus
to
reiterate
in
summary
therefore
hence
above all
especially
Example 2
Read the following passage. What types of words are being used repeatedly
throughout the passage to help you focus on key details? First highlight the main
idea in green. Then circle the words you think help support the main idea.
1 First,let's make a list of people who have made a career out of starting (and thus often
failing):Harlan Ellison, Steve Carrell, Oprah Winfrey, Richard Wright, Dr. Oz, George
Orwell, Gloria Steinem and the list goes on and on. I didn't have to do any research at all
to come up with this list; I just wrote down the names of a bunch of famous and
respected successful people.
2 For instance, Oprah has had failed shows, failed projects, failed predictions. She starts
something everyday, sometimes a few times a day, and there's a long list of things that
haven't worked out. No one keeps track of that list, though, because the market (and our
society) has such respect for the work she's done that has succeeded. Dr. Oz has lost
patients. Mark Cuban has backed failed businesses. The more you do, the more you fail.
3 Second, let's think about the sort of failure we're talking about. Not the failure of
disrespect, of the shortcut that shouldn't have been taken or the shoddy work of
someone who doesn't care. No, we're talking about the failure of people with good intent,
people seeking connection and joy and the ability to make a difference.
4 No one is suggesting that you wing it in your job at the nuclear power plant, or
erratically
 jump from task to task instead of studying. Hard work is going to be here
no matter what. For instance, the kind of initiative I'm talking about is difficult because
it's important and frightening and new. Finally, if you sign up for the initiative path and
continue on it when others fret about “quality” and “predictability,” you will ultimately
succeed.
Source: Adapted from Godin, Seth. Poke the Box. Do You Zoom: Amazon, 2011, pp. 16—17.
Did you notice clues that support the details by providing examples and key

points? Authors also use support word clues (words and phrases used to signal
that what is being presented in the text supports the main idea) to let you know
when they are presenting details that support their main idea or argument. Table
4.3 contains a partial list of words and phrases that authors often use to do this.
When you come across these clues, or similar ones, pause and ask yourself what
larger point the details being discussed support. The larger point is most likely
the main idea. Supporting details will be explained further in Chapter 5.
Table 4.3
Support Word Clues
for
example
one of
the
reasons
to
illustrate
the point
ﬁrst of
all
therefore
for
instance
a case in
point
also
second
of all
ﬁnally
See that the author used the word counterproductive in this sentence:
I need to sell you on the reasons why avoiding failure is counterproductive.
You can use context clues and word part analysis to figure out what this word
means. The context clue is that the word has something to do with avoiding
failure. The word part analysis will gives us the answer. The prefix counter-
means “against, opposite to”; the prefix pro- means “in favor of or for something”;
the root duct means “to lead or bring forward”; the suffix -ive means “the quality
or state of what is before it in the word.” Counterproductive describes something
that is against or opposite to what others are in favor of or want to bring forward.
Using context clues and word part analysis, define the word predictions, as used in
this sentence from the passage:
Oprah has had failed shows, failed projects, failed predictions.
Example 3
Read the following passage. What type of words are being used repeatedly

throughout the passage to help you see a contrast in ideas? First highlight the
main idea in green. Then, circle the words you think signal a contrast.
Even though both candidates are from the same party, their views are strikingly different
in many ways. For example, each one's view regarding taxing is rather diverse. Candidate
A believes that tax increases is the only way to cut our nation's deficits and will serve to
strengthen the economy, long-term. On the other hand, Candidate B believes that
reducing taxes is the only solution to growing the economy. It allows families to spend
more and creates more job opportunities. Another difference is their views regarding
health care reform. Candidate A challenges the law to provide coverage to all citizens,
whereas Candidate B believes that health care is best left up to the decision of individual
states. Candidate A believes that education reform begins with teaching our educators
and reducing the number of charter schools. Too many schools are not graduating
students when most future jobs will require a college education. However, Candidate B
enforces standardized testing as the solution and supports the concept of charter
schools.
Source: From MAGSTADT. Understanding Politics: Ideas, Institutions, and Issues 9e (p. 451).
Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
Although authors use many different word clues to help you see a main point
more clearly or to understand how details support a main idea, some words and
phrases serve both purposes. The words in Table 4.4 are examples of commonly
used contrast word clues. Contrast word clues (words and phrases used to signal
when an author has stopped discussing one point and is moving on to a different
point) tell you that an author has stopped discussing one point and is moving on
to discuss another point. Whenever you encounter these contrast word clues,
pay careful attention to the new direction the author is taking; authors often
place main ideas or important details right next to these phrases.
Table 4.4
Contrast Word Clues
however
but
on the
other
hand
to the
contrary
in
contrast
conversely on the
contrary
whereas
Activity 4F
Find the Main Idea
Read the following passage from a political science textbook. Prepare yourself by

(1)
(2)
asking “What is this all about?” As you read, notice the word clues that are
purposely written in italics to guide you in this activity. At the end of reading this
passage, ask yourself
“What is the topic?” and
“What is the most important point the author makes about the topic?”
Then highlight in green the sentence that best answers the second question—the
main idea.
Is the Party Over?
1 Many in the United States say neither major party any longer reflects the realities of
U.S. life and society. Others see the parties as evidence of a failed political system. The
very idea of party politics or partisanship has sometimes come into conflict with the
ideal of democracy. At the same time, however, participatory democracy is here to stay.
State primary elections, once the exceptio a bonanza for some states, attracting revenue
and wide media attention.) Other states hold party caucuses, where rank-and-file party
members choose delegates who later attend state conventions that, in turn, select
delegates pledged to support particular candidates at the party's national convention.
2 Such reforms make the average citizen at least feel a part of the party's nominating
process and diminish the power of both state party and national party regulars. But
there is a downside: U.S. presidential campaigns are costly and prolonged; the
nomination and election process can last well over a year. (British parliamentary
elections often last less than a month and cost a tiny fraction of what U.S. elections cost.)
Fund-raising is a full-time endeavor, not only for presidential hopefuls but also for
serious candidates in Senate and House races, prompting cynics to remark that U.S.
elections have become nonstop events.
3 No other liberal democracy in the world spends so much time and treasure choosing
its chief executive. Parties play a role in elections, but money plays a far bigger role.
Where do candidates turn for financial backing? Next we look at the role of interest
groups in contemporary U.S. politics.
Source: From MAGSTADT. Understanding Politics: Ideas, Institutions, and Issues 9e (p. 451).
Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.

As you read the title and begin to read the passage, you can quickly tell that the
topic is political parties. What about them? As you read and look for the answer to
your question, you are stopped by the contrast word clue however, and then you
see your answer: participatory democracy (use of political systems) is here to stay,
which is the main idea of the passage. The other major points in the passage
—primary elections, early primaries, party caucuses, cost, length of
elections—are supporting details that show how the whole political process
depends on political parties; they support the main idea, participatory democracy
is here to stay.
What additional word clues can you locate in this passage?
1.
What kind of word clues were they?
2.
Did recognizing the word clues help you to understand the passage? If so,
how?
3.
Brainstorm what you know about political parties in the United States. How
can this help you remember what you just read in the reading passage
about political parties?
4.
Use the vocabulary strategies you learned in Chapter 3 to help you unlock the
meaning of the following words and phrases from the passage. If you cannot
figure out the definitions, look the words up in a dictionary. Breezing over these
words without fully understanding them can cause you to miss the meaning of
this passage. You need to understand these definitions, not just recognize that
the words look familiar, in order to see how deeply political parties are
integrated into our political systems.
partisanship (paragraph 1):
5.
party caucuses (paragraph 1):
6.
delegates (paragraph 1):
7.

national convention (paragraph 1):
8.
4-3d Strategy Four: Categorize an Author's Points
As you use the strategies of asking questions, looking in the usual spots, and noticing
word clues, you will begin to see that not all ideas are created equal—some are more
important than others. You can use a fourth strategy, categorization (arrange something
into categories or classes) , to help you decide which ideas are the main ideas. You do
this by deciding how specific an idea is and looking at how it functions in a reading.
General sentences are most likely to be main ideas, while very specific ones are usually
the details that support them.
Activity 4G
Identify the General and Speciﬁc Sentences
Read each of the following pairs of sentences, and circle the more general
statement. The first one is modeled for you.
Example
Poisonous snakes can be found all over the world.
a.
Asian cobras kill more people than any other snake in the world.
b.
Self-improvement begins with self-examination.
a.
Many negative beliefs about body image can contribute to low
self-esteem.
b.
1.
Dyslexia is a learning disorder that affects reading ability and
sometimes math ability.
a.
People with learning disabilities usually have above-average or at
least average intelligence.
b.
2.
Food additives enhance the appearance or flavor of foods.
a.
Yellow food coloring is added to banana ice cream.
b.
3.
Moore's law states that the number of transistors that can be placed
a.
4.

inexpensively on an integrated circuit doubles every two years.
Computers will be faster and cheaper as years go by.
b.
Most people have brown hair.
a.
Red heads make up 2% of the U.S. population.
b.
5.
Comprehension Check
Describe the four strategies for identifying the main idea. Include as
much detail as possible. Repeat them to yourself several times so that
you feel comfortable using them in your other courses. Create a
mnemonic to help you remember the four strategies.
What strategies do you use to determine the main ideas in your
readings? Have you used any of the strategies discussed in this
chapter? If so, how effective are they? What works for you?
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Remember that when you get better at something, you are creating a pathway in
the brain, such as the one that you use when you drive a car or ride a bike. Then
you can do the activity without having to devote much attention to how you do it.
Your goal in learning to search for main ideas and details is to create an efficient
reading pathway. By the time you finish this course, you will not have to devote
the effort to reading in this new fashion that you now have to. You will have a
reading superhighway. However, building the highway takes time, practice, and
effort until it becomes automatic, just like learning another skill or a sport.
Remember that identifying main ideas is not like completing a math problem. In math, 4
times 6 is always 24. In reading, the main idea is not always exact. It is what the author

2
emphasizes as central to his or her point.
The four main idea strategies presented in this chapter make you examine your reading
material closely, which is why they work. With practice, you will find yourself reading an
article or textbook chapter and automatically understanding the main ideas without
purposely applying each strategy as a separate step. It may be like the first time you
drove a car with a manual transmission. Your first efforts at trying to use the clutch,
stick shift, and accelerator simultaneously would probably have been clumsy. But as you
practiced, your movements became more fluid, and eventually you drove without
consciously thinking about each step in the process.
Activity 4H
Practice More with Main Ideas
Read the following passages, and use the four strategies presented in this chapter
to highlight the main idea in green. Circle any word clues you find. The first one
is modeled for you.
When a tiny word gives you a big headache, it's probably a pronoun. Pronouns are
usually small (I, me, he, she, it), but they're among the biggest troublemakers in the
language. If you've ever been picked on by the pronoun police, don't despair.
You're in good company. Hundreds of years after the first Ophelia cried, ”Woe is
me,” only a pedant would argue that Shakespeare should have written, “Woe is I” or
“Woe is unto me”. (Never mind that the rules of English grammar weren't even
formalized in Shakespeare's day). The point is that  no one is exempt from having
his pronouns second-guessed.
Source: O'Conner, Patrick T. Woe Is I: The Grammarphobe's Guide to Better English in
Plain English. New York: Penguin Books, 2009, p. 1.
1.
You might have thought the first sentence should have been identified as the
main idea instead of the second sentence. Either choice is correct as they both
say essentially the same thing. After noticing the circled word clue the point is,
you might ask yourself, “What is the point?” The answer to that question leads
you to the main idea, which is that pronouns can be a problem.
1 Pablo Picasso, one of the richest artists in history, liked to talk about his days
as a poor man.
2 As a struggling artist in Paris in 1902, Picasso shared an attic room with a friend,
poet Max Jacob. Their flat was unheated and only had one bed. Jacob worked at a
department store by day and claimed the bed at night. Picasso created artwork at
night and slept during the day. At times, the two had to burn Picasso's drawings and
watercolors to stay warm.

3
3 One day when Jacob and Picasso were especially destitute, they bought a sausage
from a street stall. Bringing it home with great anticipation, they warmed it and it
grew bigger, and bigger and bigger, and then it exploded into nothingness, leaving
only a stinky smell.
Source: Jacob, M. and Jacob, M. What the Great Ate. Three Rivers Press: New York,
2010, p. 87.
The Ethical Challenges Marketing Faces
1 Marketing does not simply surround us, (but envelops us, permeating our
lives. Television, radio, newspapers, magazines, billboards, clothes with labels,
packaging, the internet, posters, the movies, sky writing—virtually wherever
anyone turns there is evidence that it has been touched by some marketer
intent on promoting, informing, persuading, and/or selling us something.
Marketing is how we get our food, clothes, and the items we use every day. It
influences and reflects how we think about the world, though surely
marketing is not the sole influence to which we are subjected. In turn,
marketing is influenced by what people themselves want and are willing to do.
The influences run back and forth. As such, marketing plays a large role in
people's lives. It is, in part, how a society defines itself and its treatment of its
members.
2 A person might think that such a pervasive and important activity on which so
much time and money are spent would be the object of relatively wide-spread
moral agreement. How else has it achieved such significance in people's lives?
Why else do people wear clothes with brand names, seek out brand products,
watch commercials, and envision a better life in terms of acquiring more (and
larger) products?
3 However, we are very ambivalent
 when it comes to marketing. It may satisfy
us in many ways, but it infuriates us in others. We rely on it, but there are parts of
it we dislike intensely. Marketing speaks to a larger drama in our lives of the
conflicts between different sets of values and norms—between those related to the
role of competition, identity, desire, greed, and fear in our society, but also those
involving certainty, dependable quality, consumer-friendly service, trust, and

4
inexpensive products and services.
Source: From George Brenkert, Marketing Ethics. Copyright © 2008 John Wiley and
Sons, Inc. Reprinted with permission.
Reading Mathematics
1 Alan Natapoff says that our math learning is not “oral” or “aural” enough, and
attempts to compensate for this in his remedial classes by having people speak
out loud what they are being told. Another criticism of conventional math
teaching is that we are not taught to read mathematics so that we can learn it
on our own. Those of us who do not go on in math, it is true, never really learn
to study mathematics the way we study other subjects. Studying math as we do
it in the lower grades consists of review and drill. Studying on our own
involves learning to understand new material without the help of a teacher.
2 One way to begin to read mathematics is to recognize how we read other
subjects. Most texts in the humanities and even in the social sciences state
important ideas and facts more than once, Therefore, those of us who enjoy
reading this kind of material learn to read quickly, even to skim, to get the gist of
what is intended, and we do not worry too much about missing something.
Chances are, if a fact or an interpretive statement is important, it will be repeated
or paraphrased. Topic sentences, paragraphs, the structure of a well-written essay
are all signposts to tell the rapid reader where to slow down and even to stop. But
reading mathematics is reading for immediate mastery. Things are stated only
once and must be well understood before we move on. The process is so different
from ordinary, even serious reading that the word “reading” might itself be
misapplied.
3 Mathematicians tell me they would not think of tackling a math book without
pencil and paper. They try to sketch, if possible, what is being said. They stop and
imagine examples that would illustrate the problem at hand. They ask themselves
questions and try to answer them. Above all, they move slowly, very slowly, over
each part of each statement.
Source: Tobias, Sheila. Overcoming Math Anxiety. NY: W.W. Norton & Co., 1993, p.
249.
Comprehension Check
Up to this point in the chapter, what is unclear?
What is the difference between a topic and a main idea?

4-4 Mind Mapping with Main Ideas
Remember from earlier in this chapter what you learned about mind maps—they are
line drawings that show the relationship between ideas, typically beginning with the
most general idea at the top or in the center and then visually separating out the topic,
main ideas, and supporting details. Read the following passage, and look at the mind map
that follows it. When you are trying to sort out ideas, especially in a complicated reading,
it helps to draw a mind map to clarify the difference between the topic, main idea, and
supporting details. Mind maps let you visualize the relationships between ideas.
(Chapter 10 offers more information about mind maps.)
Tip from the Brain Doctor
A mind map is kind of like a neural network in the brain. You are making the
pattern of connections visible. When you make mind maps, you are working in a
way similar to the way the brain works (making connections between ideas),
making it easier for you to learn and remember. Be sure to give this strategy
enough effort and attempts so that you can see how helpful it can be to you. Once
you are good at it, it will save you time and effort.
1 For some unimaginable reason a handful of my teachers didn't give up on me as a
hopeless moron. Mr. Robicheaud, my history teacher, never doubted that I had a brain
that was actually functional. He always made me want to rise to any challenge. Same
with Ms. Samara, my homeroom teacher. And my English teacher, Mrs. Hawkes, urged
me to take her creative writing class. I figured, “What the hell, sounds easy!” But it
wasn't—at first, anyway. One day, after class, she took me aside and said, “You know, I
always hear you telling funny stories and we can make that your homework
assignment.” Hey, it sounded better than poetry!
2 So I gave it a try and—amazingly—it turned out to be the first time I ever did homework
where I wasn't waiting for Ricky Nelson to come on TV. I actually enjoyed it. I'd spend
hours writing a story (usually about something stupid that happened at school), reading
it to myself, crossing out things that weren't funny. I'd do four or five drafts, then hand it

in. Suddenly, it was fun to go to class and stand up to read my funny story—and, best of
all, to get some laughs. I was always grateful to Mrs. Hawkes for that.
3 Another teacher who made a huge impression was Mr. Walsh. For whatever reason, he
was always assigned to oversee detention duty in the library. And since I was always in
detention, we'd sit together almost every day. Mr. Walsh was one of those guys who
would laugh at anything. Tell him the simplest joke and he'd break up. Everything was
hilarious to this man. So I'd have new stories for him all the time. One day he said to me,
“Why don't you think about going into show business?”
Stacie McChesney/NBC/NBCU Photo Bank via Getty Images
4 This was a revelation (the act of revealing/disclosure) . The idea never even occurred to
me. I didn't know anybody in show business. The closest thing was an eighth-grade
teacher named Mr. Duncan, who did magic tricks at student assemblies. And that was
unbelievable! Someone we knew who could actually entertain people! When you grow
up in a small town like Andover, show business is the furthest thing from being a career
option.
Source: Leno, Jay. Leading with My Chin. New York: HarperCollins, 1996, pp. 55-56.
Figure 4.2 shows how the ideas in this passage are related to each other: The topic (a
phrase) is at the top, the main idea (a complete sentence) is immediately below it, and
the details that support the main idea branch off it. The further an idea is from the topic
and main idea, the less important it is to the overall meaning of the passage. These
details far away from the topic and main idea are minor.
Figure 4.2
Mind Map of Jay Leno Passage
© Cengage Learning

Activity 4I
Create Your Own Mind Maps
Read the following passages and create a mind map for each. State the topic in a
word or phrase at the top of your map. Draw a vertical line down from the topic
and write the main idea in a sentence. Then draw lines extending away from the
main idea statement and add details at the end of each line. Apply the main idea
strategies you have been using in this chapter: 1) Question yourself, 2) Look in the
usual spots, 3) Notice word clues, and 4) Categorize.
A common mistake is slicing sandwich meats thick instead of thin. A few thick slices of
meat stacked on a sandwich will have far less volume and therefore look like less than
an equal amount of thinly sliced meat. See Figure 4.3. Also, thicker cut meats tend to be
chewier, especially when cold. Thinly sliced sandwich meats make the sandwich portion
appear larger, are more tender, and are generally easier to eat.
Figure 4.3
Meat Fillings
Thinly sliced meat gives sandwich more volume than thick slices of meat.
Chas/ Shutterstock.com
Source: McCreal, Michael. Culinary Art Principles and Applications. American Technical
Publishers, Inc., 2012, p. 393.

© Cengage Learning
Don't Catch Me if you can
1 Might we have better luck avoiding colds in the first place? My friend Cathy carries
those little bottles of Purell everywhere she goes. She has them in her purse and her
computer bag, in her desk drawers and her car. She uses them after she shakes hands
with anyone or goes into a store, particularly a pharmacy. She never opens a door with
her bare hands but uses her sweater or a shirt. She flushes toilets with her foot, presses
elevator buttons with her elbow. If she is seated in a plane next to someone with a cough
she says that “It totally freaks me out. I do everything I can to move. Even if it means
creating a story like, I have cancer and can't be near a sick person. Yes, I did use that
one,” she admits. “If I absolutely have to stay there, I try not to talk and keep my face
averted. Afterwards, I take vitamin C.”
Eye of Science/Photo Researchers, Inc.
2 Cathy's pediatrician father put the fear of germs in her. At parties, he instructed his
children which guests to avoid kissing and which to stay away from altogether. Her
mother's constant refrain was “Keep your fingers away from your face. Don't put your
fingers in your mouth!” “As a result, I pretty much see the world with an overlay of little
floating germs,” she says, “and my goal is to avoid them in every way possible.” In the
past 12 years, Cathy hasn't had a single cold. Germ prevention is possible, but at what
cost? “Before I go on vacation, I won't go anywhere or see anyone except my fiancé,” she
says. “And I definitely won't go to a movie theater or any other place where there are lots
of people or, God forbid, kids. I love kids, but they make me really nervous on the germ
front. My cousins have gotten used to my asking if they are sick before I commit to
coming over to their house; they completely understand now when I back out.”
3 Cathy is in famously good company. Marcel Proust, Marlene Dietrich, and Howard
Hughes were germaphobes. Jessica Alba of Fantastic Four fame reportedly carries a UV
light to zap germs in her hotel rooms. Donald Trump considers shaking hands
“barbaric”—
an aversion
 that got him in hot water with the unwashed masses
during the 2000 presidential campaign. “People always come up to me wanting to shake

hands and I never know where that hand has been,” he writes in his blog. “I say let's copy
the wonderful Japanese custom of bowing. It's respectful and it's sanitary.” Trump's
campaign reportedly handed out half-ounce bottles of hand sanitizer to his constituents
(tagged with his website address). The comedian Howie Mandel, who once wowed his
audiences by blowing up a surgical glove using only his nose, fist-bumps acquaintances
instead of shaking hands to avoid germs. The jacket of his new book, Dont Touch Me,
shows Mandel inside a man-size plastic bubble; his website sells blue wristbands reading
“Skip the Shake.” Word has it that he even built a special guesthouse that he could retreat
to when his kids got sick.
4 Our society as a whole is far more germ conscious
 than it was, say 10 or 15 years
ago, says Harley Rotbart. “This is in part because we're inundated with news stories
about health and infection. The types of stories that a decade ago might not have made
the newspaper are now breaking news on all of the cable channels. When there are five
cases of peanut butter associated with salmonella or two cases of E. coli linked with
spinach, it becomes a huge national story and people wonder whether they should be
eating spinach or peanut butter,” says Rotbart. “But,” he adds, “there's also clearly a sales
job going on here.” The enterprising
 germ-fighting industry exploits our fears,
flooding the market with antimicrobial lotions, soaps, shampoos, toothpaste, perfume,
air fresheners. You can buy hundreds of products infused with the antimicrobial
chemical triclosan (the antibiotic present in most antibacterial soaps), including pencils
and protractors for children. This is a complete scam, says Rotbart. “How can anyone
believe that an antibiotic embedded in plastic can kill a bug that lands on the surface of
an object? I understand the economics of it but not the biology. A plain protractor
costs $0.35 and one impregnated with antibiotic costs $1.50. But how does an
antimicrobial in a protractor or a hairbrush or a toilet seat find the bacteria it's supposed
to destroy? This is the sort of nonsense that preys on the paranoia
 of people prone
to paranoia.”
5 The kind of hypervigilance
 that has come to characterize our culture may have
some subtle psychological effects. Rotbart doesn't worry too much about its impact on
children—he believes they're resilient
 and won't succumb to obsession over
cleanliness. But at least one study suggests that even educated adults are affected by the
germ hype in unexpected ways, making us overreact to something as simple as a sneeze.
The study, led by Spike Wing Sing Lee of the University of Michigan, suggests that
awareness of the danger of infectious disease heightens our perception of risks posed by
other, unrelated hazards. Last May, just when swine flu was beginning to emerge as a
serious threat, Lee and his colleagues positioned an actor in a busy building on the
Michigan campus. As students passed, the actor occasionally sneezed loudly. Then the
psychologists waylaid the students and interviewed them. Those who had witnessed the
sneeze perceived a greater risk not only of getting sick but also of risk utterly unrelated
to germs—such as having a heart attack before age 50 or dying in an accident or as a
result of a violent crime. When asked about their views on this country's health-care
system (was it a disaster or working pretty much okay?), the sneeze perceivers
tended to pan the current system and express the view that resources should be shifted
from the creation of green jobs to vaccine development.
6 In other words, in an atmosphere of hypervigilance, a simple sneeze can trigger
sweeping fears and even color people's views on something as abstract as government
allocation
 of resources.
7 It's hard not to be conscious of germs when there's a hand sanitizer dispenser outside
every classroom and in every public bathroom,” says Rotbart. “We're a Purell-inundated

society.” In Rotbart's view, this is not necessarily a bad thing. For starters, it means that
people who are sick are generally more aware that they may be contagious and thus take
more precautions.
 “More often these days, you hear people with a cold saying, ‘Hey,
you don't want to shake my hand; let's do an elbow bump instead.' It's not necessarily
that the potential recipients of a bug are more paranoid, it's that the ‘donors' have
become more conscientious.”
Source: From AH-CHOO! by Jennifer Ackerman. Copyright © 2010 by Jennifer Ackerman.
Reprinted by permission of Grand Central Publishing. All rights reserved.
© Cengage Learning
4-5 Chapter Review

4-5a Practice with a Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Based on the title, what do you expect the following passage to be about?
1.
What do you know about the topic already? Are you comfortable with
spiders and wasps?
2.
Develop a question, using the title of this passage, to ask yourself before
you read.
3.
As you read the passage, circle any word clues and highlight the main idea
in green.
4.
From “The Spider and the Wasp”
By Alexander Petrunkevitch
1 In the adult stage the [pepsis] wasp lives only a few months. The female produces but a
few eggs, one at a time at intervals of two or three days. The mother wasp attaches the
egg to the paralyzed spider's abdomen. Upon hatching from the egg, the larva is many
hundreds of times smaller than its living but helpless victim. It eats no other food and
drinks no water. By the time it has finished its single gargantuan meal and become ready
for wasphood, nothing remains of the tarantula but its indigestible chitinous (hard,
protective) skeleton.
2 The mother wasp goes tarantula hunting when the egg in her ovary is almost ready to
be laid. Flying low over the ground late on a sunny afternoon, the wasp looks for its
victim or for the mouth of a tarantula burrow, a round hole edged by a bit of silk. The sex
of the spider makes no difference, but the mother is highly discriminating as to species.
Each species of pepsis requires a certain species of tarantula, and the wasp will not
attack the wrong species. In a cage with a tarantula, which is not its normal prey, the
wasp avoids the spider and is usually killed by it at night.

Mark Moﬀett/Minden Pictures/National Geographic Stock
3 Yet when a wasp finds the correct species, it is the other way about. To identify the
species the wasp apparently must explore the spider with her antennae. The tarantula
shows an amazing tolerance to this exploration. The wasp crawls under it and walks over
it without evoking any hostile response. The molestation is so great and persistent that
the tarantula often rises on all eight legs, as if it were on stilts. It may stand this way for
several minutes. Meanwhile the wasp, having satisfied itself that the victim is of the right
species, moves off a few inches to dig the spider's grave. Working vigorously with legs
and jaws, it excavates—like a machine—a hole 8 to 10 inches deep with a diameter
slightly larger than the spider's girth (measurement around) . Now and again the wasp
pops out of the hole to make sure that the spider is still there.
4 When the grave is finished, the wasp returns to the tarantula to complete her ghastly
enterprise. First she feels it all over once more with her antennae. Then her behavior
becomes more aggressive. She bends her abdomen, protruding her sting, and searches
for the soft membrane at the point where the spider's legs join its body—the only spot
where she can penetrate the horny skeleton. >From time to time, as the exasperated
(annoyed, irritated) spider slowly shifts ground, the wasp turns on her back and slides
along with the aid of her wings, trying to get under the tarantula for a shot at the vital
spot. During all this maneuvering, which can last for several minutes, the tarantula
makes no move to save itself. Finally the wasp corners it against some obstruction and
grasps one of its legs in her powerful jaws. Now at last the harassed spider tries a
desperate but vain defense. The two contestants roll over and over on the ground. It is a
terrifying sight and the outcome is always the same. The wasp finally manages to thrust
her sting into the soft spot and holds it there for a few seconds while she pumps in the
poison. Almost immediately the tarantula falls paralyzed on its back. Its legs stop
twitching; its heart stops beating. Yet it is not dead, as is shown by the fact that if taken
from the wasp it can be restored to some sensitivity by being kept in a moist chamber for
several months.
5 After paralyzing the tarantula, the wasp cleans herself by dragging her body around the
ground and rubbing her feet, sucks the drop of blood oozing from the wound in the
spider's abdomen, then grabs a leg of the flabby, helpless animal in her jaws and drags it
down to the bottom of the grave. She stays there for many minutes, sometimes several
hours, and what she does all that time in the dark we do not know. Eventually she lays
her egg and attaches it to the side of the spider's abdomen with a sticky secretion
(substance that is released) . Then she emerges, fills the grave with soil carried bit by bit
in her jaws, and finally tramples the ground all around to hide any trace of the grave
from prowlers. Then she flies away, leaving her descendant safely started in life.
6 In all this the behavior of the wasp evidently is qualitatively (relating to quality)
different from that of the spider. The wasp acts like an intelligent animal. This is not to
say that instinct plays no part or that she reasons as man does. But her actions are to the
point; they are not automatic and can be modified to fit the situation. We do not know
for certain how she identifies the tarantula—probably it is by some olfactory or chemo-
tactile sense—but she does it purposefully and does not blindly tackle a wrong species.

7 On the other hand, the tarantula's behavior shows only confusion. Evidently the wasp's
pawing gives it no pleasure, for it tries to move away. That the wasp is not stimulating
sexual stimulation is certain because male and female tarantulas react in the same way
to its advances. That the spider is not anesthetized by some odorless secretion is easily
shown by blowing lightly at the tarantula and making it jump suddenly. What, then,
makes the tarantula behave as stupidly as it does?
8 No clear, simple answer is available. Possibly the stimulation by the wasp's antennae is
masked by a heavier pressure on the spider's body so that it reacts when prodded by a
pencil. But the explanation may be much more complex. Initiative in attack is not the
nature of tarantulas; most species fight only when cornered so that escape is impossible.
Their inherited patterns of behavior apparently prompt them to avoid problems rather
than attack them. For example, spiders always weave their webs in three dimensions,
and when a spider finds that there is insufficient space to attach certain threads in the
third dimension, it leaves the place and seeks another, instead of finishing the web in a
single plane. This urge to escape seems to arise under all circumstances, in all phases of
life, and to take the place of reasoning. For a spider to change the pattern of its web is as
impossible as for an inexperienced man to build a bridge across a chasm (a deep, wide
gap) obstructing his way.
9 In a way the instinctive urge to escape is not only easier but often more efficient than
reasoning. The tarantula does exactly what is most efficient in all cases except in an
encounter with a ruthless and determined attacker dependent for the existence of her
own species on killing as many tarantulas as she can lay eggs. Perhaps in this case the
spider follows its usual pattern of trying to escape, instead of seizing and killing the
wasp, because it is not aware of its danger. In any case, the survival of the tarantula
species as a whole is protected by the fact that the spider is much more fertile than the
wasp.
Source: From Petrunkevitch, Alexander, “The Spider and the Wasp,” Scientiﬁc American (August 1952). Copyright ©
1952 Scientiﬁc American, a division of Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission.
Check Your Understanding
Use context clues and word part analysis to define the following words
from the passage.
discriminating (paragraph 2): 
molestation (paragraph 3): 
encounter (paragraph 9): 
5.
Were you able to answer the question you created in question #3? Provide
the answer to your question.
6.
What is the topic?
7.

What is the main idea being supported by all of the sentences in the
reading?
8.
If you could rewrite the title of the passage, what would your title be?
9.
What does the tarantula do when the wasp explores it?
10.
How does the wasp attack the tarantula?
11.
Why doesn't the wasp kill the tarantula completely?
12.
What answer does the author give for the tarantula's unusually compliant
behavior?
13.
Did you enjoy the reading? Why or why not?
14.
What strategies did you use to help you concentrate on the reading?
15.
Circle the best answer to the following multiple-choice questions.
The wasp has to provide her egg with:
a fresh, three-dimensional web.
a.
a live tarantula.
b.
a male tarantula.
c.
an egg from the tarantula's nest.
d.
16.
Which of the following statements is true?
The wasp seeks a male tarantula to attach its egg to.
a.
Each species of pepsis requires a certain species of tarantula, and the
wasp will not attack the wrong species.
b.
Male and female tarantulas react differently to the female wasp.
c.
17.

Only male tarantulas are suitable for the female wasps' eggs.
d.
What happens after the wasp digs a grave?
The wasp grasps one of the spider's legs in her jaws.
a.
The spider fights the wasp.
b.
The tarantula becomes paralyzed.
c.
The wasp feels all over the spider once more with her antennae.
d.
18.
What happens after the wasp drops the spider into the grave?
She stays in the grave for a while.
a.
She leaves to lay her egg.
b.
She kills the spider.
c.
She buries the spider.
d.
19.
How does the tarantula species survive?
The wasps usually cannot find the right species very easily.
a.
The tarantula can run faster than the wasp can fly.
b.
The wasps have more babies than the tarantulas.
c.
The tarantulas have more babies than the wasps.
d.
20.
Chapter Review
4-5b Chapter Summary
Main ideas are the author's important points, so figuring them out can lead to good
comprehension and easier studying. The first step to understanding main ideas is
realizing that main ideas and topics are not the same thing. Topics are subjects that can
usually be described in one or two words. Main ideas are the points authors make about
topics. Previewing helps you recognize the topic and begin to predict a pattern. Then ask
yourself some questions. As you read, look for the answers to your questions by looking
in the usual spots and by recognizing word clues when you see them. Also, categorize the
author's points as you read them. Some are more general, which could be the main idea,
and others are more specific, which are probably details. Mind mapping, line drawings

topic
1.
stated main idea
2.
thesis
3.
to scan or look over something
quickly
1.
words and phrases used to
signal when an author has
2.
that show the relationship between ideas, help you to visualize the general-to-specific
relationships between topic, main idea, and details an author can use in a passage.
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw the amount of dendrites you imagine that you have now about stated main
ideas. Compare your drawing of dendrites now with what you drew at the
beginning of this chapter. If the amounts are different, explain why.
Comprehension Check
Where in the chapter did you lose concentration or become confused?
If you could ask the authors a question about this chapter, what would
you ask?
Chapter Review
4-5c Post Test
Part 1. Objective Questions
Match the key terms from the chapter in Column A to their definitions in
Column B.

word clues
4.
topic sentence
5.
contrast word clues
6.
emphasis word clues
7.
support word clues
8.
supporting details
9.
mind maps
10.
skim
11.
previewing
12.
categorization
13.
stopped discussing one point
and is moving on to a different
point
looking over your reading
material before you
thoroughly read it, looking for
specific things to mentally
prepare yourself to read
3.
a word or phrase that is the
subject of a reading
4.
line drawings that show the
relationship between ideas
5.
major points the author makes
about the topic directly stated
in a sentence
6.
ideas that prove, clarify, justify,
or otherwise support the main
idea
7.
arrange something in
categories or classes
8.
the main idea of a paragraph
9.
words and phrases that signal
what logical path the author's
ideas are taking
10.
words and phrases used to
signal that what is being
presented in the text supports
the main idea
11.
words and phrases used to
signal what is most important
in a reading
12.
a main idea of an entire work
of writing
13.
T
F
T
F
Indicate whether the following statements are true (T) or false (F).
If several people read a textbook chapter, they should all identify the same
main idea.
14.
To identify the main idea of a reading, all you have to do it look for word
clues.
15.
Popular Reading
Part 2. Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Based on the title, what do you expect the following passage to be about?
1.
What do you already know about the subject?
2.
Develop a question from the title. As you read the passage, try to answer
that question.
3.
The “Thrill” of Theft
By Jerry Adler
with Julie Scelfo,
Gretel C. Kovach,
Karen Springen,
and Tara Weingarten
1 If all you've ever done is pay for stuff, you'd never know how it felt. It was thrilling, she
says, a heart-pounding rush of greed and fear as she stuffed the bathing suits into her
bag, two identical sets of tops and bottoms, because she was going to a concert the next
night with a friend and they wanted to wear the same thing. She was in eighth grade
then, and she'd been stealing for a year, partly for the fun of getting away with
something, but also partly because no way was she going to spend $70 on one of those
suits. “I think, ‘I could be spending my money on this, but I'm getting it for free’,” she told
Newsweek. “Then I get to spend my money on things my parents don't know I'm

buying—like beer, drugs and cigarettes.” But there's always danger. “Your heart starts to
race, and all you can think about is getting out of the store. It's like, ‘I've taken what I
need to take, let's get out of here.‘ But I get really excited because I'm thinking, ‘I already
got a bunch of stuff in my bag and I can get a whole lot more’.” She moved on to the rack
of Mudd jeans. For some people, shoplifting is a thrill.
2 Some 800,000 times a day, this tableau of temptation, fear and exhilaration plays out in
the humdrum aisles of department stores and supermarkets, frequently over such
unlikely objects of avarice (greed) as batteries and souvenir knickknacks. It's a window
into our desires: retailers like Brandy Samson, who manages a jewelry and accessories
store in the Sherman Oaks (Calif.) Fashion Square, uses shoplifting as a guide to taste.
“We know what's hot among teens by seeing what they steal,” she says. It can be a cry for
help on the part of troubled celebrities like Bess Myerson, Hedy Lamarr and maybe
Winona Ryder, who was arrested in December on felony charges of taking $4,760 in
clothes from the Beverly Hills branch of Saks Fifth Avenue. She pleaded not guilty and
was freed on bail, although her fans continue to protest the injustice of the arrest with
free winona T shirts. And it's an economic bellweather (indicator) thrills and temptation
won out over fear in 2000 to the tune of some $13 billion, according to Checkpoint, a top
retail-security company (which notes that employees steal the most by far). And in the
current recession, the company is predicting a $1 billion jump in shoplifting losses, with
more people out of a job, and fewer salesclerks to watch them as they nervously sidle
down the aisles heaped with DVDs, lingerie and balsamic vinegar.
3 Shoplifting was the first distinctly modern crime, a product of late-19th-century mass
merchandising. “Consumer culture manipulates the senses of the shoppers, seduces
them, weakening their ability to resist temptation,” says Lisa Tiersten, a cultural
historian at Barnard College in New York. Department stores, bursting with fans and
muffs and bustles stocked conveniently out of sight of the distant shop clerks, proved an
irresistible lure to otherwise respectable housewives. The spectacle of middle-class
women stuffing their corsets with swag was so unnerving to the Victorian sensibility that
in 1890 a new mental disorder was postulated (offered as a theory, claimed) to explain it,
“kleptomania.” Shrinks no longer believe, as they once did, that it originates in the
uterus, but kleptomania is still a recognized condition, although rarely diagnosed these
days. By far the largest category of habitual shoplifters, experts say, are suffering from
nothing more exotic than addictive-compulsive disorder; the rest include professional
criminals, drug addicts supporting their habits—and thrill seekers, who are often
high-school kids. By some estimates, a quarter of all shoplifters are teenagers.
4 She made only one mistake that day, but it was a costly one: she began her spree by
taking an empty shopping bag from another store, to hold the items she planned to steal.
A clerk at the first store watched her go and alerted the manager of the boutique where
she was headed. As she left with the bathing suits, the jeans, and a couple of beaded T
shirts stashed in her bag, she was stopped by a clerk. “They arrested me and walked me
through the mall, they took me to the juvenile center and called my parents. I got
grounded for probably like a month and a half, but it was the first month of summer
vacation so it was really bad.” She was not prosecuted, although she had to write a
25-page report on how shoplifting affects the economy.
5 A few decades after the invention of kleptomania, a 6-year-old named Gretchen Grimm
began what may be one of the longest criminal careers in history, swiping a lipstick for
her mother at a Woolworth's. The only daughter in a family with seven older sons,
Grimm felt overlooked and began stealing, she believes, to win her mother's attention
and affection. It ended last year when Grimm, at the age of 83, finally kicked the habit

with the help of psychotherapy and the anti-anxiety drug Paxil. Over the intervening
years, while she raised five children and worked as a nurse at the University of Iowa, she
stole, by her own account, “clothes, jewelry, toilet paper, towels, pencils, pieces of
stone—everything.” At the moment of theft, she says, “you feel wonderful, elated, slick
and cool and cunning.” But immediately afterward, guilt would set in, and often she
would actually sneak her loot back into the stores.
6 Grimm's story illustrates two important truths about shoplifting. The first is the
powerful ego boost it can provide, especially to insecure young people. In that context,
experts say, while stealing can never be condoned (pardoned) , a single episode
—especially as part of a group—is not necessarily a cause for parents to panic. “As an
isolated thing, most 12-year-old girls with a peppery personality do it once,” says child
psychiatrist Elizabeth Berger, author of Raising Children With Character. “It shows you're
a real badass.”
7 The other lesson is that a crime that can be perpetrated with equal ease by first graders
and old ladies is pretty hard to stop. Grimm had only one serious arrest, and hid her
habit from her family for almost her entire life. She started getting caught more often in
her 80s, and would call her psychiatrist, Dr. Donald Black. “She usually gets off because
she's old,” Black says. Technology has provided merchants with a new generation of
sensor tags sewn inside clothes or hidden in packaging. Cameras now are ubiquitous
(everywhere, ever present) in large retail stores, hidden in clocks, smoke alarms, even
the pushbars on fire-exit doors. But most stores, as every shoplifter knows, are reluctant
to pursue criminal cases against amateur crooks, reasoning that the cost in
publicity—and possible liability for false arrest—isn't worth the gain.
8 She's 17 now, and she's learned her lesson, which is to be more careful and steal stuff
only when she really needs it—like last week, when because her car insurance payment
was due she was out of cash for a Valentine's Day present for her boyfriend. So she
picked up a nice candle for him, and, while she was at it, a Bob Marley T shirt for herself.
“Anything free is cooler,” she says. “And I still get a rush from it.”
Source: Adapted from “The Thrill of Theft,” by Jerry Adler from Newsweek (Feb. 25, 2002). Copyright © 2002 The
Newsweek/Daily Beast Company LLC. Reprinted with permission. www.newsweek.com.
Check Your Understanding
Circle the best answer to the following multiple-choice questions.
According to the passage, which of the following statements is not true?
One store used shoplifting as a guide to know what items are
desirable among teenagers.
a.
Shoplifters usually steal things that they really need but cannot
afford.
b.
Winona Ryder was arrested on felony charges for taking $4,760 in
clothes from a Saks Fifth Avenue store.
c.
Shoplifting was the first distinctly modern crime.
d.
4.

Which is the largest category of habitual shoplifters?
drug addicts supporting their habits
a.
professional criminals
b.
those suffering from addictive-compulsive disorder
c.
thrill seekers
d.
5.
What are the two important truths about shoplifting that are mentioned in
the passage?
Shoplifting provides a powerful ego boost and is hard to prevent.
a.
Shoplifting provides a powerful ego boost and is usually committed
by men.
b.
Shoplifters usually are not arrested and they are good at avoiding
security cameras.
c.
Shoplifters usually steal batteries and they usually strike during the
day, when stores are the busiest.
d.
6.
According to the passage, what is one measure retailers are taking to
prevent shoplifting?
They are installing cameras in their stores.
a.
They are profiling certain people and following them around stores.
b.
They are watching their employees more carefully as they are the
biggest offenders in shoplifting.
c.
They are hiring more security guards.
d.
7.
Why did Gretchen Grimm believe she started to steal things?
She started shoplifting because she suffered no guilt from it.
a.
She started shoplifting because she knew that even if she were
caught, she would never be prosecuted.
b.
She started shoplifting because she refused the anti-anxiety drug
Paxil, even though she needed it.
c.
She started shoplifting because she felt overlooked and wanted to win
her mother's attention and affection.
d.
8.
Short-Answer Questions

Use context clues and word part analysis to define the following words
from the passage.
exhilaration (paragraph 2): 
recession (paragraph 2): 
intervening (paragraph 5): 
9.
Were you able to answer the question you created in question #3? Provide
your answer to that question.
10.
What is the topic? What is the main idea being supported by all of the
sentences in the reading?
11.
Were you able to maintain your concentration throughout the entire
passage? If you were, what factors do you think contributed to your ability
to stay focused? If you were not able to maintain your concentration well,
where in the passage did you become distracted and why?
12.
In your opinion, does the author approve of shoplifting? Explain your
answer.
13.
List two word clues from the passage, and explain what they signal.
14.
Why do you think the author included stories of shoplifters' experiences?
15.

Chapter Review
4-5d 
 Brain Strength Options
Working individually or in groups of no more than three people, complete one of
the following options.
Create a PowerPoint presentation explaining the concepts of topic and
main idea. You will present to the class (or the instructor may have you
post your presentation online for other students to use to review the
chapter).
Be sure to define both terms and make the difference between them
clear.
Provide four examples. These examples will be a brief paragraph
with the main idea indicated by highlighting or other formatting.
Explain how you determined the topic and main idea.
1.
Create a poster. Apply the same guidelines as in Option #1.
2.
Find a popular song. Print out the lyrics for each class member or present
them on a screen, and have the class identify the main idea. Then tell the
class what you identified as the main idea. Realize that this means that you
must find a song that has a clear message!
3.
Take one article from a magazine or the Internet, and highlight the main
idea and label the topic. Because you are highlighting what is actually
printed, you will have to select material that has directly stated (explicit)
main ideas and details, not implied (implicit) main ideas.
4.

Chapter 5
Finding Supporting Details
Chapter Introduction
5-1 Using your Entire Brain: Big Picture and Detail
5-2 What are Supporting Details?
5-3 Identifying Major Supporting Details
5-3a Strategy One: Ask Questions
5-3b Strategy Two: Look for Support Word Clues
5-3c Strategy Three: Look for Implied Word Clues
5-4 Identifying Minor Supporting Details
5-5 Looking for the Big Picture in Longer Readings
5-6 Chapter Review
5-6a Practice with a Reading Passage
5-6b Chapter Summary
5-6c Post Test
5-6d  Brain Strength Options
Chapter Introduction
“I've always wanted to be somebody, but I see now I should have been more specific.”
— LILY TOMLIN
Student to Student
Niki Hudson
Recently graduated from Baker College with a degree in diagnostic medical
stenography and is currently studying to take her board exams

Making Connections
Would you describe yourself as a
“detail person”? Why or why not?
1.
What is the purpose of details in a
paragraph?
2.
How do you remember large
amounts of detail?
3.
Which details do you choose to
remember from your textbooks?
How do you make that choice?
4.
Courtesy of Niki Hudson
I like the garbage! I'm not going to lie. People, Us, OK. Love those magazines. I
have a crazy interest in that kind of stuff. I guess they're easy to read. I have a
hard time comprehending things I'm not interested in, especially physics. I had to
read it over and over just to understand. I have to admit, I struggle.
For all of my classes, I read the chapter once through to figure out what I'm
reading. Then I reread the chapter to process what I read the first time. While I'm
reading the chapter the second time, I pull out important parts, which are
anything in bold or italics, anything that is underlined, any boxes on the side of
the page that have the heading Note. I not only “note” these things, I highlight
them and make flash cards to study from. I use this strategy for all my classes,
and it usually works, except for physics. It only kind of works for that. I get the
main idea of the chapters in physics because they're pretty clearly stated. It's the
details: the math, the formulas. Some things are inversely proportional, directly
proportional. Density affects speeds in some materials. There's a lot. It's not just
memorization. If physics were song lyrics, I could breeze through.

© Cengage Learning
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw on the brain cell how many dendrites you imagine you have for how
much you know about supporting details.
5-1 Using your Entire Brain: Big Picture and Detail

Have you heard people talk about “being in the right brain” or “being in the left brain” or
saying that someone is “left-brained” or “right-brained”? This is actually not an accurate
description of how the brain works. The misconception comes from the fact that the
brain has two halves (called hemispheres), kind of like a walnut split down the middle;
these halves are called right brain and left brain. The two halves have different primary
functions, though they are highly interactive and share many functions. They always
work together because they are connected by a large white-matter structure called the
corpus callosum, a thick band of nerve fibers. This structure sends information back and
forth between the two halves so they can work together. One example of this is how you
can process both the “big picture” and details at the same time. For example, if you are
walking and come upon a forest, you can understand that you are looking at both a forest
(the big picture) and trees (the details).
iStockphoto.com/Firstsignal
However, if someone has had surgery to cut the corpus callosum, the two halves cannot
communicate, and the left side does not know what the right side is doing. Doctors and
scientists working with someone who has had this surgery can present information to
only one side of the brain because the two halves can no longer communicate. When a
picture of a wooded area is presented to only the left side (sees details), the patient can
see only trees but cannot see the forest— the patient is unable to understand the idea of a
forest. However, if the doctor sets up the situation so that material is presented to only
the right hemisphere (sees the big picture), the patient can see the forest but does not
understand the trees. It takes both parts of your brain to see the big picture and the
details. Both are important in order to have a complete understanding of the world. The
same reasoning applies to reading.

5-2 What are Supporting Details?
In order to get a complete understanding of your textbook material, you need to
understand how all the textbook information is connected. Authors use supporting
details (additional information an author provides to add meaning to the main idea) to
illustrate and explain their main ideas. Unlike topics or main ideas, which are more
general in nature, details consist of facts, examples, definitions, and other more specific
information. There are two types of details: major supporting details and minor
supporting details. Major supporting details (details that directly support the main idea)
are the ideas and arguments an author uses to validate his or her main point or points.
Major supporting details can be arguments, examples, illustrations, facts, opinions, and
definitions. Minor supporting details (details that directly support the major details) are
used to clarify and enhance major details. Minor supporting details are even more
detailed than major supporting details. They exemplify, illustrate, or offer other related
information about the major supporting details. They enhance the major details but are
not absolutely necessary for basic comprehension of the reading. Keep in mind that
supporting details, both major and minor, can be as small as single words in a sentence
or as big as an entire sentence. Details are major or minor based on how and what they
support, not their size.
5-3 Identifying Major Supporting Details
Major Supporting Details are to a Reading Passage what engine parts are to a car; they
make it work. The minor supporting details of a reading passage are extras, like the car's
paint color, heated seats, and stereo system. They do not make it work, but they make it
look nice and sound better. Once you recognize details and can distinguish major ones
from minor ones, you will be able to follow an author's line of reasoning and see how the
ideas in a reading text are related to each other.
In Chapter 4, you learned about main ideas. Many times finding the main idea leads
easily to finding the supporting details because the supporting details are clearly
examples of the main idea.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Remember that learning involves making connections in the brain. You will
remember the details better if you connect them to the main ideas. Therefore, it
is important that you identify the main idea first and then focus on the details
and how they connect to the main idea.

Activity 5A
Identify Major Supporting Details
Read the following passage, and answer the questions that follow.
Waging War
One of the gravest charges against the human race is that only humans make war. The
German writer Hans Magnus Enzensberger began his recent book on European civil war
by saying, “Animals fight, but they do not wage war.” We are supposed to be shamed by
the fact that animals do not make war. Yet some animals do. Ant wars are the best
known, but insects are sufficiently dissimilar to us that people seldom take that to heart.
In recent years it has become clear that animals as closely related to us as chimpanzees
can go to war. The famous chimps of Gombe attack other bands with no provocation and
with deadly intent, not only patrolling their borders but making raids. They may kill and
eat one another.
FRANS LANTING/National Geographic Stock
Source: Masson, J. M. & McCarthy, S. When Elephants Weep: The Emotional Lives of Animals.
Delta Books, New York, 1995, p. 135.
The title gives you a clue to the main idea. Highlight the main idea of the
passage in green.
1.
The author clearly does not believe that only humans wage war. Find two
examples to support his claim.
a.
2.

b.
These two examples are major supporting details.
Now read the following passage. As you read, ask yourself, “What is the author's
point?” Then ask yourself what sentences directly support the main idea (these
are the major supporting details).
Thanks for the Topsoil
1 Earthworms, the “intestines of the earth,” as Aristotle called them, dramatically alter
soil structure, water movement, nutrient dynamics, and plant growth, according to the
U.S. Department of Agriculture. These segmented vertebrates have been around for half
a billion years, but they have no eyes, ears, or lungs. They digest organic material (such
as dead leaves), soil, and even tiny stones which are excreted as castings that enrich and
aerate the soil.
2 Worms are pretty much responsible for all the rich soil on the planet. There can be as
many as a million worms per acre in temperate regions. Some species are able to
regenerate themselves: if one is cut in half, it can grow a new tail (but the pieces don't
become two whole new worms.)
Source: Malesky, Kee. All Facts Considered: The Essential Library of Inessential Knowledge.
John Wiley and Sons, Inc.: New Jersey, 2010, p. 121.
The title gives you a clue to the main idea. Highlight the main idea of the
passage in green.
3.
What are the major supporting details?
a.
b.
c.
4.
Explain why you selected each major supporting detail.
a.
b.
c.
5.
Why are worms referred to as the intestines of the soil? Why is this
significant?
6.

Activity 5B
Identify More Major Supporting Details
Read the following passage about families in China. Highlight the main idea in
green and the major supporting details in yellow. Then answer the questions that
follow.
1 It might seem an innocuous move to outsiders but in China it was a game-changer.
Authorities in Shanghai began encouraging newly married couples in the city to have
two children.
2 The rationale: Under China's vaunted one-child policy—a cornerstone of economic and
social planning for decades—the population has been aging too rapidly. Indeed,
Shanghai, which has always had a relatively youthful populace, now has the same
proportion of retirees as an average city in the United States or Europe.
3 The move last summer by the city of Shanghai marked the first time since 1979 that
officials have exhorted couples to have more offspring. More important, it symbolizes a
sharpening debate in the world's most populous country over one of Beijing's most
fundamental totems.
4 A growing chorus of critics is warning that unless the government changes course, the
nation's one-child policy will drive the Asian powerhouse into a demographic dead end.
They see China growing old before it grows rich.
5 Officials are beginning to take note. Spooked by the prospect of only 1.7 active workers
for every pensioner by 2050, they are quietly chipping away at Beijing's signature
population edict.
6 They have another reason to worry, too—forecasts are that within 30 years, 15 percent
of marriage-aged men will be unable to find brides. The combination of the one-child
policy and the Chinese preference for male offspring has proved deadly for female
fetuses: 120 boys are born for every 100 girls—the highest ratio in the world.
Source: Ford, Peter. “China's crib conundrum,” The Christian Science Monitor, Volume
102/Issues 5 & 6, Dec 2009 - Jan 2010, p. 23.
Activity 5C
Fill in the Missing Details
Suppose you are a college reporter and are asked to cover a story on graduation.
Provide your own main idea and details for the topic Ben's Graduation Day.
Complete the provided mind map based on your current understanding of major
and minor supporting details. Explain what happened by providing readers with
three major details. For each major detail, provide two minor supporting details.
For example, one of the major supporting details could be:
Ben went to the graduation ceremony with two friends.

Two of the minor supporting details could be:
One of the girls was named Lucy.
The other girl was named Laura.
Be creative; it is your story. This activity is intended to introduce you to how
details reinforce and support the main idea and how the details provide meaning
and substance to what you are reading. Without the details, there is no story!
© Cengage Learning
Activity 5D
Remember the Day's Details: Part 1
On a sheet of paper, write the words “I made it to class.” Below that sentence,
write down every detail you can think of that describes anything you
encountered from the time you closed the door of your house to the time you sat
down in class today. (For example, if you were to list some details of what you did
between waking up until an hour later, you might list: woke up, took a shower,
read news on the Internet, stubbed my toe, had coffee.) It might be easier to think
of the details between leaving your house and sitting down in class if you think in
chronological order, but you do not have to. Your goal is to come up with as many
details as you can. Try to fill a whole page if possible. Later in this chapter, you
will return to this activity and work on it further.
There are three specific strategies you can use to identify major supporting details:
Ask questions.

Look for support word clues.
Look for implied word clues.
5-3a Strategy One: Ask Questions
Major supporting details support the main idea directly, so when you know a main idea,
you can ask yourself, “What idea(s) supports the main poin, the main idea, the author is
making in the reading?” The answers to this practical question will be the supporting
details. You can also ask follow-up questions about the main idea using the words who,
what, where, when, why, and how. Examine the following passage, and use the
questioning technique to help guide you, asking yourself these questions and writing
down your answers:
What is this about? (This reveals the topic.)
What is the main point the author is trying to make regarding the reading? (This
reveals the main idea.)
Create your own question about the main idea. (This will help guide you to the
major supporting details.)
What in the passage supports the main idea directly? (This reveals the major
supporting details.)
One of the many signs by which joy in animals can be recognized is vocalization. Pet cats
are admired for purring, a sound that usually indicates contentment, though it may also
be used to appease another animal. Big cats purr too. Cheetahs purr loudly when they
lick each other, and cubs purr when they rest with their mother. Lions purr, though not
as often as house cats, and only while exhaling. Both young and adult lions also have a
soft hum they utter in similar circumstances—when playing gently, rubbing their cheeks
together, licking each other, or resting.
Source: Masson, J. M. & McCarthy, S. When Elephants Weep: The Emotional Lives of Animals.
Delta Books, New York, 1995, p. 112.
Now read the following answers to the questions and compare them with yours.
The passage is about signs of joy in animals.

The main idea of the passage is that one of the signs animals make to show their
joy is vocalization. You know that the main idea is vocalization because all of the
sentences give examples of how animals vocalize when they are content, resting,
and happy.
A question about the main idea: How do animals vocalize joy?
Cats were used to provide support (major supporting details) in this paragraph.
Pet cats purr.
Big cats purr, too.
Lions hum.
Activity 5E
Ask Questions to Find Major Supporting Details
Read the following passages. For each passage, identify the topic, highlight the
main idea in green, and then write a who? what? where? when? why? or how?
question about the main idea. The answer to your question will reveal the major
supporting details.
The adult brain, like the young child's, thrives on experience. If we are able to make the
fullest use of its innate potential and continue to grow in mental abilities throughout
life, it is essential we give our brains as rich, as varied, and as stimulating an
environment as possible. One of the principal reasons that mental faculties appear to
drop off after about the age of twenty is that formal education ceases around this age
and we do not provide the brain with so many challenges and exercise. After leaving
school, or college, many people stop using their brains as much, and with this comes an
apparent decline of the brain's potential. Like any other organ, the brain atrophies if not
in constant use
Source: Russell, Peter. The Brain Book. New York, NY: Hawthorn Books, Inc., 1979, p. 74.
What is the topic?
1.
Highlight the main idea in green.
2.
Create a question about the main idea.
3.
Answer your question to find major supporting details.
4.

1 Multiplication is one of the basic math concepts that will enable you to calculate more
quickly. It is a shortcut for repeated addition. One of the uses of multiplication is
determining the total amount owed when you purchase more than one item costing the
same amount, such as 6 CDs at $9.95 each. You can add $9.95 six times, but it is quicker to
multiply $9.95 by 6. Through the use of multiplication, you will be able to determine if
your paycheck has been computed correctly and if the charges on your monthly bills are
correct.
2 Multiplication is the mathematical procedure for finding the product of two numbers.
The number to be multiplied is called the multiplicand, and the number that indicates
how many times to multiply is the multiplier. The result, or the answer, is known as the
product. Sometimes the multiplicand and multiplier are referred to as factors.
Source: From BURTON/SHELDON. Practical Math Applications 3e. Copyright © 2011
Cengage Learning.
What is the topic?
5.
Highlight the main idea in green.
6.
Create a question about the main idea.
7.
Answer your question to find major supporting details.
8.
Covenant
1 Covenant is the crucial concept for setting out the relationship between God and the
Hebrew people. The covenant can be summed up in the simple biblical phrase “I will be
your God; you will be my people.” In Hebrew history, the Bible insists, God has always
been faithful to that covenant that was made with the people of Israel while the people
must learn and relearn how to be faithful to it. Scholars have pointed out that the
biblical covenant may be based on the language of ancient marriage covenants (for
example, “I will be your husband; you will be my wife”); if that is true, it gives us an even
deeper understanding of the term: the relationship of God and Israel is as close as the
relationship of husband and wife.
2 This strong portrait of a single, deeply involved God who is beyond image or portrayal

has had a profound impact on the shape of the Judeo-Christian worldview. The notion of
covenant religion not only gave form to Hebrew religion, the idea of a renewed covenant
became the central claim of Christianity. (Remember that another word for covenant is
testament; hence the popular Old/ New Testament split Christianity insists upon.) The
idea has even spilled over from synagogues and churches into our national civil religion,
where we affirm a belief in “One nation under God” and “In God we trust”—both
sentiments rooted in the idea of a covenant.
Source: From CUNNINGHAM/REICH. Culture and Values, Volume I: A Survey of the
Humanities with Readings 7e (p. 136). Copyright © 2010 Cengage Learning.
What is the topic?
9.
Highlight the main idea in green.
10.
Create a question about the main idea.
11.
Answer your question to find major supporting details.
12.
The Power of Eﬀective Public Speaking for Free People
1 Just as the democratic civilizations throughout history have understood the
importance of public speaking education, so do we know that being able to effectively
present your ideas in a speech empowers you in several ways.
2 First, public speaking skills empower you to participate in democratic processes. Free
speech is a hallmark of democracy. The strategies and policies our government adopts
are a direct result of the debate that occurs across the nation: in living rooms; over pizza
at the local hangout; on blogs and social networking sites; in the media; as well as in our
executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government. When equipped with
effective public speaking skills, you have the confidence to speak out and voice your
ideas on important public issues.

iStockphoto.com/Blend_Images
3 Second, public speaking skills empower you to communicate complex ideas and
information in ways that all audience members can understand. Most of us have had an
unfortunate experience with a teacher who “talked over our heads.” The teacher
understood the material but was unable to express it clearly to us. When we can express
our ideas clearly, we are more likely to share them. When others understand our ideas,
they learn from us. This confidence equips us to share our knowledge to the benefit of
others.
4 Third, public speaking skills empower you to achieve your career goals and be
self-sufficient. Research shows that, for almost any job, one of the most highly
sought-after skills in new hires is oral communication skills.
5 So, whether you aspire to a career in business, industry, government, the arts, or
education, good communication skills are a prerequisite to your success. Although you
might be hired on the basis of your technical competence, your success will depend on
your ability to communicate what you know to others, including your manager, your
clients, and your colleagues.
Source: From VERDERBER/SELLNOW/VERDERBER. The Challenge of Effective Speaking, 15e
(pp. 6-7). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
What is the topic?
13.
Highlight the main idea in green.
14.
Create a question about the main idea.
15.
Answer your question to find major supporting details.
16.
The Trust Economy
1 In the August 2007 issue of Scientific American Mind there was an article by Christoph
Uhlhaas entitled “Is Greed Good?” The story describes how eBay should simply not work.
After all, if you send money to a complete stranger, why would he send you anything in
return? According to the article, “This is a borderline miracle, because it contradicts the
concept of Homo economicus (economic man) as a rational, selfish person who single-
mindedly strives for maximum profit. According to this notion, sellers should pocket
buyers' payments and send nothing in return. For their part, buyers should not trust

sellers—and the market should collapse.”
2 So why does the online auction eBay work? Why do most people buy from someone
they do not know, based on a bunch of positive peer reviews and ratings from people
they do not know? At first strike, this doesn't make any sense, but this type of behavior is
commonplace online. We have an inherent trust in those who have taken the time to
publish their personal feedback.
3 There is a “Wisdom of Crowds” at play here (to quote bestselling author James
Surowiecki) and an overriding faith in groups of individuals who have never met. The
online trust economy is a powerful force that favors the crowd over companies. Look no
farther than Amazon. com. When reviewing book selections, the traffic and attention
given to these peer reviews is so powerful that the online merchant's description of the
book from the publisher and subsequent mass media reviews pale in comparison to the
conversion rate to sale that they get from the consumer-generated reviews. Ultimately,
you'll trust Sally from Carefree, Arizona, over the New York Times Book Review.
4 In fact, it works so well that Amazon.com also has a feature called “Customers Who
Bought This Item Also Bought,” which is one of the best tools to get consumers to buy
more books. After all, if you like the book you're about to purchase and other people who
bought this book also found value in some other titles, they might be worth checking out
as well.
5 Those who are part of the participatory culture (and give abundantly) tend to build
powerful and respected personal brands. They are connected through intricate networks
based on information and content as the currency, and their ability to provide value
translates into their status in the disjointed hierarchy online. Among all communities,
individuals hope to achieve some level of status and reputation. The pecking order
online is simply bigger, and it has no face.
6 This unique trust economy is counter to everything you ever thought about how a
business grows. A great salesperson knows that the ultimate customer is one who has
given you his or her trust. Trust is earned by an overall great experience with a
foundation of authenticity, open communication, knowledge, and value from that
customer's perspective.
Source: From VERDERBER/SELLNOW/VERDERBER. The Challenge of Effective Speaking, 15e
(pp. 6-7). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
What is the topic?
17.
Highlight the main idea in green.
18.
Create a question about the main idea.
19.
Answer your question to find major supporting details.
20.

5-3b Strategy Two: Look for Support Word Clues
In Chapter 4, you were introduced to support word clues (words and phrases used to
signal that what is being presented in the text supports the main idea) as you were
learning to distinguish main ideas from details. As you ask the question “What directly
supports the main idea?” use support word clues to guide you to the answer—the major
supporting details. Table 5.1 gives you some examples of support word clues. Can you
think of others?
Table 5.1
Examples of Support Word Clues
for
example
one of
the
reasons
to
illustrate
the point
ﬁrst
of all
for
instance
a case in
point
also
second
of all
this is
to say
for
example
in
addition
in
other
words
Tip from the Brain Doctor
If you set your intention, as in telling your brain, to actively look for something,
you are more likely to find it. Study word clues, and then remind yourself to
actively look for them when you read. This will make your reading more active,
rather than passive, as well.

Look at the following passage from a communications textbook regarding hegemony.
1 Social theorist Antonio Gramsci (1971)referred to hegemony as domination by consent.
In other words, hegemony is a process of granting some group with more power and
privilege the ability to shape our worldviews, attitudes, beliefs, expectations, and
actions. Perhaps one of the most common examples of hegemony concerns women's
clothing in general and shoes in particular. Feminist scholars have argued that women
have, to the extent that they embrace high-heeled, pointy-toed shoes and plunging
necklines, assumed, perhaps unreflectively, the male gaze; this is to say, they have
internalize (and thus embraced and made a part of their “style”) a perspective and a look
that functions to objectify them, making them seem more like objects for others'
consumption than complex, thinking, and feeling individuals. This is especially
complicated by the fact that wearing high heels can cause permanent damage to
women's calf muscles. The concept of hegemony attempts to reveal how people or
groups who are oppressed, or who have less power, participate in that process, even
when it's harmful to them; however, this process of participation is complex.
2 For example, Deanna owns a pair of black Kenneth Cole mary janes with three—inch
stacked wood heels. They are a smooth black matte leather, and they are lined,
unexpectedly, with a vivid purple leather. She not only loves the way they look but also
the way they sound when she walks, sort of a resonant “clock, clock, clock.” They are a
little bit uncomfortable; though they are roomy in the toe box, the height of the heel
pitches her forward onto the balls of her feet, which, after about an hour or so, begin to
feel bruisey, and causes her lower back to ache and complain. But she gets a lot of
compliments when she wears them—about their style, about her legs, about the
look—and, quite simply, it feels good to be recognized in this way. So, we could argue that
this is as simple as “The shoes hurt, so toss them!” but so much in our culture—our
friends, television and movies, historical and cultural trends in fashion—reinforces a
vision of femininity that renders women available to the straight, male vision of beauty,
one that comes at a cost for both women and men (in the form of unrealistic
expectations of body image and disordered eating, sexism and violence against women,
and so forth). That Deanna knows all this, and yet, the next time she is invited to a
swanky dinner party, she's still likely to wear these shoes because of how attractive she
feels when she wears them (even though they make her feel terrible at the same time)
raises an interesting question in terms of Gramsci's definition: Has she consented to
domination? Or, is being critical of all the different influences and contradictions in this
experience resistance?
Source: From John T. Warren and Deanna L. Fassett, Communication: A Critical/Cultural
Introduction (pp. 46-47). Copyright © 2011 Sage Publications, Inc. Reprinted with
permission.
The first sentence is the main idea. Some might say that the second sentence looks like
the main idea because the second sentence restates the first. Both sentences define
hegemony, so either would be correct.
Ask yourself, “What directly supports the main idea?” Ask follow-up questions such as
“What is hegemony?,” “Why would someone consent to domination?,” and “What does it

look like to consent to domination?” What support word clues help point out the
answers to these questions?
First Support Word Clue: in other words emphasizes the main idea by restating it. It
answers the question “What is hegemony?” by defining it and leading us into the
passage regarding how powerful it is.
Second Support Word Clue: this is to say reinforces the idea that a man's gaze
regarding what they wear would have more power over women's thinking and
actions than the consequences of their fashion choices. This answers the question
“Why would someone consent to domination?”
Third Support Word Clue: The second paragraph begins with the word clue for
example. It answers the questions “What is hegemony?” and “What does it look like
to consent to domination?” An example of hegemony is presented: granting some
group with more power and privilege the ability to shape our worldviews,
attitudes, beliefs, expectations, and actions.
Activity 5F
Locate Support Word Clues
Preview the following passage, and develop a question to answer.
1.
Now read the passage.
1 Throughout the ages, poets have been waxing poetic about the beauties of white teeth.
In the Old Testament's Song of Solomon, the beloved's teeth are compared to a flock of
sheep, fresh-washed, evenly shorn, all twins.
2 But how do you get white healthy teeth? It's a pursuit that dates back to the pharaohs
and beyond. Egyptians used to rub their teeth with a chew stick coated with a paste made
from granulated pumice stone and wine vinegar. In Europe in the Middle Ages and
Renaissance, barber-surgeons filed the surface of the teeth and slathered on aqua fortis,
a corrosive nitric acid. A dazzling smile would be followed in middle age by tooth decay
because the filing and acid took all the protective enamel off the teeth.
3 Another early popular approach was human urine. In ancient Rome, women gargled
and brushed with urine to help keep their teeth sparkling, and most prized was
Portuguese urine, reputed to be the strongest. (Actually, the long delivery time might
make that claim true.)
Source: Richard Zacks, An Underground Education, New York: Doubleday, 1997, p. 203.
After reading the passage, what do you think is the topic?
2.
What is the most important point the author makes about the topic?
3.

Highlight the main idea in green.
4.
What are the major supporting details? What points directly support the
main idea?
5.
Highlight in yellow any support word clues.
6.
Use word part analysis to define what reputed means in this sentence: In
ancient Rome, women gargled and brushed with urine to help keep their teeth
sparkling, and most prized was Portuguese urine, reputed to be the strongest.
7.
5-3c Strategy Three: Look for Implied Word Clues
Sometimes the Author gives other clues to the major supporting details. The author may
give examples without using specific word clues. The details may be in a pattern or have
some similarity among them. Recognizing that similarity helps you find the details.
Activity 5G
Find Implied Word Clues
Read the following passage, looking for something similar that is repeated.
I have no doubt that Einstein, and other great scientists, have also been motivated by
aesthetics in their search for new laws of nature. The Nobel physicist Steven Weinberg,
who proposed the successful unified theory of the electromagnetic and weak nuclear
forces far ahead of experimental evidence, uses words like beautiful and ugly to describe
theories he likes and doesn't like. Dirac, whose equation for the electron has widely been
described as one of the most “elegant” and “beautiful” in all of physics, used to say “Find
the mathematics first, and think what it means afterwards.” The Nobel chemist Roald
Hoffmann tells his students that it is the awareness and appreciation of the “aesthetic
aspects of science,” rather than mere quantitative analysis, that leads to discovery. And
Einstein himself, in his Autobiographical Notes, says that the selection of physical
theories has always been guided by considerations of “naturalness” and “logical
simplicity” and “inner perfection.” Perhaps aesthetic criteria are part of Einstein's “free

inventions” of the mind.
© GL Archive/Alamy
Source: Lightman, Allen. A Sense of the Mysterious. Pantheon Books, New York, 2005, p. 76.
List the scientists mentioned in the passage. Next to each name, write the
viewpoint of that scientist.
1.
Underline the main idea in green.
2.
Do you see how the major supporting details are the viewpoints of scientists
regarding the main idea?

Activity 5H
Remember the Day's Details: Part 2
In Activity 5D, you were asked to recall the details of your day. Read over what
you wrote. Consider the title your main idea, and highlight it in green. Now
highlight in yellow the major details only—the ones that show how you got to
class. The rest of the details on your page are minor supporting details.
5-4 Identifying Minor Supporting Details
Minor supporting details clarify or enhance the major supporting details and are usually
not considered as important as major supporting details or main ideas. However, some
of them are significant and useful to remember because they help make sense of the
major details. They also help you visualize or picture what you read. Here are two
strategies you can use to decide which minor details are worth remembering:
Remember the minor details that make the major supporting details easier to
remember. For example, if you had to remember Stalin, the Soviet leader, his role
during World War II, and the controversy he brought to his own country, you might
picture Stalin in your mind, committing to memory this minor detail: Stalin had
small pox as a child, which left permanent scars on his face; his schoolmates
mercilessly called him “Pocky.” Picture the face of Stalin with lots of scars. As you
learn material about him, visualize him. The visual may make it easier to
reconstruct the memory. All of the major details related to Stalin can be pictured
in your mind, attached to this minor detail.
1.
Remember any minor details that are emphasized in lecture or in classroom
discussions. Many professors will stress points in lecture that they want you to
know. Even if these points were minor supporting details from your textbook, you
should remember them.
2.
When you find minor supporting details in your reading you feel will help you
remember the major details, you should mark them by underlining or circling them.
Comprehension Check
Using your own words, differentiate between major supporting details
and minor supporting details.
Up to this point in the chapter, what is unclear?

Activity 5I
Use Minor Supporting Details to Remember
Read the following passages, and highlight the main idea in green and major
supporting details in yellow. >From each passage, pick one minor detail that you
think is worth noting, circle it, and explain why you think it is important in the
space provided. The first one is modeled for you.
A Spherical Planet
1 We all have heard that some people believed Earth to be flat. Yet Earth's sphericity, or
roundness, is not as modern a concept as many think. For instance, more than two
millennia ago, the Greek mathematician and philosopher Pythagoras (ca. 580—500 B.C.)
determined through observation that Earth is spherical. We do not know what
observations led Pythagoras to this conclusion. Can you guess what he saw to deduce
Earth's roundness?
2 He might have noticed ships sailing beyond the horizon and apparently sinking below
the water's surface, only to arrive back at port with dry decks . Perhaps he noticed
Earth's curved shadow cast on the lunar surface during an eclipse of the Moon. He might
have deduced that the Sun and Moon are not just the flat disks they appear to be in the
sky, but are spherical, and that Earth must be a sphere as well. Earth's sphericity was
generally accepted by the educated populace as early as the first century A.D.
Christopher Columbus, for example, knew he was sailing around a sphere in 1492; that is
one reason why he thought he had arrived in the East Indies.
Source: Christopherson, Robert. Geosystems: An Introduction to Physical Geography. NJ:
Pearson, 2009, p. 15.
Why do you think the minor detail is worth noting? It is a clear visual, it is easy to
remember, and it illustrates Pythagoras's possible observation.
We take our technological world, and our memories within it, very much for granted. We
leave messages on answering machines or computers for absent friends; we consult our
diaries as to free dates and write notes to colleagues arranging dinner, a theater or a
meeting; we check the fridge and write ourselves a shopping list . Each of these is an act
of individual memory—but an act in which we have manipulated technologies external
to ourselves in order to aid or supplement or replace our internal brain memory system.
It was not always thus: individual our memories may be, but they are structured, their
very brain mechanism affected, by the collective, social nature of the way we as humans
live. For each of us as individuals and for all of us as a society, technologies, some as old
as the act of writing, some as modern as the electronic personal organizer, transfer the
way we conceive of and the way we use memory. To understand memory we need also
understand the nature and dynamics of this process of transformation.
Source: Rose, Steven. The Making of Memory. Anchor Books, New York, NY: 1992, p. 60.

Why do you think the minor detail is worth noting?
1 Indian religion, later called the Hindu religion(derived from an Arabic word meaning
“those who live in the Indus Valley”), combined, then, a highly ritualized worship of the
gods of the pantheon (many believe these gods are merely faces or names for the
ultimate reality) with a strong speculative tradition that tries to grasp the ultimate
meaning of the cosmos and those who live in it. Indian religion, in short, is both a
religion of the priest and the temple as well as the religion of solitary meditation and
study. Most Indian homes to this day have a small altar for a god or goddess in order for
the family to show respect and worship (called puja) in the home.  The fundamental aim
of Indian religion, however, is to find the path that leads one to the correct knowledge of
ultimate reality, which, when known, leads one to be liberated from the illusory world of
empirical reality and be absorbed into the one true reality, Brahman.
Malgorzata Kistryn/Shutterstock.com
2 Broadly speaking, three paths have been proposed for attaining such knowledge:
The path or discipline (that is, yoga) of asceticism (fasting, nonpossession, bodily
discipline, and so on) by which one lives so that the material world becomes
accidental and the person becomes enlightened. This is the hardest path of all,
which, if at all undertaken, usually comes after one has had a normal life as a
householder.
1.
The path or discipline of karma, in which one does one's duty according to one's
caste obligations (for example, priests should sacrifice; warriors fight) and not out
of greed or ambition—motives that cloud the mind.
2.
The path of devotion, in which all people refer all of their deeds as an act of
3.

devotion (bhakti) to the gods or to the one god to whom a person has a special
devotion. By doing everything out of devotion, one does not fall into the trap of
greed or self-centeredness.
Source: From CUNNINGHAM/REICH. Culture and Values, Volume I: A Survey of the
Humanities with Readings 7e (p. 117) Copyright © 2010 Cengage Learning.
Why do you think the minor detail is worth noting?
1 Culture shock is the disorientation that people feel when they encounter cultures
radically different from their own and believe they cannot depend on their own taken-
for-granted assumptions about life. When people travel to another society, they may not
know how to respond to that setting. For example, Napoleon Chagnon (1992) described
his initial shock at seeing the Yanomamö (pronounced yah-noh-MAH-mah) tribe of South
America on his first trip in 1964.
2 The Yanomamö (also referred to as the “Yano-mami”) are a tribe of about 20,000 South
American Indians who live in the rain forest. Although Chagnon traveled in a small
aluminum motorboat for three days to reach these people, he was not prepared for the
sight that met his eyes when he arrived:
I looked up and gasped to see a dozen burly, naked, sweaty, hideous men staring at us
down the shafts of their drawn arrows. Immense wads of green tobacco were stuck
between their lower teeth and lips, making them look even more hideous, and strands
of dark-green slime dripped from their nostrils—strands so long that they reached
down to their pectoral muscles or drizzled down their chins and stuck to their chests
and bellies. We arrived as the men were blowing ebene, a hallucinogenic drug, up
their noses…. I was horrified. What kind of welcome was this for someone who had
come to live with these people and learn their way of life—to become friends with
them? But when they recognized Barker [a guide], they put their weapons down and
returned to their chanting, while keeping a nervous eye on the village entrances.
(Chagnon, 1992: 12—14)
3 The Yanomamö have no written language, system of numbers, or calendar. They lead a
nomadic life-style, carrying everything they own on their backs. They wear no clothes
and paint their bodies; the women insert slender sticks through holes in the lower lip
and through the pierced nasal septum.  In other words, the Yanomamö—like the
members of thousands of other cultures around the world—live in a culture very
different from that of the United States.
Source: From KENDALL. Sociology in Our Times: The Essentials 8e (pp. 60—61). Copyright ©
2012 Cengage Learning.
Why do you think the minor detail is worth noting?
3.

Activity 5J
Diﬀerentiate Major from Minor Supporting Details
The following passage, Thanks for the Topsoil, should be familiar; you read it when
practicing with major supporting details in Activity 5A. Read it again, but this
time, after you read it, ask yourself, “What are the minor supporting details?” As
you try to differentiate between major and minor supporting details, ask yourself
what each detail supports. If it directly supports the main idea, it is a major
supporting detail—and you will have already identified it. If the detail supports
the major detail, it is a minor supporting detail. Think of it this way: If the detail
could be left out without the passage losing its main idea, it is probably a minor
detail.
1 Earthworms, the “intestines of the earth,” as Aristotle called them, dramatically alter
soil structure, water movement, nutrient dynamics, and plant growth, according to the
U.S. Department of Agriculture. These segmented vertebrates have been around for half
a billion years, but they have no eyes, ears, or lungs. They digest organic material (such
as dead leaves), soil, and even tiny stones which are excreted as castings that enrich and
aerate the soil.
2 Worms are pretty much responsible for all the rich soil on the planet. There can be as
many as a million worms per acre in temperate regions. Some species are able to
regenerate themselves: if one is cut in half, it can grow a new tail (but the pieces don't
become two whole new worms.)
Source: Malesky, Kee. All Facts Considered: The Essential Library of Inessential Knowledge.
John Wiley and Sons, Inc.: New Jersey, 2010, p. 121.
List all the minor supporting details, and explain why they are not major
supporting details.

Activity 5K
Unscramble the Paragraph
The paragraph on the next page is scrambled. Decide what the correct order of
the paragraph should be by renumbering the sentences in the order they should
appear. Identify the main idea and major and minor supporting details. When
you finish, read the sentences aloud to check for accuracy.
 For example, suppose a student thinks, “I'm never
going to pass this test.”
1.
 Keep track of your own negative self-talk.
2.
 Your journal is a great place to write it down.
3.
 Learn to substitute neutral statements.
4.
 Listen to the words you use.
5.
 Negative self-talk consists of irrational statements
that must be recognized and changed.
6.
 “I failed the last one, and I know the same thing
will happen again.”
7.
 Write it down.
8.
 Examine what you say to yourself.
9.
 Negative self-talk can have a negative effect on a
student's test performance.
10.
Source: Adapted from Sembera and Hovis. at: A Four Letter Word! Whimberley,
Texas: Wimberly Press, 1993, p. 23.
Was this process easy or difficult for you? Explain your answer.
5-5 Looking for the Big Picture in Longer Readings
When reading long reading assignments, especially entire textbook chapters, it is
important to create in your mind a big picture of how all of the ideas relate to one

another. You do not want to read facts and examples in isolation. When you see them as
related and that they fill in the puzzle pieces (facts, examples, or arguments) of your
mental picture as you read, you will be able to prioritize ideas. Although all ideas in a
reading are related, they are not all equally important. The mental picture you create as
you read will help you see this. You might even consider trying to draw your mental
picture.
Textbook chapters usually have more than one main idea, so it is useful to break
chapters down into smaller parts or sections and then seek the main idea and supporting
details for each part. A section of a chapter can be a paragraph or group of paragraphs
that make a single, important point about an overall topic. Textbook chapters are often
separated into these sections by headings, which you can use as guides. Look for the
main idea for each section, labeled by a heading, and then determine which ideas are the
major supporting details. Once you can see the main point of each part and how the
supporting details relate, you are on your way to understanding the whole chapter.
When you read textbook chapters, instead of looking for one topic with only one main
idea, supported by several major and minor details, you should look at the bigger
picture: one topic with a number of main ideas, each supported by a variety of major and
minor supporting details.
Look at the mind map in Figure 5.1, which is based on a chapter from a sociology
textbook. This chapter was divided into six sections, each with its own heading.
Figure 5.1
Mind Map with Main Ideas
Source: Based on Nijole V. Benokraitis, SOC. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2010, pp. 80-97.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Seeing the big picture and seeing details are two brain processes that work
together. Most people will see both naturally. But sometimes you want to focus
on one or the other. Because the brain learns by making connections, you want
to focus on the big picture on the first reading and then reread the material
focusing on the details. In this way, the information you focus on during the
second reading will be able to connect to the big picture. When reading material
in order to learn it, it is advisable to do two complete read-throughs.

Tip from the Brain Doctor
The brain is very visual. If you make the relationship between the main idea and
the details visual, it will be easier to recall. There are many ways to do this, as you
will learn in Chapter 10. But for now, a simple mind map will help, with the main
idea in the center circle and lines to outside circles with the details.
The mind map in Figure 5.1 shows the topic, taken from the chapter's title, “Social
Interaction and Social Structure,” and six main ideas, which were suggested by the six
headings within the chapter. The major supporting details you would need to remember
could be found by asking a who? what? why? where? when? or how? question about each
main idea. In the textbook chapter, however, there are subheadings under each heading,
which are the major supporting details. Consider the following four subheadings (the
major supporting details) under the main idea of: Status is a social position.
Status Set
Ascribed and Achieved Status
Master Status
Status Inconsistency
With these added major supporting details, your new mind map would look like Figure
5.2.

Figure 5.2
Mind Map with Major Details for One Main Idea
Source: Based on Nijole V. Benokraitis, SOC. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2010, pp. 80-97.
Figure 5.2 shows that the ideas are all related but that there is a hierarchy. Learn the
ideas with the hierarchy in mind. When you think about a main idea, such as Status is a
social position, think about it in terms of its major supporting ideas. Try to see the main
idea and its major supporting details completely so you can visualize a full picture.
According to the textbook chapter, status set is the group of societal places one occupies
at a given time. For example, you may be a college student, a registered voter, a brother,
and a health club member. Ascribed and achieved statuses are those positions we are born
into and are ascribed to us (sex, age, ethnicity) and those we choose or achieve
(employee, graduate, spouse). Master status is a position that determines a person's
identity. They are visible things or things people assess very quickly, such as ethnicity,
occupation, and income level. Status inconsistency is conflict in statuses. A chemical
engineer might be working at the local movie theater because of recent job shortages.
His educational status is inconsistent with his occupational status.
Your instructors want you to understand what you read in a complete and deep way.
This means understanding the main ideas clearly and linking them with necessary
supporting details. This might seem like a lot to memorize at first, but if you visualize
ideas so you can memorize them in groups of main ideas with their supporting details,
you will have an easier time.
Activity 5L
Connect What you Know
Add to the mind map provided on the next page with information that describes
your statuses. Here are some definitions to help you:
Status Set: group of societal places one occupies at a given time (student, voter,
child)

Ascribed Status: those positions we are born into (sex, age, ethnicity)
Achieved Status: those positions we choose (employee, graduate, spouse)
Master Status: a position that determines a person's identity
Status Inconsistency: inconsistency in statuses
© Cengage Learning
Activity 5M
Create a Mind Map Using Main Idea and Supporting Details
Read the following passage from a business textbook. Look for the main idea,
major supporting details, and minor supporting details.
Ethical Criticisms
1 The criticisms of marketing are both well known and widespread. They are raised not
simply in North America or Europe, but appear in most countries around the world.
Advertising is, of course, a favorite target of moral
 criticism. Its use of sex and fear to
increase sales, not to mention its deceptive practices, are condemned by many. Retailers
are often charged with privacy invasion. For example, when customers use their credit
cards at retail stores the data from their use not only informs the company of which
goods to restock but also is mined as part of a data profile which data processors can
develop on individuals and various market segments. The amount and detail of the
information can be impressive. Similarly, telemarketers are criticized for intruding on
people at home with their telephone calls. When laws are passed regulating this activity,
they seek ways around those laws, while insisting on their right to call potential

customers.
2 Marketers are also faulted for how they treat their business customers when, for
example, salespeople offer money, bribes, or other “special considerations” to suppliers
or retailers to obtain special favors. Large retailers are attacked for exercising their
considerable economic power over smaller retailers and suppliers. Some of these
methods inhibit
 open competition by requiring smaller retailers only to stock the
products of one marketer rather than those of others. For example, Coca-Cola insists that
those who handle its products not handle Pepsi Cola. If they do, then Coke will withdraw
its product, as well as other favorable financing arrangements they provide to the
handlers. Microsoft has been repeatedly taken to court for the pressure that it has placed
on other businesses to use its products. And Wal-Mart is frequently attacked for driving
local enterprises out of business while destroying the central business districts of small
towns. These criticisms resonate
 around the world.
3 If this were not enough, marketing has been criticized more generally as simply being
wasteful, expending billions of dollars to persuade people to buy products they don't
need. It is accused of bringing about the commercialization of society and human
relations. It is reproached
 for promoting both materialism and consumerism.
Marketers are said to foster conditions under which people take their identities from the
brands they buy and wear, as opposed to developing their own, non-commercial
identities. The current problem of obesity is attributed, at least in part, to the marketing
practices of fast-food producers and advertisers.
4 Finally, an important part of anti-globalization protests relates to marketing.
International marketers have been charged with imposing the values of their home
countries on the countries in which they do business, destroying local businesses, and
manipulating people to want things they cannot afford.
Source: From George Brenkert, Marketing Ethics. Copyright © 2008 John Wiley and Sons,
Inc. Reprinted with permission.
Using the title, what is the topic?
What is the main idea?
Complete the following mind maps, one for each paragraph, identifying the
major and minor details as well as support word clues. The stars represent
support word clues.
Paragraph 1

© Cengage Learning
Paragraph 2
© Cengage Learning
Paragraph 3

© Cengage Learning
Paragraph 4
© Cengage Learning
5-6 Chapter Review
5-6a Practice with a Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Based on the title, what do you expect the following passage to be about?
1.
What do you know about the topic already?
2.
If you do not have a disability, have you ever wondered about students on
campus with physical disabilities and how they affect day-to-day living and
attending college?
3.

Using the title of this passage, develop a question to ask yourself as you
read.
4.
Letting Justice Flow
Alison Kafer
1 I have no legs.
2 One night, six years ago, I fell asleep an active, able-bodied young woman. Months later
I woke up, my arms, belly, and back covered in burn scars. The legs that had carried me
for years were missing, amputated above the knees as a result of my burns. The last few
years have been a continual process of learning how to move and understand myself in
this new, and yet old, body.
3 Before my disability, I saw myself as a political activist only when involved in a
demonstration or protest. Now, however, I understand my very body as a site of
resistance. Every single time I leave my house, people stare. Their eyes linger on my
scars, my half-legs, and my wheelchair as they try to understand what happened and
why I look the way I do. Their stereotypes about disability are written in their
expressions of confusion and fear as they watch me pass. I am powerfully aware that
merely by living life in a wheelchair, I challenge their stereotypes about what bodies
look like and what bodies do. I feel like an activist just by rolling out my front door.
4 Sometimes, however, simply rolling outdoors isn't enough of a statement.
5 Sometimes you have to pee outdoors, too.
6 Three years ago, during my first semester of graduate school, I took an exchange class
at a local seminary.
 A month into the course, I was assigned to give a presentation
on the week's readings. Halfway through class we took a break, after which I was to give
my talk. I desperately had to pee, and I rolled over to the library, sure I'd find accessible
toilets there. I was met only with a wall of narrow stalls—too narrow to slide my wheels
into.
7 I dashed about campus, rolling from one building to another, hoping to find a wide stall
door, muttering to myself, “There has to be an accessible can somewhere on this damn
campus.” After checking every bathroom in every building, I realized I was wrong.
8 What the hell was I going to do?
9 Going home wasn't possible because I would never make it back to school in time to
give my presentation. “Holding it” also wasn't possible because… well, when a girl's gotta
go, a girl's gotta go. I exercised my only remaining option: I went outside, searched for a
dark and secluded part of campus, hiked up my skirt, leaned my body over the edge of
my wheelchair, and pissed on the grass.
10 It just so happened that the dark, secluded place I'd found was the Bible meditation
garden.

11 I went back to class angry. With mild embarrassment, I told the professor what had
happened. I felt validated when she stopped the class to tell everyone the seminary
president's name so they could write letters demanding an accessible bathroom at the
school.
12 The next day, I, too, wrote a letter to the president informing him of both my
accessibility problem and my solution. “Odds are,” I wrote, “I will need a bathroom again.
And I am doubtful that my ‘christening
 of the Bible garden is a practice you would
like me to continue.” In closing, I mentioned the Bible verse I'd found emblazoned
on the garden wall (the one I'd practically peed on), and hoped its irony
 would not
escape him. “Let justice roll down like waters,” the words proclaimed, “and
righteousness like an everlasting stream.” Never before had the Bible seemed so
relevant
 to me!
13 Within forty-eight hours, I had an appointment with the school president. He ushered
me into his office and sat down across from me. “Before we discuss possible
construction,” he said, “I just want to give you a moment to share your pain.”
14 I paused, thinking his comment a rather condescending way to begin a meeting. “I'm
not in any pain,” I said curtly, “I just want a place to go to the bathroom.”
15 Our conversation could only go downhill from there.
16 The president informed me that although he wanted to provide me with an accessible
bathroom, the school could not currently afford such construction. When I suggested
that removing a forty-year-old stinky couch from one of the woman's rooms would free
up space for an accessible stall, he responded with a sentiment as old as the couch: “Well,
I'm reluctant to remove the sofa because some of the lady students like to rest there
during their time.”
17 Right. I'd forgotten how much we lady students, brains overtaxed by academia, liked
to rest, bleeding, on musty couches in dank bathrooms. What a traitor to my sisters I
must have been to suggest that my need to pee was more important than a couch that
hadn't seen human contact since 1973.
18 Not surprisingly, that meeting did not result in an accessible toilet. So, as threatened, I
continued to piss in the garden and complain in the halls. What had started out as a
necessity became an interesting combination of necessity and protest—a pee protest.
Word got around, and to my delight most students supported me. Petitions were signed
in a number of classes. One student even proposed a documentary on The Bathroom
Debates to her film class, showing them a short teaser clip she'd made. I became a bit of a
celebrity, known in the halls as “the bathroom girl.”
19 About a month after the first incident, I fired off another letter to the president
informing him of my continued use of the Bible meditation site. This time I meant
business. I told him I was ready to expose his total disregard of the needs of disabled
Americans by going to the press with my story. Bingo. Construction began on the most
beautiful accessible bathroom you ever did see.
20 Justice and righteousness were rolling down at last. They had just needed a little boost
from a girl, her wheelchair, and a full bladder.
Alison Kafer is a graduate student in Women's Studies and Religion. In between
battles with university administrators about inaccessible buildings, she kayaks,

camps, and hikes. A relentless optimist, Alison insists that most people stare at her
not because of her disability, but because of her Southern charm and dazzling
physical grace.
Source: From THAT TAKES OVARIES: BOLD FEMALES AND THEIR BRAZEN ACTS by Alison
Kafer (pp. 127—130) edited by Rivka Solomon. Copyright © 2002 by Rivka Solomon. Used
by permission of Three Rivers Press, a division of Random House, Inc. and Alison Kafer.
Check Your Understanding
Use context clues and word part analysis to define the following words
from the passage.
accessible (paragraph 6): 
validated (paragraph 11): 
condescending (paragraph 14) 
5.
Circle the best answer to the following multiple-choice questions.
What was the author's problem in the essay?
She had a difficult time with her wheelchair.
a.
She found her graduate-level classes difficult.
b.
There were no wheelchair-accessible bathrooms.
c.
There were no clean bathrooms.
d.
6.
How did she finally solve her problem?
She waited until she went home.
a.
She went to the library to find a bathroom.
b.
She went to the student union.
c.
She relieved herself outside in the meditation garden.
d.
7.
What did her professor do when she told her about her problem and
described how she solved it?
She told the students the school president's name so they could write
letters.
a.
She ignored her problem and continued teaching class.
b.
The professor wrote a letter of protest.
c.
8.

She gave the students a few minutes to talk so they could share her
pain.
d.
What did the president of the school say when the author had a meeting
with him to discuss the problem?
He suggested removing an old couch from one of the women's
bathrooms to free up space for an accessible stall.
a.
He said that building construction was not up to him and that she
should contact the ombudsman of the school.
b.
He said the school was already constructing a new bathroom in
another wing of the building.
c.
He said the school could not currently afford to build an accessible
bathroom stall.
d.
9.
What made the university president finally agree to build an accessible
bathroom?
The author threatened to continue to relieve herself outside.
a.
The author threatened to expose the problem to the press.
b.
Other students protested on the author's behalf.
c.
He felt it would be expensive but worth it.
d.
10.
Short-Answer Questions
Did you enjoy reading the passage? Why or why not?
14.
The main idea is not stated explicitly but implied, a subject that will be
discussed in the next chapter. The main idea is: Sometimes you have to do
something radical to achieve justice. Knowing this, identify at least three
major supporting details.
15.
What details does the author use to make you, the reader, understand her
frustration at not being able to find an accessible bathroom?
16.

What details does the author use to show how other students supported
her request for an accessible bathroom?
17.
Do you agree or disagree with how the author handled her situation?
Would you have acted differently to get the college to provide accessibility?
18.
Comprehension Check
Create three questions about this chapter you would ask students if
you were the instructor.
Of everything you have read in this chapter, what will you be sure to
use in other classes?
If you could ask the authors a question about this chapter, what would
you ask?
Chapter Review
5-6b Chapter Summary
Major supporting details add strength and clarity to the main idea by providing more
specific information, explanation, and examples. Minor supporting details flesh out the
major supporting details with more explanation and examples. Ideas go from general
(topic) to very specific (minor detail), depending on what function they serve in the
reading. Question yourself about the main idea in order to locate the major supporting
details. Ask “what backs this up?” and who? what? where? when? why? or how? questions
about the main idea, and then find the answers in the supporting details. Use support
word clues and implied word clues to help you determine where the supporting details
are.
Most textbook chapters have more than one main idea and a lot of details. Make it a
practice to always look for the big picture in what you read. From there, fill in the blanks
of the framework with main ideas of sections and details within those sections that you
know are important. Decide what is important by taking cues from your instructor

supporting details
1.
major supporting details
2.
minor supporting details
3.
support word clues
4.
words and phrases used to
signal that what is being
presented in the text supports
the main idea
a.
additional information an
author provides to add to the
meaning to the main idea
b.
details that directly support
the main idea
c.
during lecture or class discussion. Include minor details, too, if they help you remember
the more major details or the main ideas. It can be helpful to visualize or draw a mind
map to identify the main idea and details of your readings. Visualizing what you read
helps your brain remember better.
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw the amount of dendrites you imagine that you have now about supporting
details. Compare your drawing of dendrites now with what you drew at the
beginning of this chapter. If the amounts are different, explain why.
Chapter Review
5-6c Post Test
Part 1: Objective Questions
Match the key terms from the chapter in Column A to their definitions in
Column B.
Column A Column B

details that directly support
the major details
d.
Circle the best answer to the following multiple-choice questions.
Which of the following is not a strategy for locating main ideas?
Question yourself.
a.
Discover your concentration blocks.
b.
Notice word clues.
c.
Look in the usual spots.
d.
5.
Minor supporting details:
are always very important.
a.
are not at all important.
b.
usually support major supporting details.
c.
are located at the beginning or end of a paragraph, but never in the
middle.
d.
6.
Textbook chapters:
sometimes have no main idea.
a.
usually have more than one main idea.
b.
usually have only one main idea.
c.
do not include minor supporting details.
d.
7.
To help organize textbook information, you can:
create mind maps.
a.
read your textbook aloud.
b.
avoid looking up unfamiliar words so as not to lose concentration
when you read.
c.
avoid questioning yourself as you read in order to save time.
d.
8.
Mind maps are effective because:
they test your spelling skills.
a.
they are difficult to complete.
b.
they show others that you have memorized the information.
c.
9.

they show relationships between ideas.
d.
Academic Reading
Part 2. Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Based on the title, what do you already know about this topic?
1.
Using the title, develop a question to ask yourself as you read.
2.
What memory technique would you use to help you recall information in
this passage?
3.
Highlight the main idea in green and the major supporting details in yellow.
Circle or Underline minor details if they help you understand what you
have read.
4.
McDonald's
Conrad Kottak
1 Each day, on the average, a new McDonald's restaurant opens somewhere in the world.
The number of McDonald's outlets today far surpasses the total number of all fast-food
restaurants in the United States in 1945. McDonald's has grown from a single hamburger
stand in San Bernardino, California, into today's international web of thousands of
outlets. Have factors less obvious to American natives than relatively low cost, fast
service, and taste contributed to McDonald's success? Could it be that natives—in
consuming the products and propaganda
 of McDonald's—are not just eating but
experiencing something comparable in certain respects to participation in religious
rituals? To answer this question, we must briefly review the nature of ritual.
2 Rituals, we know from the chapter on religion, are formal—stylized, repetitive, and
stereotyped. They are performed in special places at set times. Rituals include liturgical
 orders—set sequences of words and actions laid down by someone other than the
current performers. Rituals also convey information about participants and their
cultural traditions. Performed year after year, generation after generation, rituals
translate messages, values, and sentiments into action. Rituals are social acts.
Inevitably, some participants are more strongly committed than others are to beliefs
on which the rituals are founded. However, just by taking part  in a joint public act,
people signal that they accept an order that transcends
 their status as mere
individuals.
3 For many years, like millions of other Americans, I have occasionally eaten at

McDonald's. Eventually I began to notice certain ritual-like aspects of Americans'
behavior at these fast-food restaurants. Tell your fellow Americans that going to
McDonald's is similar in some ways to going to church and their bias as natives will
reveal itself in laughter, denial, or questions about your sanity. Just as football is a game
and Star Trek is “entertainment,” McDonald's, for natives, is just a place to eat. However,
an analysis of what natives do at McDonald's will reveal a very high degree of formal,
uniform behavior by staff members and customers alike. It is particularly interesting
that this invariance
 in word and deed has developed without any theological
doctrine.
 McDonald's ritual aspect is founded on 20
-century technology,
particularly automobiles, television, work away from home, and the short lunch break. It
is striking, nevertheless, that one commercial organization should be so much more
successful than other businesses, the schools, the military, and even many religions in
producing behavioral invariance. Factors other than low cost, fast service, and the taste
of the food—all of which are approximated by other chains—have contributed to our
acceptance of McDonald's and adherence to its rules.
4 Remarkably, when Americans travel abroad, even in countries noted for their food,
many visit the local McDonald's outlet. The same factors that lead us to frequent
McDonald's at home are responsible. Because Americans are thoroughly familiar with
how to eat and more or less what they will pay at McDonald's in its outlets overseas, they
have a home away from home. In Paris, whose people aren't known for making tourists,
particularly Americans, feel at home, McDonald's offers sanctuary
 (along with
relatively clean, free restrooms). It is, after all, an originally American institution, where
natives, programmed by years of prior experience, can feel completely at home. Given
its international spread, McDonald's is no longer merely an American institution—a fact
that McDonald's advertising has not ignored. A TV commercial linked to the 1996
Olympics (of which McDonald's was an “official sponsor”) portrayed an Asian athlete
finding sanctuary from an alien American culture at a McDonald's restaurant in Atlanta.
For her, the ad proclaimed, McDonald's was home-culture turf.
5 This devotion to McDonald's rests in part on uniformities associated with its outlets:
food, setting, architecture, ambience, acts, and utterances. The McDonald's symbol, the
golden arches, is an almost universal landmark, as familiar to Americans as Mickey
Mouse, Mr. Rogers, and the flag. A McDonald's (now closed) near my university was a
brick structure whose stained-glass windows had golden arches as their central theme.
Sunlight flooded in through a skylight that was like the clerestory
 of a church.
6 Americans enter a McDonald's restaurant for an ordinary, secular
 act—eating.
variability
 of the world outside. We know what we are going to see, what we are
going to say, and what will be said to us. We know what we will eat, how it will taste, and
how much it will cost. Behind the counter in every McDonald's, agents wear similar
attire. Permissible utterances by customer and worker are written above the counter.
Throughout the United States, with only minor variation, the menu is in the same place,
contains the same items, and has the same prices. The food, again with only minor
regional variation, is prepared according to plan and varies little in taste. Obviously,
customers are limited to what they can choose. Less obviously, they are limited in what
they can say. Each item has its appropriate designation: “large fry,” “quarter pounder
with cheese.” The novice who innocently asks, “What kind of hamburgers do you have?”
or “What's a Big Mac?” is out of place.
7 Other ritual phrases are uttered by the person behind the counter. After the customer
has completed an order, if no potatoes are requested, the agent ritually asks, “Any fries?”
Once food is presented and picked up, the agent conventionally says, “Have a nice day.”
th

(McDonald's has surely played a strong role in the diffusion of this cliché into every
corner of contemporary American life.) Nonverbal behavior also is programmed. As
customers request food, agents look back to see if the desired sandwich item is available.
If not, they tell you, “That'll be a few minutes,” and prepare your drink. After this, a
proper agent will take the order of the next customer in line. McDonald's lore and
customs are even taught at a “seminary” called Hamburger University in Illinois.
Managers who attend the program pass on what they learn to the people who work in
their restaurants.
8 It isn't simply the formality and regularity of behavior at McDonald's but its total
ambience
 that invites comparison with ritual settings. McDonald's image makers
stress “clean living” and refer to a set of values that transcends McDonald's itself.
Employees submit to dress codes. Kitchens, grills, and counters should sparkle.
Understandably, as the world's number one fast-food chain, McDonald's also has evoked
 hostility. In 1975, the Ann Arbor campus McDonald's was the scene of a ritual
rebellion—desecration by the Radical Vegetarian League, which held a “puke-in.”
Standing on the second-story balcony just below the clerestory, a dozen vegetarians
gorged themselves on mustard and water and vomited down on the customer waiting
area. McDonald's, defiled, lost many customers that day.
9 The formality and invariance of behavior in a demarcated
 setting suggests
analogies
 between McDonald's and religious rituals. Furthermore, as in a ritual,
participation in McDonald's occurs at specific times. In American culture, our daily food
consumption is supposed to occur as three meals: breakfast, lunch, and dinner.
Americans who have traveled abroad are aware that cultures differ in which meal they
emphasize. In many countries, the midday meal is primary. Americans are away from
home at lunchtime because of their jobs and usually take less than an hour for lunch.
They view dinner as the main meal. Lunch is a lighter meal symbolized by the sandwich.
McDonald's provides relatively hot and fresh sandwiches and a variety of subsidiary
fare
 that many American palates
 can tolerate.
10 The ritual of eating at McDonald's is confined to ordinary, everyday life. Eating at
McDonald's and religious feasts are in complementary distribution in American life.
That is, when one occurs, the other doesn't. Most Americans would consider it
inappropriate to eat at a fast-food restaurant on Christmas, Thanksgiving, Easter, or
Passover. Our culture regards these as family days, occasions when relatives and close
friends get together. However, although Americans neglect McDonald's on holidays,
television reminds us that McDonald's still endures, that it will welcome us back once
our holiday is over. The television presence of McDonald's is particularly evident on
such occasions—whether through a float in the Macy's Thanksgiving Day parade or
through sponsorship of special programs, particularly “family entertainment.”
11 Although Burger King, Wendy's and Arby's compete with McDonald's for the fast-food
business, none has equaled McDonald's success. The explanation may lie in the
particularly skillful ways in which McDonald's advertising plays up the features just
discussed. For decades, its commercials have been varied to appeal to different
audiences. On Saturday morning television, with its steady stream of cartoons,
McDonald's has been a ubiquitous
 sponsor. The McDonald's commercials for
children's shows usually differ from the ones adults see in the evening and on sports
programs. Children are reminded of McDonald's through fantasy characters, headed by
clown Ronald McDonald. Children can meet “McDonaldland” characters again at outlets.
Their pictures appear on cookie boxes and plastic cups. Children also have a chance to
meet Ronald McDonald as actors scatter visits throughout the country. One can even

rent a Ronald for a birthday party.
12 Adult advertising has different but equally effective themes. Breakfast at McDonald's
has been promoted by a fresh-faced, sincere, happy, clean-cut young woman. Actors
gambol on ski slopes or in mountain pastures. The single theme, however, that for years
has run through the commercials is personalism. McDonald's, the commercials drone
on, is something other than a fast-food restaurant. It's a warm, friendly place where you
are graciously welcomed and feel at home, where your children won't get into trouble.
McDonald's commercials tell you that you aren't simply an anonymous face in an
amorphous
 crowd. You find respite
 from a hectic and impersonal society, the
break you deserve. Your individuality and dignity are respected at McDonald's.
13 McDonald's advertising tries to de-emphasize the fact that the chain is a commercial
organization. One jingle proclaimed, “You, you're the one; we're fixin' breakfast for
ya”—not “We're making millions off ya.” Commercials make McDonald's seem like a
charitable organization by stressing its program of community good works. “Family”
television entertainment is often “brought to you by McDonald's.” McDonald's
commercials regularly tell us that it supports and works to maintain the values of
American family life.
14 I am not at all arguing here that McDonald's has become a religion. I am merely
suggesting that specific ways in which Americans participate in McDonald's bear
analogies to religious systems involving myth, symbol, and ritual. Just as in rituals,
participation in McDonald's requires temporary subordination
 of individual
differences in a social and cultural collectivity. In a land of ethnic, social, economic, and
religious diversity, we demonstrate that we share something with millions of others.
Furthermore, as in rituals, participation in McDonald's is linked to a cultural system that
transcends the chain itself. By eating there, we say something about ourselves as
Americans, about our acceptance of certain collective values, customs, and ways of
living.
Source: From Conrad Kottak, Cultural Anthropology 9e (pp. 466—468). Copyright © 2002
McGraw-Hill. Reprinted with permission.
Check Your Understanding
Use context clues and word part analysis to define the following words
from the passage.
designation (paragraph 6): 
lore (paragraph 7): 
inappropriate (paragraph 10): 
5.
Circle the best answer to the following multiple-choice questions.
According to the author, why do people eat at McDonald's?
The French fries are only $.99.
a.
Americans are not really concerned with their health.
b.
6.

They are familiar with how to eat and what they will pay at
McDonald's.
c.
Americans do not like to pay a lot for lunch because it is not
considered the main meal of the day.
d.
The author argues that people are devoted to McDonald's because:
they believe that Wendy's has greasy hamburgers.
a.
they like the uniformities associated with McDonald's outlets.
b.
each McDonald's is different.
c.
McDonald's was an “official sponsor” of the 1996 Olympics.
d.
7.
According to the author, what nonverbal behavior is customary for
McDonald's employees?
As customers request food, employees look back to see if the desired
sandwich item is available.
a.
If no potatoes are ordered with a meal, employees routinely ask, “Any
fries?”
b.
If a food item is not available, employees will say, “That'll be a few
minutes.”
c.
Employees frequently stare off into space and yell, “Next in line!”
d.
8.
What hostility occurred in a McDonald's in Ann Arbor, Michigan?
University of Michigan undergraduates critiqued the grammar on the
menu over the loudspeaker.
a.
Michigan State football fans attempted to rally at the restaurant but
couldn't remember their school's fight song.
b.
Vegetarians picketed outside.
c.
The Radical Vegetarian League held a “puke-in.”
d.
9.
According to the author, in what way has McDonald's promoted the idea of
personal attention in their advertisements?
They have a catch phrase in their commercials: “Have it your way.”
a.
The commercials tell you that you aren't simply an anonymous face
in an amorphous crowd.
b.
They include a guy name “Dave” in all of their commercials.
c.
10.

They advertise McNuggets for McYou.
d.
Short-Answer Questions
What is the main idea of the passage?
1.
What rituals are performed at McDonald's?
2.
According to the author, what do we say about ourselves when we eat at
McDonald's?
3.
Do you agree with the author when he states that Americans have created
religious-like rituals regarding McDonald's? Explain.
4.
Create your own title for this reading.
5.
Chapter Review
5-6d 
 Brain Strength Options
This project will combine what you learned in Chapter 4 and in this chapter.
Working individually or in groups of no more than three people, complete one of
the following options.

Create a PowerPoint presentation explaining the concepts of topic, main
idea, and supporting details. You will present what you create to the class
(or the instructor may have you post your presentation online for other
students to use to review the chapter).
Be sure to define topic, main idea, and supporting details.
Provide examples of all of these from two readings. Each main idea
should have at least two details.
Explain how you determined that reading's topic, main idea, and
details.
1.
Create a poster, applying the same guidelines as in Option 1.
2.
Find an article from a magazine or the Internet that is at least two pages
long. Highlight the topic, main ideas, and supporting details. Because you
are highlighting what is actually printed, you will have to select material
that has directly stated main ideas and details.
3.

Chapter 6
Using Inference to Identify Implied Main Ideas
Chapter Introduction
6-1 Understanding the Theory of Mind
6-2 Finding Implied Main Idea from Inferences
6-2a Reader-Response Theory: Activating Prior Knowledge
6-3 Making Inferences
6-3a Strategy One: Understand an Author's Purpose
6-3b Strategy Two: Note Comparisons and Implied Similarities
6-3c Strategy Three: Understand an Author's Tone
6-3d Strategy Four: Detect an Author's Bias
6-3e Strategy Five: Recognize Information Gaps
6-4 Knowing How Much to Infer
6-5 Chapter Review
6-5a Practice with a Reading Passage
6-5b Chapter Summary
6-5c Post Test
6-5d  Brain Strength Options
Chapter Introduction
“More than anything else, being an educated person means being able to see connections
that allow one to make sense of the world and act within it in creative ways.”
— George Kuh
Student to Student
Serja Goram

Making Connections
How do you know what someone is
feeling when he or she is not
speaking?
1.
Describe a time when you figured out
what someone really meant even
though that person did not say it.
2.
When you send emails, the other
person cannot see your facial
expression. How do you show that
you are making a joke or kidding?
3.
A graduate student at Ashland University studying pastoral counseling
Courtesy of Serja Goram
I want to understand where an author is coming from when I read because I
don't always agree with their views. I give them a chance, though. I try to see
what an author is saying from their point of view. Are they just being informative
or persuasive? Are there opposing views on the subject? An author's intentions
influence what's written, and it's important to me that I understand both the
intentions and the words. Doing so helps me to comprehend the material fully,
whether I agree with it or not.
Reading always comes easier to me when I have some background information
on the subject. I usually take a number of different approaches to get acquainted
with a subject before I dive into the reading. This includes skimming the assigned
chapter (sometimes even the previous chapter) to see what is familiar to me. I
frequently use the Internet to access information on the subject area or terms
that I am unfamiliar with.
I integrate what I already know on the subject with what I am reading, but I don't
want to extend my understanding beyond the author's intent. One way I gauge
whether my inferences are accurate is by comparing the professor's lecture with
the class readings. They should complement one another. If they don't,
something is amiss. With the current popularity of student postings online being
required in many courses, I am also able to measure my understanding of the
text in comparison to my fellow students. This gives me an idea whether I have a
“middle-ground understanding” or if my comprehension of the material is off.

List some possible purposes an
author would have for writing
something.
4.
What does tone of voice mean? Name
some tones of voice a person could
use when speaking.
5.
Can a piece of writing have a tone of
voice? How would the author express
the tone to the reader?
6.
What does it mean when you say
someone is biased? Can you
recognize a person's bias when he or
she speaks? How?
7.
Name some words that convey
emotion.
8.
If someone asked you what the main
idea of a movie was, what
information would they be asking
for?
9.

© Cengage Learning
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw on the brain cell how many dendrites you imagine you have for how
much you know about making inferences.
6-1 Understanding the Theory of Mind
When you read a textbook, you understand that the author has something in mind that
he or she wants to communicate to you. You are actually applying the Theory of Mind
when you do this. The Theory of Mind is our understanding that other people also have
thoughts, ideas, feelings, desires, fears, and beliefs. Research shows that even children
are aware that others have a mind. When you are reading, you are expected to move
beyond what is printed for a more complete understanding. Try to understand what the
author means or has in mind when he or she writes even if it is not directly stated. To
understand implied meanings, you mentally build from what is stated directly to create
the ideas the author intended. Some people call this “reading between the lines.” You do
not have the opportunity in most instances to ask the author, “What do you mean?” or
“Can you say it more clearly?” As a student, that becomes your job while reading. When
you figure out what the author has “in mind,” you are determining the implied main idea
and making inferences.

Pakhnyushcha/Shutterstock.com
6-2 Finding Implied Main Idea from Inferences
This chapter focuses on strategies that will help you draw conclusions from your reading
assignments by noting both what is said and what is not said by an author. Combine this
information with what you already know to determine implied main ideas.
Sometimes when you are reading a textbook, the main idea is directly stated in a
sentence. In Chapter 4, you learned different strategies for locating a stated main idea:
Question yourself.
1.
Look in the usual spots.
2.
Notice word clues.
3.
Categorize an author's points.
4.
However, sometimes authors use implied main ideas (main point in a paragraph,
section, or chapter that is not stated directly) , which are the main points in a paragraph,
section, or chapter that are not stated directly. The implied main idea should be what
you think the author intends you to find. You cannot just look in the usual spots to find
the main idea, and you may not find word clues that help you. You have to do more. You
have to work with the text to figure out the main idea and ask yourself what idea the
sentences support. Working with the text means taking what you read, adding to it what
you already know, and making inferences that lead you to a reasonable main idea.
Inference (the process of drawing conclusions about information when an author's
opinions or ideas are not directly stated) is the process of drawing conclusions about
information when an author's opinions or ideas are not directly stated. Remember that
when you read, you participate in a two-way conversation with an author. Some books
present literal information or facts, like these stated main ideas from a math textbook:
An angle is the union of two rays that have the same end point.

The Pythagorean Theorem involves the relationship of the sides of a triangle.
However, some textbooks only offer clues that hint at or imply the main idea. Your job in
this conversation is to take the hint and infer meaning.
Consider this story. You will be surprised when you realize you know more about
inference than you think you do. See if you can figure it out.
Juan dropped the letters, packages, and advertisements through the slot, ignored the
barking, and moved away. He breathed a sigh of relief that he was finished for the day,
just as it started to get dark.
Use your ability to infer by answering the following questions.
Who is Juan? 
1.
Where is Juan? 
2.
What time of day is it? 
3.
What kind of animal did Juan come across? 
4.
What is Juan wearing? 
5.
What was he doing? 
6.
Why did he put those objects in the slot? 
7.
How did he feel? 
8.
What happens as a result of what Juan did? 
9.
Look at how much information you inferred from a few short sentences. You made
inferences and understood the implied meaning when you answered the questions
about Juan. You were able to “read between the lines” and fill out the story. You infer
information in a similar way all the time, every day. The inference questions you just
answered are similar to the types of questions you should ask yourself when you read
textbooks. You learn information directly from printed words, but often you are
expected to move beyond what is printed for a more complete understanding.
6-2a Reader-Response Theory: Activating Prior Knowledge
Reader-response theory says that in order for you, the reader, to understand what you

are reading, you need to have knowledge about what you are reading so that you can
connect it with what you already know. If you have knowledge about the writer's topic,
your prior knowledge (everything you have learned or experienced about a topic
previously) , also called your schema, will be activated. As a result, you will be able to
understand and respond to what the writer tells you. Your neural network will be
activated, and you will connect what you already know to what you are reading. You will
be able to respond by agreeing or disagreeing with the writer or by knowing that you
need to do more research to be sure you understand what you are reading.
For example, if you took Biology 101 last term and are now taking Biology 102, you will
probably have enough of a basic schema or neural network to be activated for the
neurons to connect. When this happens, you can understand and catch on relatively
easily and quickly to the material in the next, higher-level course. On the other hand, if
you took an algebra course when you were a sophomore in high school and did not take
any more math classes until your calculus course in college, you will probably not have
the necessary knowledge to make it possible for you to easily understand this higher
level course.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Remember that prior knowledge creates neural networks that new information
can activate. In order to make inferences as you read, connect what you are
reading to what you already know. If you do not have the prior knowledge or
think you do not, the sentences are difficult, if not impossible, to understand. The
more frustrated and upset you get about not understanding what you are
reading, the more difficult it is for you to learn. Once you make a connection,
suddenly the information will seem to fall into place and make sense.
© Cengage Learning
The same is true about anything you are reading. If what you are reading is above and
beyond what you know, you need time to develop and increase your prior knowledge
and grow and connect a new neural network about the new or more advanced topic. In
other words, if you do not have prior knowledge about the topic, you will not easily be
able to understand and respond to what you are reading.
Without knowledge and experiences similar to the writer's, you may find it difficult to
make correct inferences about what you are reading and to understand what the writer
is saying. You need to remember to look up new words as you are reading to connect

what you already know and understand the points the author makes.
Comprehension Check
Imagine you are reading a magazine article about the stock market and
what people need to do to prevent bankruptcy. However, you do not
know anything about the stock market. What will you need to do to be
able to read and respond with understanding to this article?
Activity 6A
Apply Prior Knowledge to Reading Comprehension
Read the following paragraph that illustrates the importance of prior knowledge,
and try to figure out what it is about.
Sehtolc Gnihsaw
The procedure is actually quite simple. First, you arrange the items into different groups.
Of course one pile may be sufficient depending on how much there is to do. If you have
to go somewhere else due to lack of facilities that is the next step; otherwise, you are
pretty well set. It is important not to overdo things. That is, it is better to do too few
things at once than too many. In the short run this may not seem important but
complications can easily arise. A mistake can be expensive as well. At first, the whole
procedure will seem complicated. Soon, however, it will become just another facet of
life. It is difficult to foresee any end to the necessity for this task in the immediate future;
but then one never can tell. After the procedure is completed, one arranges the
materials into different groups again. Then they can be put into their appropriate places.
Eventually they will be used once more and the whole cycle will then have to be
repeated. However, that is part of life.
Source: From Dooling, D. and Lauchman, R., “Effects of Comprehension on Retention of
Prose,” Journal of Experimental Psychology vol. 88 (pp. 216–222). Copyright © 1971
American Psychological Association. Reprinted with permission.
What do you think the Sehtolc Gnihsaw procedure is about?
1.
What do you infer from the paragraph?
2.
If you had trouble understanding this paragraph, what made it difficult for
you to understand?
3.

Now read the title backward. What does it say?
4.
Now that you know what the topic of the paragraph is, does it change your
understanding of its meaning? How did your understanding about the
reading change once you knew the title?
5.
6-3 Making Inferences
Making an inference or conclusion about what you read involves many factors—your
assumptions, the author's words, other facts. As you make inferences while reading,
check these factors. Ask useful questions to help you judge the accuracy of your
inferences. What is the author's purpose for writing? What are the facts? What
assumptions are you making? What might the author want you to get from his writing?
Very often when you are trying to infer what an author is saying, you make personal
assumptions that lead you to that inference. Assumptions (beliefs and ideas collected
over a lifetime from experiences) are beliefs and ideas that you have collected over your
lifetime from your experiences. These assumptions may or may not be factual and many
times include information you might not have ever questioned. For example, the sun
sets each day and you assume it will rise again the next day. You accept this as true. We
are greatly influenced by our own assumptions and use them, sometimes unknowingly,
as we read.
For example, imagine walking into a person's house and seeing a framed picture on a
table. You look at the picture and take in the facts. How many people are in it? Are they
close together in the picture? Are they smiling? Is the picture in color, black-and-white,
sepia? Was the picture taken outside or inside? What is everyone wearing? Then you
think about what you know of the person whose house you are in. Does this person have
brothers or sisters? Where did this person grow up? Then you add your own
assumptions. Displaying family pictures is common, desirable. Having pictures of people in
your house shows that you have a close relationship with them. After all of this thinking,
which may take only seconds, you may infer (or conclude) that the picture is of the
person's family members.
Activity 6B
Make Assumptions and Inferences
Complete the unfinished sentences with the words you think should be there.

It is raining very hard outside. When Jane goes out, she will need to take
a(n) 
 to keep her dry.
1.
Joe is going to the beach. Remind him to pack his 
so he can go swimming.
2.
Michael always loved flying. When he had to select between being an
airline pilot or a businessman, of course he chose being a(n)
.
3.
We can infer from the woman's sighing, red eyes, and smudged eye makeup
that she has been 
.
4.
We can infer from the sounding of the weather alert alarm that
.
5.
None of your responses may be 100% correct, but, based on the words on the
page, what you know to be true, and your past experiences, your responses are
most likely good conclusions or inferences.
Now read the following passage from The Great Gatsby. Write a short paragraph
about what you think you know (infer) about the person being discussed. Provide
at least three pieces of evidence from the paragraph to support what you think.
There was music from my neighbor's house through the summer nights. In his blue
gardens men and girls came and went like moths among the whisperings and the
champagne and the stars. At high tide in the afternoon I watched his guests driving from
the tower of his raft, or taking the sun on the hot sand of his beach while his two
motor-boats slit the waters of the Sound, drawing aquaplanes over cataracts of foam. On
week-ends his Rolls-Royce became an omnibus, bearing parties to and from the city,
between nine in the morning and long past midnight, while his station wagon scampered
like a brisk yellow bug to meet all trains.
© Corbis
Source: Fitzgerald, F. Scott. The Great Gatsby. Simon and Schuster: New York, 1925, 1925,
p. 43.
Your inference:
1.

Evidence 1:
2.
Evidence 2:
3.
Evidence 3:
4.
Using your knowledge of word parts and context clues, what do you think
the word omnibus means as used in this passage?
5.

Example:
A closed mouth catches no flies.
Possible response:
If you are quiet, you are less likely
to say something you will regret.
Activity 6C
Infer from Proverbs
Practice making inferences by explaining what the following proverbs mean.
A penny saved is a penny earned.
1.
A leopard cannot change its spots.
2.
She who marries for money will earn it.
3.
A drowning man will clutch at a straw.
4.
A golden key can open any door.
5.
The following strategies will help you infer meaning when an author does not directly
state it. Using these will help you put the pieces together so that you can understand the
author's main idea:
Understand an author's purpose.
Note comparisons and implied similarities.
Understand an author's tone.
Detect an author's bias.
Recognize information gaps.
Activity 6D
You Already use Inference Strategies
Before reading about inference strategies, see if you can figure out inferences by

reading the poem here. Answer the following questions. You may be surprised by
how many inference strategies you used. This poem is one of several poems that
make up a play written in the mid-1970s. Since then, the play has been performed
off-Broadway and has been adapted into a 2010 film titled For Colored Girls. The
main idea is timeless, which is why it is still relevant after 40 years. The language
is written like texting language is today, but long before texting became popular.
“no assistance”
1 without any assistance or guidance from you
i have loved you assiduously for 8 months 2 wks & a day
i have been stood up four times
i've left 7 packages on yr doorstep
5 forty poems 2 plants & 3 handmade notecards i left
town so i cd send to you
you have been no help to me
on my job
you call at 3:00 in the mornin on weekdays
10 so i cd drive 27 1/2 miles cross the bay before i go to work
charmin charmin
but you are of no assistance
i want you to know
this waz an experiment
15 to see how selfish i cd be
if i wd really carry on to snare a possible lover
if i waz capable of debasin my self for the love of another
if i cd stand not being wanted
when i wanted to be wanted
20 & i cannot
so
with no further assistance & no guidance from you

i am endin this affair
this note is attached to a plant
25 i've been watering since the day i met you
you may water it
yr damn self
Source: Reprinted with the permission of Scribner, a Division of Simon & Schuster, Inc.,
and by permission of Russell & Volkening as agents for the author from FOR COLORED
GIRLS WHO HAVE CONSIDERED SUICIDE / WHEN THE RAINBOW IS ENUF by Ntozake
Shange. Copyright © 1975, 1976, 1977, 2010 by Ntozake Shange. All rights reserved.
The main idea is implied. What is it?
1.
The author says, “i have loved you assiduously for 8 months 2 wks & a day.”
Using context clues, define assiduously. Why would the author use that
word in this poem when the other words are easy, more familiar words?
2.
Why does the author give the exact amount of time—“8 months 2 wks & a
day”? What does that tell you about her?
3.
The author provides a lot of specific detail. Why do you think she does this?
What is her purpose?
4.
She is not really carrying out an experiment in stanza 3 (lines 13–23). Why
does she tell him she is?
5.
What is her point about the plant? What assistance did she need that she
did not get?
6.

6-3a Strategy One: Understand an Author's Purpose
An author's purpose (reason for writing) is his or her reason for writing. A textbook
author wants to inform you about a specific subject such as psychology, biology, history,
or business. Authors also, at times, write to persuade you or to explain ideas. For
example, an author of a biology text might want to persuade you of the importance of
addressing climate change. A sociology textbook author might explain how one's culture
affects one's decisions in life. Authors of other types of college reading material, such as
essays, journal articles, and stories, write for other purposes, perhaps to stimulate your
imagination as you read about possible technological advances or entertain you with
stories.
An author's purpose is frequently implied. To understand an author's purpose, begin by
asking yourself, “What is the author's reason for writing this?” In the poem from Activity
6D, the author's purpose for writing was to express her anger and disappointment.
Read the following passage and ask yourself, “What is the author's purpose?”
The ACT, like the SAT, is designed to test what a student has learned and to demonstrate
the application of ideas. It uses both multiple-choice and essay questions. The ACT is the
most common college admission test in Michigan, and test administrators make slight
adjustments to maintain the same degree of difficulty each year.
Source: Jodi Upton, The Detroit News, August 25, 2002.
There is no attempt at humor in this paragraph, no persuasion. The author's purpose is
simply to inform. The author offers facts about the ACT. The following passage from a
political science textbook has a different purpose. Can you figure it out?
The most basic service that most governments are expected to offer their people is
education. This is a prerequisite of economic development for the country as a whole,
and it greatly expands the world of the individuals who are educated. Many nations of
the Third World, whose populations were largely illiterate at the time independence was
acquired, have had an uphill fight in bringing education to their peoples, but this story
over the last fifty years is in the main one of success.
Source: Shively W. Phillips. Power & Choice: An Introduction to Political Science, 12th Edition. NY: McGraw-Hill, 2011,
p. 85.
When you ask yourself, “What is the author's purpose in writing this?” you can decide
right away that it is not to entertain. There is actually not a lot of information in the
passage or much detailed explanation. The author seeks to persuade you to see the value
education has to an entire nation. Here is another passage from a sociology textbook.
What do you think the author's purpose is here?

1.
1 Cultures change because people are continually finding new ways of doing things.
Invention, the process of creating new things, brought about products such as toothpaste
(invented in 3000 BC), eyeglasses (262 AD), flushable toilets (the sixteenth century), can
openers (1813), fax machines (1843—that's right, invented in 1843!), credit cards (1920s),
sliced bread (1928), computer mouses (1964), Post-It notes (1980), and DVDs (1995).
2 Innovation—turning inventions into mass-market products—also sparks cultural
changes. An innovator is someone determined to market an invention, even if it's
someone else's good idea. For example, Henry Ford invented nothing new but
“assembled into a car the discoveries of other men behind whom were centuries of
work,” an innovation that changed people's lives.
Source: From BENOKRAITIS. SOC 1e (p. 55). Copyright © 2010 Cengage Learning.
There is a lot of detailed explanation in this passage. The author's purpose is to explain.
The following passage is a little different. It is not from a textbook. What is the author's
purpose?
1 I asked my mother, “What was Daddy like?”
2 “Crunchy, a bit salty, rich in fiber.”
3 “Before you ate him, I mean.”
4 “He was a little guy, insecure, anxious, neurotic… pretty much like all you baby boys.”
5 I felt closer than ever to the parent I had never known, who'd been dissolved in Mom's
stomach just as I was being conceived. From whom I had gotten not nurturing but
nourishment. I thought, thank you, Dad. I know what it means for a [praying] mantis to
sacrifice himself for the family.
Source: Boﬀa, Alesandro. “You're Losing Your Head, Viskovitz,” in You're an Animal, Viskovitz! New York: Alfred A. Kopf,
2002, p. 27.
As you read the passage, you may have realized that praying mantises are talking to one
another. It seems more like fantasy than just straight information. The author's purpose
is to entertain.
Activity 6E
Identify an Author's Purpose
Read the following passages, and decide what the author's purpose is for each
passage.
Some of the latest research suggests that your taste in food can be formed even
before you're born. The fluid in a mother's womb may carry the flavors of
whatever she's been eating, and that fluid is often swallowed by the fetus
growing in there. Julia Mennella conducted an experiment on how tastes are
formed, studying mothers who drank carrot juice while they were pregnant or
breastfeeding. She compared babies whose mothers drank carrot juice with
those whose mothers didn't. All of the babies were given cereal mixed with

2.
3.
water and then cereal mixed with carrot juice. The babies who had learned the
taste of carrot juice from their mothers—either from breast milk or from
amniotic fluid—liked the carrot juice/cereal combination much more than the
other babies did. You probably have to be fed carrot juice at an early age
(before you're old enough to say no) in order to want it on your cereal.
Source: Schlosser & Wilson, Chew on This, New York: Houghton Mifflin Company,
pp. 108–109.
The author's purpose is:
to entertain
a.
to inform
b.
to illustrate
c.
to praise
d.
In the midst of a pleasant dream I opened my eyes as the dawn was silently
pushing the darkness from my bedroom window. Wavy streamers of pink and
gold peeked out from behind the shrouded clouds. The freshly brewed breeze
of the young day filled my room. I could hear the full-throated birds chanting
their morning psalms of praise. Joyful peacefulness had come to visit me, and I
was grateful. Sounds of gladness floated through the open window of the
room, through my mind. The mistakes of yesterday took flight, and new and
better possibilities were present. As the horizon was lifting the great orange
ball, I heard a distant echo of ancient words: “Let there be light.”
Source: McKams, Fr. James. In Living Faith, Fenton, MO: Creative Communications
for the Parish, 2012, Volume 27, Number 4.
The author's purpose is:
to persuade
a.
to support
b.
to disprove
c.
to inspire
d.
1 Under the palm of one hand the child became aware of the scab of an old cut
on his kneecap. He bent forward to examine it closely. A scab was always a
fascinating thing; it presented a special challenge he was never able to resist.

4.
2 Yes, he thought, I will pick it off, even if it isn't ready, even if the middle of it
sticks, even if it hurts like anything.
3 With a fingernail he began to explore cautiously around the edges of the scab. He
got a nail underneath it, and when he raised it, but ever so slightly, it suddenly
came off, the whole hard brown scab came off beautifully, leaving an interesting
little circle of smooth red skin.
Source: Roald Dahl, Skin and Other Stories, Penguin Books, 2000, p. 90.
The author's purpose is:
to persuade
a.
to encourage
b.
to describe
c.
to insult
d.
1 Adolf Hitler launched a war against cigarette smoking and sought to
confiscate all guns. In Hitler, Great Lives Observed, it says that if Hitler's “people
had found that he intended after the war to prohibit smoking and make the
world of the future vegetarian it is probable that even the SS would have
rebelled.”
2 We quite properly call Hitler's regime totalitarian. But Americans accept
government invasion in other areas of private conduct—cigarette smoking—as an
example of enlightened big government intervention. In one Northern California
city, laws bar people from smoking in public parks! What's next? Americans' intake
of meat and sugar? Don't laugh. Yale University professor Dr. Kelly Brownell
believes that government should tax fatty, unhealthy foods to discourage their
consumption. Said Brownell, “To me, there is no difference between Ronald
McDonald and Joe Camel.” He thinks the government should subsidize fruits and
vegetables, to make them dirt cheap, but tax foods containing too many calories or
grams of fat, so that people will think twice about their food purchases, knowing a
Twinkie will hurt your wallet once you reach the cash register.
Source: Elder, Larry. The Ten Things You Can't Say in America, St. Martin Press, 2000,
pp. 219–220.
The author's purpose is:
to persuade
a.
to encourage
b.

5.
to describe
c.
to insult
d.
People vary in the extent to which they know and use a large variety of words.
If you have made a conscious effort to expand your vocabulary, are an avid
reader, or have spent time conversing with others who use a large and varied
selection of words, then you probably have a large vocabulary. As a speaker,
the larger your vocabulary, the more choices you have from which to select
the words you want. Having a larger vocabulary, however, can present
challenges when communicating with people whose vocabulary is more
limited. As a speaker, you must try to adapt your vocabulary to the level of
your listener so that your words will be understood. One strategy for assessing
another's vocabulary level is to listen to the types and complexity of words the
other person uses and to take your signal from your communication partner.
When you have determined that your vocabulary exceeds that of your partner,
you can use simpler synonyms for your words or use word phrases composed
of more familiar terms. Adjusting your vocabulary to others does not mean
talking down to them. It is merely polite behavior and effective
communication to try to select words that others understand.
Source: From VERDERBER/VERDERBER. Communicate! 12e (p. 68). Copyright © 2008
Cengage Learning.
The author's purpose is:
to inform
a.
to illustrate
b.
to entertain
c.
to object
d.
6-3b Strategy Two: Note Comparisons and Implied Similarities
In textbooks, authors sometimes use comparisons (characteristics that are common to
two or more things) to illustrate their points. For example, the author of a history text
might use a familiar situation, such as that of parent and child, to illustrate and explain
an unfamiliar situation, like the relationship between Britain and the colonies before the
American Revolution. A biology text author might liken the human circulatory system
(unfamiliar) to a road map (familiar).

Consider this example of a comparison and implied similarity. What two things are being
compared?
Learn to do the drudgery of scientific work. Although a bird's wing is perfect, the bird
could never soar if it did not lean upon air. Facts are the air on which the scientist leans.
Source: Hergenhahn, B.R. An Introduction to Theories of Learning. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1982.
It seems from this statement that a bird needs air to fly just as a scientist needs hard
work to arrive at factual information. Being implied here is that both the bird and the
scientist are dependent on something. Even though the author does not directly state
this dependence, he implies it with his comparison.
Sometimes writers signal that they are making a comparison by using words such as like
or as. Such comparisons are called similes (comparisons using the words like or as) . You
have probably heard the expressions “worked like a dog,” “cold as ice,” or “light as a
feather.” Those are all similes.
With similes, authors add emotion, emphasis, and clarity to their words. Look at the
photograph here taken from a photography book. At first glance, you may think it is a boy
just looking at the light coming into the room. It is actually much more.
© Charles Harbutt
The boy is blind. He is in The Lighthouse, an institute in New York. He is not looking at
the light. He is feeling the heat from the light, which is how he recognizes it. Read the
following poem written in response to this picture, and take note of the simile in bold.
The Photograph
Shutter release button squeezed
like a thin hollow egg pushed beneath water,
and this blind boy
will always be
5 a blind boy

on his knees,
hands flat on the wall
like lips on a kiss.
His fingertips reach
10 for the familiar rope of heat,
he grabs for an instant,
and pulls himself into unexpected light;
it washes the dark dream from his eyes
until he is again, nothing
15 more than a photograph
in a closed book.
Source: D.A. Brooks. Used with permission.
In the poem, the author compares the blind boy's happiness of finding his rope of light
everyday at noon to a tender kiss on the lips. His hands on the wall, lovingly touching the
light, are being compared to lips kissing. A kiss is loving and soft. When we think of
kissing someone, it usually means that we trust, embrace, and count on that someone.
Described in this poem is a time of day when the boy feels connected to the world, which
is otherwise a dark space for him. The rope of light becomes his “someone” or
“everything.” Notice that the word like in the sentence signals the comparison.
Sometimes, authors present two apparently dissimilar pieces of information next to one
another without using any comparison words and expect you to infer what they mean.
These kinds of comparisons are called metaphors (strong comparison where one idea is
described as another) . Consider these words by William Carlos Williams:
Let the snake wait under
his weed
and the writing
be of words, slow and quick, sharp
to strike, quiet to wait,
sleepless.
Source: By William Carlos Williams, from THE COLLECTED POEMS: VOLUME II, 1939–1962, copyright ©1944 by
William Carlos Williams. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corp. and Carcanet Press Limited.
What do you think this is about? Writing and the creative process are being compared
with nature. The snake makes the comparison more dramatic. Snakes are unpredictable,
striking when one least expects it. The poet waits for the right words (waits for the snake

to strike). The process cannot be forced, but the creative juices never rest—they are just
waiting for the right moment. A metaphor is a comparison, like a simile, but stronger.
In the poem from Activity 6D, the author uses a plant as a metaphor for the relationship.
She implies that a plant, like a relationship, needs attention and care. She says she
watered it every day, implying that she did all the work in the relationship. In the end,
she gives him the plant. He now has to do the work to keep it (the plant/their
relationship) alive.
Have you ever sweat bullets while taking an exam, cried your eyes out, worked your butt
off, or felt like a million bucks? If you are a native English speaker, you probably use
metaphors and similes like these as well as other types of comparisons all the time.
Begin looking for them in writing and purposefully thinking about what is being
compared and why.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
The brain loves metaphors because they are so visual and are connected to a
large network of experience. If you can make comparisons when you think about
information, it may be easier to remember, especially if you visualize what you
are comparing the information to. Examine the cover of this scientific journal.
What is the visual metaphor? What is being compared? How is the illustrator
helping you see the comparison?
Reprinted from Neuron, 56/2, Cover, Copyright 2007, Reprinted from Neuron, 56/2, Cover, Copyright 2007,
with permission from Elsevier.
Activity 6F
Identify Comparisons

2.
3.
Read the following passages. Identify what two items are being compared, and
explain the implied similarity.
Mentally, Tiger simply loved the competition, “I like the feeling of trying my
hardest under pressure,” he said. “But it's so intense, it's hard to describe. It feels
like a lion is tearing at my heart.” Physically, Tiger had developed golf muscles that
would allow him to drive the ball over 300 yards.
Source: Rosaforte, Tim. Tiger Woods: The Making of a Champion. New York: St.
Martin Press. 1997, pp. 27–28.
1.
Comparison between:
Implied similarity:
On a molecular scale, liquids resemble the people in the stadium aisles, who
move more freely than when sitting in their seats. A liquid is an example of a
fluid, which is any substance that flows. Flowing occurs when molecules are
free to slide past one another and continually change their relative positions.
The molecules are in constant motion. They are free to flow under, over, and
around their neighboring molecules.
Source: Heath Chemistry (New York: D.C. Heath and Company. 1987).
Comparison between:
Implied similarity:
A social movement is a large and organized activity to promote or resist some
particular social change. Examples of social movements include groups that
focus on civil rights, the rights of the disabled, crime victims, gun control, and

4.
5.
drunk driving to name just a few. Social movements are as American as apple
pie, notes sociologist Lynda Ann Ewen.
Source: Nijole V. Benokraitis. SOC. Belmont, CA: Cengage Learning, 2012, p. 321.
Comparison between:
Implied similarity:
Viewing data as weapons and programs as their delivery system, the
[computer] hacker considers himself a privateer of the modern era. He likens
his computer to a vessel, a battleship for him to cruise the world's computer
networks, assailing the weak and subverting the unsuspecting.
Source: Ritter, Jonathan. “The World View of a Computer Hacker,” in M. Connelly,
The Sundance Reader, 2nd ed. New York: Harcourt Brace College Publishers, 2000, p.
187.
Comparison between:
Implied similarity:
Culture is the principal tool we use to feed ourselves. That is, human beings, in
groups, develop forms of knowledge and technologies that enable them to get
the necessary energy from the environment to make life more secure.
Source: From NANDA/WARMS. Cultural Anthropology 9e (p. 103). Copyright © 2007
Cengage Learning.
Comparison between:

Implied similarity:
6-3c Strategy Three: Understand an Author's Tone
Tone in writing is like facial expressions in speaking. If you are good at reading facial
expressions, you may be good at Theory of Mind, or figuring out what others are
thinking. This skill should also help you when you read to figure out tone and the
author's implied meaning.
A famous scientist named Paul Ekman determined that there are some universal facial
expressions. In every culture around the world that he studied, he found that these
expressions conveyed the same basic emotions regardless of where people lived. See if
you can infer the emotions from the following facial expressions and, thus, discover
these basic emotions according to Ekman.
Read the following passage, and think about the ways authors use their writing to
express emotions, similar to facial expressions.
The Universality of Facial Expressions
Human facial expressions are also designed to arouse reactions from others. The early
work of Darwin (who took full advantage of the British Empire's broad geography)
indicated that people all over the world both express and perceive facial expression in
similar ways. These early observations were confirmed recently by Paul Ekman, Ph.D., of
the University of California Medical School at San Francisco, who enlarged Darwin's
observations, using more sophisticated methods. Traveling to exotic locations such as
Papua New Guinea where the residents had little contact with outsiders, Ekman showed
the natives photographs of people expressing anger, happiness, disgust, surprise,
sadness, and fear and asked them to say what emotion was being expressed. He found
wide general agreement in the emotions identified, which he interpreted as meaning
“our evolution gives us universal expressions, which tell others some important
information about us.” In these universal signals we are able to read another's emotions,
attitudes, and truthfulness. Of course, exceptions abound, such as the everyday
deceptions put forward for our benefit by, for example, actors on stage and salespeople
who have learned to mimic genuine facial expressions. Although culture shapes the
nuances of facial expressions, nature seems to endow us with a limited number of basic
emotions and ways to convey them, much like a language, which is basically the same
everywhere it is used but is subject to local dialects.
Source: From Robert L. Solso “About Faces, in Art and in the Brain,” Cerebrum (July 01,

2004). Copyright © 2004 The Dana Foundation. Reprinted with permission.
Source: Solso, RL. “The cognitive neuroscience of art: A preliminary fMRI observation.” Journal of Consciousness
Studies 2000, 7: 75–85. Permission courtesty Imprint Academic. All Rights Reserved. Photo by Anne Solso.
Activity 6G
Detect Emotions
Describe a time when you knew someone was angry or upset with you, even
though he or she did not say a word. How did you know? What did he or she do
that convinced you? And, when he or she did speak, what made you know that
this person was not happy?
Activity 6H
Design Emoticons
How do you show emotion or tone in an email? Draw an emoticon that you
would use in an e-mail to represent the following emotions. It can be letters that
stand for something or a drawing of symbols.
amused
1.
laughing
2.

Example 1:
Pushy children hawking overpriced
cookies to unsuspecting grocery store
shoppers for class-trip money is an
American tradition.
Example 2:
Hard-working students who raise
money from supportive community
members are keeping up an American
tradition.
sad
3.
offhand remark
4.
List as many emoticons as you can, and write the emotion or tone they are
intended to convey. Review a reading in this chapter, and draw appropriate
emoticons in the margin.
The tone authors use to discuss their subject matter can reveal their attitude toward it.
You can assess an author's tone (the emotion or feeling that an author's words give) by
examining the words used and by taking the time to picture the images created with
figurative language. Tone is a subtle aspect of an author's writing. An author's tone also
emphasizes the author's purpose for writing. If the purpose is to entertain, the tone may
be humorous; if the purpose is to persuade, the tone may be authoritative or even
sarcastic; if the purpose is to inform, the tone may be formal and emotionless.
An author's diction or word choice is a good place to start when you are trying to
determine the author's tone. In the poem from Activity 6D, the author chooses specific
words to express her anger: i've been stood up, you have been no help to me, water it yr damn
self.
Read the following sentences, and decide which one is positive and which one is
negative.
Did you notice a difference? What is the author talking about in each example? Complete
the following chart by listing words used in each example.
Topic of examples: 
Example 1: Negative
Language
Example 2: Positive
Language
 
 

 
 
 
 
Even though the topic is the same, what is the implied main idea for each example?
Consider the following example from a history textbook.
Although the development of gas masks significantly reduced the impact of this
menacing  new chemical warfare, the threat  of poison gas added another
nightmarish  element to the experience of those who fought the war.
Source: From NOBEL/STRAUSS/OSHEIM/NEUSCHEL. Western Civilization Beyond
Boundaries 6e (p. 699). Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
The words menacing, threat, and nightmarish help you infer the hardship of war. There
are other aspects to war such as bravery, pride, and heroism, but this writer wants
readers to focus on the difficulties, and he directs them with his choice of words.
Contrast that passage with this one about Thomas Aquinas from the same textbook.
Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274) was the greatest  of the Scholastics, the most sensitive  to
Greek and Arab thought, and the most prolific  medieval philosopher.
Source: From NOBEL/STRAUSS/OSHEIM/NEUSCHEL. Western Civilization Beyond
Boundaries 6e (p. 275). Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
Notice the words greatest, sensitive, and prolific. These words imply a positive meaning.
Emotive language (words that, when read, bring about certain feelings and emotions)
are words authors use that are intended to persuade you and guide your thinking. They
are words that let you know if there is additional or implied meaning to the text. For
example, suppose an author talks about a politician he does not like. He may refer to the
politician as shady or slippery. However, if the same author refers to a politician he likes,
he may use terms such as honest or innovative. Or suppose an author wants to refer to a
heavy-set person. She may use the word husky or obese. In our culture, it is acceptable
for a young man to be husky, so if the author chooses that word, she presents a positive
spin on the person. Obese would imply a more negative meaning. Words are powerful.
They plant seeds of images in the minds of readers.
Activity 6I
Work with Emotive Language
For each word, provide a word that means the same that is positive and one that
means the same that is negative.

Word
Positive Word
Negative Word
Example:
heavy-set
husky
obese
little
 
 
unfriendly
 
 
loud
 
 
quiet
 
 
new
 
 
old
 
 
hungry
 
 
thirsty
 
 
unattractive
 
 
inexpensive
 
 
Activity 6J
Set the Tone
Read the following passages, and choose the word that best matches the author's
tone. As you read, circle words that help you identify the tone. The first one is
modeled for you.
Example:
The body of Richard Milhous Nixon was scarcely  in the ground when the struggle  for
control  of his legacy had begun. That day on the plane, the dark forces  that haunte
Nixon in life seemed to reach beyond the grave. Somewhere between the two coasts, Ed
Cox, Tricia's New York attorney husband, brought up a plan to ensure the Nixon library
would be tightly controlled by the family rather than by hired hands.
Source: Adapted from “Nixon Daughters Spar over Library,” The Detroit News, April 28,
2002, p. 8a.

The tone of this passage can best be described as:
joyful.
a.
sarcastic.
b.
troubled.
c.
inspirational.
d.
Explain why you selected your response.
The Complete Rules of Good Writing
Do not use, unnecessary, commas.
Do not use a foreign word when there is an adequate English quid pro quo.
Do not use hyperbole; not even one in a million can do it effectively.
Don't repeat yourself and avoid being repetitive.
Don't use no double negatives.  The double negative is a no-no.
Don't be redundant; don't use more words than necessary it's highly
superfluous.
Don't indulge in sesquipedalian lexicological  constructions.
Don't overuse exclamation marks!!!
Don't repeat yourself, or say again what you have said before.
“Don't use unattributed quotations.”
Source: Antal. Parody. Eats, Shoots, & Leaves: Crap English and How to Use It. Michael
O'Mara Books Limited. Great Britain. 2004.
1.
The tone of this passage can best be described as:
humorous.
a.
sarcastic.
b.
troubled.
c.
inspirational.
d.

2.
3.
Explain why you selected your response.
To sum up, in philosophy, as in so many other endeavors, the Archaic Greeks
were great borrowers and even greater innovators who left a profound mark
on later ages. Lyric poetry and Archaic sculpture display a ground-breaking
interest in individual feelings and the human body. By the late sixth century
B.C., Archaic Greece was poised on the brink of a revolution that would give
birth to the Classical period of Greek civilization.
Source: From NOBEL/STRAUSS/OSHEIM/NEUSCHEL. Western Civilization Beyond
Boundaries 6e (p. 66). Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
The tone of this passage can best be described as:
joyful.
a.
sarcastic.
b.
religious.
c.
inspirational.
d.
Explain why you selected your response.
As humans expand and continue to devour land, water and natural resources,
it is critical to remember that we are only one part of a vastly complex, organic
mosaic composed of myriad life forms—all of which are dependent on the
earth for survival.
By appropriating more and more of this planet with our growing numbers and our
technology, humans are effectively condemning other life on earth to an
increasingly diminished existence.
Source: Ettingoff, S. “How Population Growth Effects the Planet” New York Times,
The Opinion Page. October 27, 2011.
The tone of this passage can best be described as:
humorous.
a.
sentimental.
b.

4.
5.
warning.
c.
sarcastic.
d.
Explain why you selected your response.
The United States established the Internet, a global media network that uses
mainly English and is heavily saturated with American advertising and
popular culture (Louw 2001). Iran's government has recently denounced
Batman, Spider- Man, and Harry Potter toys as a form of “cultural invasion”
that challenges the country's conservative and religious values. The
curvaceous and often scantily clad Barbie dolls with peroxide-blond hair have
been especially singled out as “destructive culturally and a social danger.”
However, many of the girls who watch foreign television and (illegal) satellite
want the dolls.
Source: From NOBEL/STRAUSS/OSHEIM/NEUSCHEL. Western Civilization Beyond
Boundaries 6e (p. 66). Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
The tone of this passage can best be described as:
angry.
a.
condescending.
b.
serious.
c.
humorous.
d.
Explain why you selected your response.
I learned on that day that it was fruitless to expect Jaclyn to apologize for any
of her bad behavior as I expected my other children to do. Jaclyn would have
sat in the time-out chair for days before she proffered an apology. I was
angered by her stubborn refusal to offer this simple act of contrition. I joined a
group of moms who had adopted older children from China; it was a support
group that I desperately needed. One of the things I discovered through my
conversation with others in the group was that Jaclyn's behavior reflected a
cultural norm: to “lose face” was much worse than to accept punishment. Her
past, still a puzzle to me, had made her who she was, and I knew that I needed

to understand that better to really know how to parent her.
Source: Champnella, Cindy. (2003). The Waiting Child. St. Martin's Griffin: New York.
p. 43.
The tone of this passage can best be described as:
sentimental.
a.
angry.
b.
mocking.
c.
frustrated.
d.
Explain why you selected your response.
6-3d Strategy Four: Detect an Author's Bias
To detect an author's bias (a tendency toward a specific view, a prejudice) , picture the
author. Remember the Theory of Mind, that all people have personal feelings, beliefs,
and opinions? These feelings, beliefs, and opinions color what authors write. The fact
that authors write based on their own feelings, beliefs, and opinions does not necessarily
make what they write wrong, though it can. It makes what they write a result of what
they think and who they are. The words on a page are not always completely neutral.
Most writing has some bias, even textbooks. When you read, ask yourself, “Is the author
biased? How does the bias affect what the author says?” An author's bias can result in an
imbalanced picture of an issue, either because authors omit information that
contradicts their own points of view or they downplay or cancel out other viewpoints.
An author's bias also can emphasize a point or direct the reader down a certain path of
thinking. It is important to be able to detect bias so you can make an informed decision
about whether to accept or challenge what an author says.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Did you know that brain scans show that when someone reads emotional
material, the emotional area of the brain lights up, as if the reader is actually
experiencing the emotion? If you read material containing words with strong
negative associations, such as violent, bloody, fearful, angry, dying, and so forth,
your brain reacts to those negative emotions and experiences them. Do you like
to fire up angry, negative emotions in yourself, do you like to experience fear

through reading scary stories, or do you prefer to conjure up positive emotions?
What you read can make a difference in how you feel afterward.
One way to detect an authors bias is to notice the use of emotive language—just as you
did with noting the author's tone. When a writer uses words that convey emotion, he or
she usually asserts an opinion. Opinions may or may not be founded on facts, but basing
textbook material on opinions can promote bias. In the following passage from a biology
textbook, the emotive words are circled.
Endangered species are also collected or killed for profit. It is a sad  commentary on
human nature that the rarer a species becomes, the higher the price it fetches  on the
black market.
Source: From STARR. Biology: The Unity and Diversity of Life 12e (p. 895). Copyright © 2009
Cengage Learning.
What types of feelings do the words sad and fetches evoke? The word sad evokes unhappy
emotions and the word fetches means “to bring” but implies casualness, an action done
without much thought or concern. The author's choice of words implies that she has
sympathy for endangered animals and disdain for those who sacrifice them for money.
Comprehension Check
What is bias?
Name one bias that you have. (Biases can be positive, too.)
Name a negative bias that people have.
Activity 6K
Detect Bias
Read the following passages, and answer the questions that follow. The emotive

2.
3.
words have been circled.
These false  underlying assumptions about racism have led the general public,
scholars, and activists all over the world to misread  and misunderstand
contemporary racism. The most notable of these well intended misreadings  in
the United States is Wilson's mistitled  book, The Declining Significance of Race
(1978).
Source: Browser, Benjamin. Racism and Anti-Racism in World Perspective (Sage
Publications, 1995).
1.
What is the author's bias?
To put all of this another way: think of this book as your own, private
apprenticeship alongside me , the Cake Boss  himself. I am going to teach you
everything I learned at my family's bakery , in the same order I learned to do
it. We're going to start by making his cookies, then work our way up through
the Carlo's “curriculum” of pastries, pies, basic cakes, and theme cakes.
Source: Valastro, Buddy. (2011). U.S. Airways, Must Read. US Airways - Pace
Communications, Inc., p. 116.
What is the author's bias?
1.
But it is our  children—the children of farm workers and Hispanics and other
minorities—who are seeking a better life. It is for them, for their future —and
for the future of California—that we must say “no” to suspending Proposition
98. We must say “no” to cutting essential services for the needy  instead of tax
loopholes for the wealthy . We must say “no” to making our  children and
their  teachers scapegoats  for the budget crisis.
Source: Chavez, Cesar. (1991). Statement From Cesar Chavez President, United
Farm Workers, Sacramento, April 3, 1991.

4.
5.
What is the author's bias?
1.
Walter Hagen won 11 major championships from 1914-1929, and was one of
the most charismatic  players the game has ever  known. He once said, “I
never wanted to be a millionaire, I just wanted to live like one.” Although he
wasn't the straightest hitter, The Haig had amazing powers  of recovery. His
swing had a lot of lateral movement, but this classic  position at the top shows
a beautiful turn. It's worth copying:  Left arm relaxed, hands soft, ready to
make a full release on the downswing.
Source: Leadbetter, David. (2011). Golf Digest, Learn for the Legends. November,
2011, p. 25.
What is the author's bias?
1.
The emergence of powerful technologies that make it easier to track people's
movements and their activities online has raised difficult question  about
where to draw the line when it comes to protecting  individual privacy. The
issue discussed before the U.S. Supreme Court, however, does not fall in the
difficult  category. It involved a GPS tracking device that FBI agents put on the
vehicle of a suspected drug dealer without a search warrant. An appellate
court held this was a violation  of the 4th Amendment guarantee against
unreasonable searches. Both conservative and liberal justices were
uncomfortable  with the FBI practice. We're troubled,  too. We doubt the
signers of the Constitution—so concerned about individual rights—envisioned
a federal government with unlimited power  to conduct surveillance on its
citizens.
Source: From The San Diego Union Tribune (November 10, 2011, B-6). Copyright ©
2011. Reprinted with permission.
What is the author's bias?
1.

6-3e Strategy Five: Recognize Information Gaps
It is particularly difficult to draw inferences from reading material when limited
information is presented or when information appears to be missing, which are known
as information gaps (places in readings where information appears to be missing or
where an author intends for the reader to infer meaning) . Sometimes as you read, you
may find that an author leaps from one idea to the next, seemingly skipping the
information that should be in the middle. When writers do this, they assume that you
have a certain amount of background knowledge and can fill in the gaps that are left on
the page. Read the following example.
China Pulls Oﬀ Tricky Satellite Maneuver
Experts say China pulled off a tricky and uncommon feat in space by maneuvering a
satellite to within about 300 yards of another while they were orbiting Earth. Analysts
say the August encounter could have been a test of China's ability to inspect its own
satellites or to spy on others. It also could have been practice for docking orbiting
vehicles, a skill required to build the space station China is expected to begin work on
next year. The analysts, whom the Associated Press did not name, said the exercise
probably wasn't meant solely to practice an attack on another country's satellite by
ramming it. U.S. military officials confirm that the exercise occurred but have released
few details. Chinese space officials didn't respond to questions.
Source: From “China shows space skills with satellite,” Detroit Free Press (November 14,
2010 p. 26-A) Copyright © 2010 The Associated Press. Reprinted with permission.
The author does not tell you why there is concern nor confirms what actually took place.
Instead, the author intentionally plants seeds of doubt, which could be alarming if taken
out of context. How does the author do this? What is implied in this short article? Circle
the words that are used to help plant doubt in the reader's mind.
The author says that it “could have been  a test to inspect its own satellites.”
Or, “it could have been a test  to spy on others.” (Spy on whom? And why? This is a
big leap in thinking.)
The author then says, “It could have been  practice for docking orbiting vehicles.”
But then in the next sentence he says, “It probably  wasn't meant solely  to
practice an attack on another country's satellite by ramming it.”
What a leap the author makes! Note the use of words—“It probably wasn't meant to
solely”… meaning that it will probably do this. It will attack another country's
satellite by ramming it. It may be used for other purposes, but it will be used to
attack.
This is a very strong article that at first does not appear to say much. Nothing is proven.
But, by leaving information gaps, the author leads the reader to believe that China is up
to no good. The author never directly says that China is doing something negative but
implies it. What did you think when you read this article?

The following steps can help you recognize information gaps in your textbooks and
other reading materials.
In order to decide whether information is missing, read the entire reading and
consider all the information presented.
1.
Note the author's use of key words and phrases that represent the topic and main
ideas of what you are reading.
2.
Look for information gaps or leaps from one idea to the next following key words.
Pause to mentally fill in any information gaps.
3.
To help clarify how you would use these steps, read this passage from a political science
textbook.
1 The original version of the Electoral College worked as the Framers intended only for
as long as George Washington was willing to seek and hold the presidency. That is, in
1789 and again in 1792, each elector cast one of his two ballots for the great Virginian.
2 Flaws began to appear in the system in 1796, however. By then, political parties had
begun to form. John Adams, the Federalist candidate, was elected to the presidency.
Thomas Jefferson, an archrival and Democratic-Republican, who lost to Adams by just
three votes in the electoral balloting, became his Vice-President.
Source: W. McClenaghan. Magruder's American Government (New York: Prentice Hall,
1994).
Reread the first sentence in the second paragraph. What word does the author use to let
you know how he feels regarding the Electoral College? What is the word that lets you
know the author's bias? What alternative word could be used that would change the
meaning?
The author says flaws began to appear in the system. The next sentence leaps to the idea
that political parties had already begun to form. There is an information gap here,
signaled by the key words flaws and political parties, which are close to each other and
suggest that the reader should pause to draw an inference. The inference is that in
governmental evolution, political party formation revealed a flaw in the system—that
candidates from the opposing parties could be placed in office together as president and
vice president.
Activity 6L
Look for Information Gaps
Read the following textbook passages, and look for information gaps. Answer the
inference questions that follow. Key words and phrases are circled.
For thousands of years, human beings have fashioned natural materials into useful
products. Modern chemistry certainly has its roots in this endeavor. After the
discovery of fire, people began to notice changes in certain rocks and minerals
exposed to high temperatures. From these observations came the development of
1.

2.
3.
ceramics, glass, and metals, which today are among our most useful materials.
Dyes and medicines were other early products obtained from natural substances.
For example, the ancient Phoenicians extracted a bright purple dye, known as
Tyrian purple, from a species of sea snail. One ounce of Tyrian purple required
over 200,000 snails. Because of its brilliant hue  and scarcity  the dye became the
choice of royalty.
Source: Ebbing, Darrell. General Chemistry. New York: Houghton Mifflin Company,
1943, p. 4.
Although it is not directly stated, why would something with a “brilliant
hue” that is “scarce” be suitable for royality? What can you infer the author
means when he mentions the brilliant hue and scarcity?
1.
The Sophists took this idea to its extreme  and asserted that it makes no sense
to ask “What is something like really?” The only “answer” is that it “really” is
the way it appears to me, the way it appears to you, and the way it appears to
everyone else when they observe it. If there are no absolutes and if everything
is relative, then opposite conclusions can both be supported . The way
something seems to me is the way it is. In a sense, the Sophists turned the
distinction between appearances and reality on its head .
Source: Mitchell, Helen. Roots of Wisdom. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. 2008. p. 27.
Although the author does not directly say how she feels about the Sophists'
point of view, what can you infer?
When European settlers first arrived in North America, they found 3 billion to
5 billion passenger pigeons. In the 1800s, commercial hunting caused a steep
decline  in the bird's numbers. The last time anyone saw a wild passenger
pigeon was in 1900—and he shot it . The last captive bird died  in 1914.
Source: From STARR. Biology: The Unity and Diversity of Life 12e (p. 894). Copyright ©
2009 Cengage Learning.

4.
5.
Although the author never directly states his feelings, how do you think he
feels about the destruction of passenger pigeons?
A door just opened on a street—
I, lost, was passing by—
An instant's width of warmth disclosed
And wealth, and company .
The door as sudden shut , and I,
I, lost, was passing by ,—
Lost doubly , but by contrast most,
Enlightening misery.
— Emily Dickinson
Emily Dickinson does not state directly how she feels, but what can you infer
when she says “enlightening misery?” What does she see that causes her to
feel “lost doubly”?
Ring around the rosy
A pocketful of posies
“Ashes, Ashes”
We all fall down!
What would be a good title for this common children's poem? What meaning
do you infer from this poem?
The concept of information gaps is brilliantly illustrated in cartoons and sarcastic
photographs. The information that is not specifically stated in words is what makes them

so funny. Your mind infers the punch line. Look at the cartoon here regarding progress
and the explanation that follows These are types of questions you should ask yourself
when reading a cartoon or looking at a photograph.
What do you think is the implied main idea, or punch line, of this cartoon?
Children are better with technology than adults. The older generation relies on
their expertise to help, instead of teaching them. Roles have changed.
What are some of the details the cartoonist uses to make his point(s)? The child
is very confident and has business savvy. The blank look on the father's face means
he is taking the child seriously. The father seems professional working on the
computer, which makes the comic a little more ironic. Do you see anything else?
© Aaron Bacall. Reproduction rights obtainable from www.CartoonStock.com.
Activity 6M
Identify Information Gaps in a Cartoon
Read the cartoon, and answer the questions that follow.

© Berry Wijdeven. Reproduction rights obtainable from www.CartoonStock.com
What is the implied main idea, or punch line, that the cartoonist is making?
1.
What are some of the details the author uses to make his point?
2.
Based on how the cows are positioned, what is the implied meaning?
3.
Do the position of the cows and the implied meaning (see question #3)
strengthen the cartoon? Why or why not?
4.
Provide your own title for this cartoon based on your understanding of it.
5.
Comprehension Check
What are the five strategies for making inferences introduced in this
chapter?
6-4 Knowing How Much to Infer
One problem that can occur when making inferences to establish the implied main idea
is inferring too much. You can sometimes quickly jump to a conclusion when you read
without establishing sound reasons for that conclusion. Remember that reading is a
two-way conversation. You cannot ignore the other person speaking—the author. Here

are some strategies to ensure that your inferences are accurate.
Recognize an author's perspective. When you read, attend carefully to what an
author says and try to see things from his or her perspective. For example, suppose
the author of a cultural anthropology textbook writes, “Many similarities between
man and his closest primate relations, the great apes, have been described.” You
should not conclude from the words man, closest relations, and apes that the author
implies that humans and apes are as closely related as human siblings. The words
do not support that conclusion. The inference that humans and apes are as closely
related as siblings is an assumption that is not based on the actual content of the
sentence. The author is a cultural anthropologist who defines the term closest
primate relations in the context of thousands of years of history and the separate
development of humans and ape. When he uses the term closest, he is not talking
in terms of the two to three years that commonly separate siblings.
Use the text to support your conclusion. When you infer something, you need to
test your conclusion against the rest of the material in the text. Is there any
information in the text that challenges your inference? If so, perhaps you are
inferring too much. Are there details in the text that support your inference? If
there are, your inference is probably accurate.
Activity 6N
Practice How Much to Infer
Read the following questions before you read the sociology textbook passage.
You will answer them after you read the passage, but think about them as you
read.
What is the author's perspective?
1.
Why does she include the commentary from the homeless man? What is
his bias? What in the text supports your answer?
2.
What purpose does the quiz serve? Why do you think the author includes
it?
3.
What is the tone of the commentary? What is the tone of the passage? What
in the text supports your answer?
4.
Do you think the author has a bias? What in the text supports your answer?
5.
The passage begins with commentary from a homeless man who is now an
author. After the commentary, there is a question that serves as the passage's
heading. After the heading, the sociology chapter begins. Then there is a
sociology quiz at the end. Read all the parts of the passage, take the quiz, and then
answer the questions that follow the passage.

1 I began dumpster diving [scavenging in a large garbage bin] about a year before I
became homeless.… The area I frequent is inhabited by many affluent college students. I
am not here by chance; the Dumpsters in this area are very rich. Students throw out
many good things, including food. In particular they tend to throw everything out when
they move at the end of a semester, before and after breaks, and around midterm, when
many of them despair of college. So I find it advantageous to keep an eye on the
academic calendar. I learned to scavenge gradually, on my own. Since then I have
initiated several companions into the trade. I have learned that there is a predictable
series of stages a person goes through in learning to scavenge.
2 At first the new scavenger is filled with disgust and self-loathing. He is ashamed of
being seen and may lurk around, trying to duck behind things, or he may dive at night.
(In fact, most people instinctively look away from a scavenger. By skulking around, the
novice calls attention to himself and arouses suspicion. Diving at night is ineffective and
needlessly messy.)… That stage passes with experience. The scavenger finds a pair of
running shoes that fit and look and smell brand-new.… He begins to understand: People
throw away perfectly good stuff, a lot of perfectly good stuff.
3 At this stage, Dumpster shyness begins to dissipate. The diver, after all, has the last
laugh. He is finding all manner of good things that are his for the taking. Those who
disparage his profession are the fools, not he.
—Author Lars Eighner recalls his experiences as a Dumpster diver while living under
a shower curtain in a stand of bamboo in a public park. Eighner became homeless
when he was evicted from his “shack” after being unemployed for about a year.
(Eighner, 1993: 111–119).
How is Homelessness Related to the Social Structure of a Society?
4 Eighner's “diving” activities reflect a specific pattern of social behavior. All activities in
life—including scavenging in garbage bins and living “on the streets”—are social in
nature. Homeless persons and domiciled persons (those with homes) live in social
worlds that have predictable patterns of social interaction. Social interaction is the
process by which people act toward or respond to other people and is the foundation
for all relationships and groups in society. In this chapter, we look at the relationship
between social structure and social interaction. In the process, homelessness is used as
an example of how social problems occur and how they may be perpetuated within
social structures and patterns of interaction.
5 Social structure is the complex framework of societal institutions (such as the
economy, politics, and religion) and the social practices (such as rules and social roles)
that make up a society and that organize and establish limits on people's behavior.
This structure is essential for the survival of society and for the well-being of individuals
because it provides a social web of familial support and social relationships that
connects each of us to the larger society. Many homeless people have lost this vital
linkage. As a result, they often experience a loss of personal dignity and a sense of moral
worth because of their “ homeless” condition (Snow and Anderson, 1993).
6 Homeless persons such as Eighner come from all walks of life. They include fulltime
and part-time workers, parolees, runaway youths and children, veterans, and the elderly.
They live in cities, suburbs, and rural areas. Contrary to popular myths, most of the
homeless are not on the streets by choice or because they are mentally ill. Before
reading on, learn more about homeless persons and the pressing national problem of

T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
homelessness by taking the quiz in the Sociology and Everyday Life box.
Source: From KENDALL. Sociology in Our Times: The Essentials 8e (pp. 104–5). Copyright ©
2012 Cengage Learning.
How Much Do You Know about Homeless Persons?
A significant increase in family homelessness has occurred in the United
States in recent years.
1.
Alcoholism and domestic violence are the primary factors that bring about
family homelessness.
2.
Many homeless people have full-time employment.
3.
Many homeless people are mentally ill.
4.
Homeless people typically panhandle (beg for money) so that they can buy
alcohol or drugs.
5.
Shelters for the homeless consistently have clients who sleep on overflow
cots, in chairs, in hallways, and other nonstandard sleeping arrangements.
6.
There have always been homeless persons throughout the history of the
United States.
7.
In large urban areas such as Los Angeles, many homeless people live in tent
cities or other large on encampments.
8.
Answers to the Sociology Quiz on Homelessness and Homeless Persons
Recently, a significant increase has occurred in the number of homeless
families while there has been a decrease or leveling in the number of
homeless single adults, partly due to policies aimed at ending chronic
homelessness among single adults with disabilities.
1.
Primary causes of family homelessness are as follows: job loss,
2.

foreclosures on homes brought about by the recession, and a lack of
affordable housing in many cities.
Many homeless people do have full-time employment, but they are among
the working poor. The minimum-wage jobs they hold do not pay enough for
them to support their families and pay the high rents that are typical in
many cities.
3.
Most homeless people are not mentally ill; estimates suggest that about
one-fourth of the homeless are emotionally disturbed.
4.
Many homeless persons panhandle to pay for food, a bed at a shelter, or
other survival needs.
5.
Overcrowded shelters throughout the nation often attempt to
accommodate as many homeless people as possible on a given night,
particularly when the weather is bad. As a result, any available spaces
—including offices, closets, and hallways—are used as sleeping areas until
the individuals can find another location or weather conditions improve.
6.
Scholars have found that homelessness has always existed in the United
States. However, the number of homeless persons has increased or
decreased with fluctuations in the national economy.
7.
Although media reports frequently show homeless individuals and families
living in tent cities or other large homeless encampments in major U.S.
cities, official studies by the U.S. Conference of Mayors (2009) have found
that only ten large U.S. cities have tent cities and that these cities hold only
very small percentage of people who are homeless.
8.
Source: U.S. Conference of Mayors, 2009.
Source: From KENDALL. Sociology in Our Times: The Essentials 8e (pp. 107–8).
Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
What is the author's perspective?
1.
Why does she include the commentary from the homeless man? What is
his bias? What in the text supports your answer?
2.
What purpose does the quiz serve? Why do you think the author includes
it?
3.

What is the tone of the commentary? What is the tone of the passage? What
in the text supports your answers?
4.
Do you think the author has a bias? What in the text supports your answer?
5.
6-5 Chapter Review
6-5a Practice with a Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Based on the title, what do you expect the following passage to be about?
1.
What do you know about the topic?
2.
From The Hunger Games
By Suzanne Collins
1 Effie Trinket crosses back to the podium, smoothes the slip of paper, and reads out the
name in a clear voice. And it's not me. It's Primrose Everdeen.
2 One time, when I was in a blind
 in a tree, waiting motionless for game to wander
by, I dozed off and fell ten feet to the ground, landing on my back. It was as if the impact
had knocked every wisp of air from my lungs, and I lay there struggling to inhale, to
exhale, to do anything.
3 That's how I feel now, trying to remember how to breathe, unable to speak, totally
stunned as the name bounces around the inside of my skull. Someone is gripping my

arm, a boy from the Seam,
 and I think maybe I started to fall and he caught me.
4 There must have been a mistake. This cant be happening. Prim was one slip of paper in
thousands! Her chances of being chosen so remote that I'd not even bothered to worry
about her. Hadn't I done everything? Taken the tesserae,
 refused to let her do the
same? One slip. One slip in thousands. The odds had been entirely in her favor. But it
hadn't mattered.
5 Somewhere far away, I can hear the crowd murmuring unhappily as they always do
when a twelve-year-old gets chosen because no one thinks this is fair. And then I see her,
the blood drained from her face, hands clenched in fists at her sides, walking with stiff,
small steps up toward the stage, passing me, and I see the back of her blouse has become
untucked and hangs out over her skirt. It's this detail, the untucked blouse forming a
ducktail, that brings me back to myself.
6 “Prim!” The strangled cry comes out of my throat, and my muscles begin to move again.
“Prim!” I don't need to shove through the crowd. The other kids make way immediately
allowing me a straight path to the stage. I reach her just as she is about to mount the
steps. With one sweep of my arm, I push her behind me.
7 “I volunteer!” I gasp. “I volunteer as tribute
8 There's some confusion on the stage. District 12 hasn't had a volunteer in decades and
the protocol has become rusty. The rule is that once a tribute's name has been pulled
from the ball, another eligible boy, if a boy's name has been read, or girl, if a girl's name
has been read, can step forward to take his or her place. In some districts, in which
winning the reaping
 is such a great honor, people are eager to risk their lives, the
volunteering is complicated. But in District 12, where the word tribute is pretty much
synonymous with the word corpse, volunteers are all but extinct.
9 “Lovely!” says Effie Trinket. “But I believe there's a small matter of introducing the
reaping winner and then asking for volunteers, and if one does come forth then we,
um…” she trails off, unsure of herself.
10 “What does it matter?” says the mayor. He's looking at me with a pained expression
on his face. He doesn't know me really, but there is a faint recognition there. I am the girl
who brings the strawberries. The girl his daughter might have spoken of on occasion.
The girl who five years ago stood huddled with her mother and sister, as he presented
her, the oldest child, with a medal of valor. A medal for her father, vaporized in the
mines. Does he remember that? “What does it matter?” he repeats gruffly. “Let her come
forward.”
11 Prim is screaming hysterically behind me. She's wrapped her skinny arms around me
like a vice.
 “No, Katniss! No! You can't go!”
12 “Prim, let go,” I say harshly, because this is upsetting me and I don't want to cry. When
they televise the replay of the reapings tonight, everyone will make note of my tears, and
I'll be marked as an easy target. A weakling. I will give no one that satisfaction. “Let go!”
13 I can feel someone pulling her from my back. I turn and see Gale has lifted Prim off
the ground and she's thrashing in his arms. “Up you go, Catnip,” he says, in a voice he's
fighting to keep steady, and then he carries Prim off toward my mother. I steel myself
and climb the stairs.

14 “Well, bravo!” gushes Effie Trinket. “That's the spirit of the Games!” She's pleased to
finally have a district with a little action going on in it. “What's your name?”
15 I swallow hard. “Katniss Everdeen,” I say.
16 “I bet my buttons that was your sister. Don't want her to steal all the glory, do we?
Come on, everybody! Let's give a big round of applause to our newest tribute!” trills Effie
Trinket.
17 To the everlasting credit of the people of District 12, not one person claps. Not even
the ones holding betting slips, the ones who are usually beyond caring. Possibly because
they know me from the Hob, or knew my father, or have encountered Prim, who no one
can help loving. So instead of acknowledging applause, I stand there unmoving while
they take part in the boldest form of dissent
 they can manage. Silence. Which says
we do not agree. We do not condone. All of this is wrong.
Source: From THE HUNGER GAMES by Suzanne Collins. Scholastic Inc./Scholastic Press.
Copyright © 2008 by Suzanne Collins. Used by permission.
Check Your Understanding
Use context clues and word part analysis to define the following words
from the passage.
protocol (paragraph 8): 
valor (paragraph 10): 
3.
What comparison is made between paragraphs 2 and 3? Why do you think
the comparison is made? In your opinion, does it add to the passage?
4.
How can you tell Prim is unhappy about being selected? Use text from the
passage to support your answer.
5.
Why do you think the image of Prim's untucked blouse makes Katniss
realize that she must do something to help her (paragraph 5)?
6.
What can you infer about the mayor? How does he feel about Katniss
volunteering? Use text from the passage to support your answer.
7.

What do the people of District 12 do when asked to applaud for Katniss?
What does their behavior signal to you?
8.
In what other situations in life could silence be a form of dissent?
9.
What is the implied main idea?
10.
Chapter Review
6-5b Chapter Summary
College instructors require you not only to read and understand what is explicitly stated
on the page, but also to detect ideas that are implied, or indirectly stated. Just as the
Theory of Mind acknowledges our understanding that other people also have thoughts,
ideas, feelings, desires, fears, and beliefs, you should realize that an author's have
something to tell you. Sometimes, to fully comprehend an author's main idea, you have
to read between the lines. Begin by questioning yourself about the topic of the reading.
Recall what you already know on the subject (using Reader-Response Theory), and then
draw reasonable conclusions.
To draw reasonable conclusions about an author's implied main idea, you need to
practice making inferences. While making inferences is something you do every day,
inferring meaning from textbooks and other college reading material requires you to
use specific strategies such as understanding an author's purpose, noting comparisons
and similarities, understanding an author's tone, detecting an author's bias, and
recognizing information gaps. It is important that you double-check your inferences by
recognizing an author's perspective and making sure there is something in the text that
supports your inference. Without this step, you could infer too much and assume
something that the author did not intend.
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment

inference
1.
prior knowledge
2.
assumptions
3.
author's purpose
4.
author's tone
5.
the emotion or feeling that an
author's words give
a.
main point in a paragraph,
section, or chapter that is not
stated directly
b.
a tendency toward a specific
c.
Draw the amount of dendrites you imagine that you have now about making
inferences. Compare your drawing of dendrites now with what you drew at the
beginning of this chapter. If the amounts are different, explain why.
Comprehension Check
What is the most valuable point you learned in this chapter?
If you could ask the authors a question about this chapter, what would
you ask?
Chapter Review
6-5c Post Test
Part 1. Objective Questions
Match the key terms from the chapter in Column A to their definitions in
Column B.
Column A Column B

author's   bias
6.
information gap
7.
implied main idea
8.
comparison
9.
emotive language
10.
simile
11.
metaphor
12.
view, a prejudice
the process of draaawing
conclusions about information
when an author's opinions or
ideas are not directly stated
d.
reason for writing
e.
place in reading where
informatttiiion appears to beee
missing or where an author
intends for the reader to infer
meaning
f.
beliefs and ideas collected over
a lifetime from experiences
g.
everything you have learned or
experienced about a topic
previously
h.
characteristics that are
common to two or more things
i.
words that, when read, bring
about certain feelings and
emotions
j.
strong comparison where one
idea is described as another
k.
comparisons using the words
like or as
l.
Circle the best answer to the following multiple-choice question.
Which of the following statements does not contain emotive l nguage?
The adorable child waited quietly and patiently for his mother.
a.
The child waited for his mother.
b.
The mischievous child trampled through the delicate grass and plucked
flowers while waiting for his mother.
c.
The dim-witted child ate a cup of dirt while wai ng for his moth r.
d.
Short-Answer Questions
How do you make sure you are not inferring too much or incorrectly?
14.
When inferring a main idea from a reading assignment, is it necessary that
all the students in your class agree on what the implied main idea is?
Explain your answer.
15.
Popular Reading
Part 2. Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Read the title of the following passage, and skim over the paragraphs,
including the information about the author. What do you expect the
passage to be about?
1.
What do you already know about the topic?
2.
Using the title, develop a question to ask yourself as you read.
3.
The Cat Lady by
Chris Rose

1 Ellen Montgomery's house near Audubon Park was already almost invisible from the
street before Hurricane Katrina shattered the massive cedar tree in her front yard and
left a tangled, camouflaged mess that now obliterates the view of just about everything.
2 If anything, that helped her hide from the National Guard during the tense days—now
ancient weeks ago—when word came that they were forcing those who had remained in
New Orleans to leave.
3 “If I was out walking in the neighborhood and I heard the Hummers coming, I would
duck down behind a porch or some broken shutters,” she said. “I felt like a Confederate
spy in enemy territory.”
4 Montgomery was a holdout. A straggler. The resistance.
5 She stayed behind without power or running water or even a generator. The simple
reason: “My babies,” she says. Thirty-four cats. (It was thirty-three for several weeks,
until one that had gone missing returned home last Saturday night “to say hello,”
Montgomery says.)
6 She knows what you're thinking. It used to bug her but not anymore.
7 “Years ago, I said to my vet: ‘But I don't want to be a cat lady!’” Montgomery recalls.
“And he says to me: ‘But you are a cat lady.’ So there you are.”
8 And so, for thirty days, what has she done?
9 “Well,” she pauses. “I sleep late. Let's see… and then I feed the cats. I read The Journal of
Beatrix Potter. It's a lovely book. And then I have my cup of coffee. And that usually lasts
a couple of hours. And then I paint and—I don't know. The days just fly by. I'm in another
world here. I don't feel the heat. I don't feel anything. I am very able to exist on my own. I
just paint, and that's what keeps me from going bonkers. That's my therapy.”
10 Montgomery has been painting since 1977, when she read the book of Vincent Van
Gogh's correspondence, Letters to Theo.
11 “I read it and I said, ‘I want to do that,’” she says. “So I got down and did that and have
been doing it ever since.”
12 Indeed. She sits on the floor in the front room of her house—it would be a stretch to
call it a “studio”—and she fills canvas after canvas, board after board, paper after paper.
If you stood still in front of her for a long enough, she'd probably paint you.
13 Her home is filled with thousands of paintings she has made over the past three
decades. She admittedly has sold few works, so mostly they line her walls, floor-
to-ceiling in every room, and then they fill stacks and piles randomly assigned through
her cluttered 1890s cottage.
14 And, having recently run out of canvases to work on, she is now working a medium
that only a hurricane could provide. She has gathered scores of slate roofing tiles that
were scattered off the roofs of her neighbors' homes into the street, and now she paints
them.
15 “They're so beautiful,” she says. “I couldn't bear the thought of the National
Guardsmen or some contractors trampling over them, so I collected them. I won't have
enough time in my life to paint them all.”

16 Over the years, she has painted various abstracts and florals and faces and landscapes,
but now her work is fairly dark and muddied and swirly, work clearly influenced by the
monstrous forces that have visited upon her life this past month.
17 Funny thing is, in the beginning, she didn't really know what had happened.
18 Montgomery has been living the consummate, isolated cat lady existence for years
and she was only vaguely aware that a storm was even coming.
19 The shattered cedar tree and the loss of power, water, and phone—and the
disappearance of all her neighbors—told her it was something big.
20 “I went to church that Sunday morning before the storm and a sign on the door said,
‘Services canceled,’ so I bought a paper and that was the last news I heard,” she says.
21 “There were four or five days where I had absolutely no idea what had happened. But
I was safe, the cats were safe, so I thought: why be scared? I firmly believe in God and
prayer. I knew I would just ride it out. I am probably more prepared than anyone else in
the world to spend time alone.”
22 It wasn't until several days later, when a neighbor returning to retrieve some items
loaned her a radio—and stocked her with food and water before leaving again—that the
magnitude of the event settled upon her.
23 “I try to listen to the news a couple of hours a day and it's unimaginable, really,” she
says. But she has seen no images of it at all; has not seen that more than half of the city
was underwater and has not seen the human misery that filled the Superdome and
Convention Center, sights that are now burned into the American consciousness.
24 “At first, actually, it was kind of nice around here,” she says. “The birds came back and
the squirrels would come deliver me the news. It's all been so peaceful, really. But it's
nice to have the thought of people coming back. I suppose there'll be lots of chainsaws
and hammers and all that, so I might miss the silence. But the truth is, I'm just about out
of candles.”
Chris Rose is a writer who gained popularity for his writings on the personal and
public struggles of Louisiana after Hurricane Katrina.
Source: Reprinted with the permission of Simon & Schuster paperbacks, a division of
Simon & Schuster, Inc. From 1 DEAD IN ATTIC by Chris Rose. Copyright © 2005, 2007 by
the Times-Picayune Publishing Corp.
Check Your Understanding
Circle the best answer to the following multiple-choice questions.
What is a typical “cat lady” in American culture? If you are not sure, look at
the passage again, and use the details of the cat lady, Ellen Montgomery, to
infer what “cat ladies” are like.
a lady who has a cat and lives alone
a.
4.

a lady who likes cats but doesn't have any
b.
a lady who thinks cats are better than dogs
c.
a lady who has many cats and lives alone
d.
What are some characteristics of typical cats?
They are independent and tend to be alone.
a.
They constantly seek the approval of their owners.
b.
They listen well to commands.
c.
They are dependent on other animals.
d.
5.
How was the cat lady able to live during the aftermath of the storm?
She worked for a company that handled emergency relief.
a.
She was generally self-sufficient and used to being alone.
b.
She was generally dependent on others.
c.
She was generally a good painter.
d.
6.
What was the purpose of this passage?
to inspire
a.
to inform
b.
to persuade
c.
to explain
d.
7.
The author's tone was:
sarcastic.
a.
humorous.
b.
negative.
c.
understanding.
d.
8.
Short-Answer Questions
What biases might the author have?
9.

What did Montgomery mean when she said, “I felt like a Confederate spy in
enemy territory”?
10.
What are some implied similarities between Ellen Montgomery and cats?
Fill in the gaps the author left.
11.
What does the author imply when he says that Montgomery “has seen no
images of it [the aftermath of hurricane Katrina]”?
12.
What does consummate mean in this sentence: “Montgomery has been
living the consummate, isolated cat lady existence for years and she was
only vaguely aware that a storm was even coming.”
13.
In the last line of the passage, the author quotes Montgomery as saying,
“‘But the truth is, I'm just about out of candles.’” What could the author be
implying here? How do you think Montgomery feels about everyone
returning back to the neighborhood?
14.
In the passage, the author uses the cat lady to imply a point about people in
general. What point can you infer about people from this passage? In other
words, what is true about the cat lady that is also true about people in
general?
15.
Chapter Review

6-5d 
 Brain Strength Options
Working individually or in groups of no more than three people, complete one of
the following options.
Prepare a poster that illustrates these strategies for finding implied main
ideas:
author's purpose
comparison
tone
author's bias
information gaps
Find and use selections from any text of your choice: textbook, magazine
article, Internet article, song lyrics, or anything else you find that
demonstrates the strategies for finding implied main ideas. Use as much
text as necessary to illustrate each strategy, which should be named and
highlighted in some manner (in bold, color, underlined). For example, if the
sentence shows bias, you would highlight the parts that indicate bias and
title it “Example of Bias.”
1.
Create a PowerPoint presentation that you will either present aloud or
otherwise distribute to the class, as determined by your instructor. Follow
the same guidelines as Option 1.
2.
Lead the class in using the strategies listed in Option 1. Read a text aloud,
and tell your classmates what they are looking for. For example, you might
say, “In the following reading, determine the author's purpose” and then
read your selection and guide them through the process. Do this for each
strategy in Option 1. If the class has trouble finding the correct answer,
perhaps you did not select appropriate examples; to avoid this, make sure
to select clear examples of each strategy.
3.
Can you draw? Create a short graphic novel illustrating each strategy. On
the bottom of each frame, list the strategy and indicate the clues. Follow
the same guidelines as Option 1.
4.
Create an online lesson that teaches the strategies for finding implied main
idea. Follow the same guidelines as Option 1.
5.
Propose your own project in writing to your instructor. Indicate what you
6.

will do and how it will be considered successful. What will be the criteria?

Chapter 7
Recognizing Patterns of Organization
Chapter Introduction
7-1 What are Patterns?
7-2 Why Your Brain Likes Patterns and Categories
7-3 Strategies for Recognizing Patterns of Organization
7-3a Question Yourself
7-3b Look for Organizational Word Clues
7-4 Common Patterns of Organization
7-4a Listing
7-4b Analysis
7-4c Cause/Effect
7-4d Comparison/Contrast
7-4e Definition/Example
7-4f Sequence
7-4g Mixed Patterns
7-5 Staying Focused on the Overall Pattern
7-6 Chapter Review
7-6a Practice with a Reading Passage
7-6b Chapter Summary
7-6c Post Test
7-6d  Brain Strength Options
Chapter Introduction
“Order is the sanity of the mind, the health of the body, the peace of the city, the security
of the state. Like beams in a house or bones to a body, so is order to all things.”

Making Connections
— Robert Southey
Student to Student
Sowmya Rasa
Through my experiences with exams and essays, I learned to hone my study
skills to fit my personality in order to help me become an efficient reader. It is an
ongoing process and changes with the type of subject matter and field you are
exposed to. It takes some time, but once you figure out what works for you, you
start to learn more easily as well as enjoy what you are reading.
A third-year medical student at St. George's University in Granada, West
Indies
Courtesy of Sowmya Rasa
One thing I learned about reading textbooks is that it is important to understand
the sequence of events. A lot of times, chapters went off on a tangent and started
talking about history and other facts that were somewhat relevant but would not
help me to understand medicine in a way that a doctor needs to. Therefore, it
helped me to take parts of the chapter and rewrite them in sequential order. I
used arrows to show the sequence. For example, to understand a biochemical
process, like gluconeogenesis, I rewrote the different reactions in a sequence that
would help me understand the topic better. In addition, it helped to make a table
of all the enzymes in gluconeogenesis, making it easier to group them together
because there are several processes in biochemistry and a lot of the enzyme
names sound very similar. In the table I would write the name of the enzyme in
one column and then the purpose of it in the next. On top I would write the
heading to describe the category under which the enzymes belonged. I did this
for a lot of different processes, grouping and reviewing. It made the reading clear
and easier to remember. Once I remembered the different names, I could make
comparisons between the tables and take relevant notes. This also helped me
understand the lectures more easily, making the whole learning process
worthwhile.

What kind of puzzles do you like?
1.
Why do you like doing puzzles? How
do they make you feel when you
finish? What do you do when they
become difficult? Why don't people
just choose easy puzzles so they can
do them quickly?
2.
How is a puzzle like a pattern?
3.
Name three things that have a
pattern.
4.
How could something you read have
a pattern?
5.
If you saw these words in something
you were reading, what kind of a
pattern would you guess the reading
would have?
then
afterward
later
next
finally
6.

© Cengage Learning
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw on the brain cell how many dendrites you imagine you have for how
much you know about recognizing patterns of organization.
7-1 What are Patterns?
Say you walk into your local grocery store to buy a bag of Fritos. You go to the snack aisle,
and instead of the expected chips and pretzels, you find three cucumbers, a box of
Band-Aids, and instant oatmeal. You look around the store and find that nothing is in
order—the pasta is with the coffee, the spices are on the shelves with lotion, and produce
is everywhere. If this were the case, you would probably walk out without your Fritos.

Katrina Wittkamp/Digital Vision/Jupiterimages
Fortunately, grocery stores are organized. The layout, or larger organization, of a grocery
store is designed to entice you to buy things. To achieve this goal, the store is designed
with a sequence in mind. The entrance usually leads to the produce department. The
smell of bread and muffins tempts you to the back of the store. You go to one aisle for
cereal, another for canned peas. You grab milk in the refrigerated section, and before
you know it, you have gone through the whole store. The must-have items, such as
cereal, canned goods, and frozen foods, are grouped in like categories that are staggered
throughout the store. This planned sequence leads you through the store purposefully
so you see and are tempted to buy all of the items that the store offers.
There is an overall plan in each grocery store, just like there is an overall plan in an
author's work. An author may mix patterns within a reading, but usually there is one big
pattern or logical structure to the entire reading. Actively looking for that larger pattern
helps you understand how an author's ideas are related. Every time you start a new
reading, think of it as exploring a new grocery store. Look for clues to the pattern so you
can find all the information you need in the reading. A pattern of organization (a way to
organize ideas through the use of specific pattern types) is the way that an author
purposefully chooses to present his or her ideas through the use of specific pattern
types.
At times, an author will use more than one pattern of organization within a reading. The
use of multiple patterns is known as mixed patterns of organization (author's use of
more than one pattern of organization) . Often, one pattern does not describe the overall
organization. For example, some stores might sell vegetables and nursery stock. The
outside of the store might have pine trees, rose bushes, and annual plants and flowers.
The inside of the store might have produce. The store has two goals—to sell plants and to
sell produce. Likewise, an author might define democracy, giving a detailed example, and
also providing an analysis of effective political systems. Both organizational patterns,
definition/example and analysis, might be equally prominent in an author's order of
ideas. The overall organizational pattern would be mixed.
In a grocery store, you can see a similar embedded organization. One aisle might have
snack foods. Within that aisle, though, the products might be organized in groups
—popcorn and peanuts at one end, pretzels of different brands in the middle, chips on
the other end. In the next aisle, you might find cereals, hot and cold, and breakfast bars.
There is, as they say, a method to the madness. Each aisle has its own organization
—snacks in one aisle, cereal in the next. Different areas of the store have bigger
organizational structures. The refrigerated area not only is bigger than an aisle but also
includes a broader categories of items—milk, cheese, yogurt, eggs, cottage cheese, sour
cream, and meats.
Authors use patterns of organization in their writing in order to achieve their goal: to get
you, the reader, to understand and accept what they write. Like the grocery store owner,
the author wants you to “buy” something. In order to critically examine what an author
is “selling,” you must first understand it. An author writing a book on climate change
might organize a chapter by comparing and contrasting temperature and precipitation
changes over the past 100 years. When you read this information, you note that the
author's comparison/contrast organization helps him showcase his points. An author
writing about cell division might explain her ideas in a sequence organization. The
sequence moves you through the process from beginning to end. A researcher studying

voting habits might write using a cause/effect pattern, illustrating his belief that
something causes people to vote (or not).
Tip from the Brain Doctor
The brain is a natural pattern seeker! It naturally notices patterns without even
trying. Why? Because seeing patterns is essential to survival. Actually, it is
deviation from patterns—a difference in a pattern—that the brain notices.
Humans would not survive long if they did not notice these things. For example,
a difference in the pattern in water indicates that fish might be feeding there,
enabling fisherman to catch fish more easily. A difference in the branch of a tree
might signal a snake is coiled there ready to spring. Take advantage of this
natural skill, and use it to enhance learning.
Authors have a purpose behind the order in which they present ideas. Ideas in a
textbook chapter are related to one another. If you do not see the relationship, you
might have difficulty identifying the main idea and critically thinking about it. You also
might have trouble remembering the details from the chapter because, like a
disorganized grocery store, stuff can be everywhere. The details from the chapter might
not be “shelved” anywhere that seems obviously logical. However, knowing an author's
overall pattern of organization helps you mentally shelve ideas in their proper place in
your brain.
Activity 7A
Create a Pattern
Imagine a grocery store that has all of the regular items a grocery store carries
but whose goal is to urge customers to buy only healthy items. How would this
store be laid out? Draw a picture of a possible layout and include the following
items: canned goods, meat, frozen items, snacks, produce, deli items, pet food,
paper items, cereals, spices, and candy. Add a paragraph to your drawing
describing how the items would be displayed on the shelves.

7-2 Why Your Brain Likes Patterns and Categories
Look at the inkblots in this picture.
What do you see? Inkblots? Fallen leaves? Something else? Sometimes people think they
see a dog in the pattern. If the text asked you to see inkblots and yet you saw a dog, what
was your brain trying to do?
Gregory R (1970) “The Intelligent Eye” McGraw-Hill, TX, © 1970. (Photographer: RC James)
If you said something like “make sense of it,” you are absolutely correct. The brain likes
to make sense of things, and one of the most powerful ways it does so is by seeing
patterns. It is a survival mechanism. Throughout time, if humans were to survive, they
needed to see patterns. In fact, the human brain rewards the seeing of a pattern with a
burst of a positive, good feeling. That is why people persist in figuring out a Sudoku,
crossword or jigsaw puzzle—or even how to put a car engine back together. The brain
loves to see patterns and to figure things out!
Categories are a type of pattern. Putting things into categories before you study them
helps the brain make sense of the material. It helps you think better and more easily
recall information. The first step is to figure out what the categories are. As you are
reading, try to determine the pattern of organization the author uses—your brain will
reward you with pleasure and a feeling of satisfaction just like completing a puzzle.
Tip from the Brain Doctor

Looking for patterns helps you learn because it is a way of connecting
information in your neural networks. It also helps you remember what you have
read because you are not memorizing facts in isolation but are relating the facts
to each other to form patterns. These patterns hold and organize the facts in your
memory.
Comprehension Check
Explain why patterns of organization are important.
7-3 Strategies for Recognizing Patterns of Organization
To recognize an author's overall pattern of organization, make sure you question
yourself and look for organizational word clues. You will notice that these strategies are
similar to the ones you learned in Chapter 4 for finding stated main ideas. Reading
strategies presented in this book are meant to be used together. It is not recommended,
for example, to simply distinguish general ideas from specific ones to understand a
stated main idea, or to only look for information gaps in reading to find an implied main
idea. Use as many strategies as it takes in order to accomplish your reading goal.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
The brain has two pathways for visual information: the what and the where. You

will learn about the where pathway later, but think about the what pathway now.
The what pathway creates categories. There is a category for faces, for example,
where all the faces you know are stored. Because the brain “likes” categories,
creating categories as a study skill will make your learning easier and more
effective.
7-3a Question Yourself
With anything you read, you should question yourself. (Refer to Chapter 4 for a review of
this reading strategy, if necessary.) Read the title or heading and make a question from it.
Look for the answer to that question as you read. That answer can lead you to the main
idea and can help you identify the author's overall pattern of organization.
You can also question yourself about the details. Details that support a main idea are
usually organized in identifiable patterns. For example, if you recognize a list of ideas as
you read, you might ask yourself, “What is this a list of?” If you can tell that events are
being described in chronological order, you can ask, “What is this sequence about?”
Look at the following example from a history textbook.
The Philosophy of Colonialism
To justify their conquests, the colonial powers appealed, in part, to the time-honored
maxim of “might makes right.” In a manner reminiscent
 of the Western attitude
toward the oil reserves in the Persian Gulf today, the European powers viewed industrial
resources as vital to national survival and security and felt that no moral justification
was needed for any action to protect access to them. By the end of the nineteenth
century, that attitude received pseudoscientific
 validity from the concept of social
Darwinism, which maintained that only societies that moved aggressively to adapt to
changing circumstances would survive and prosper in a world governed by the Darwinist
law of “survival of the fittest.”
Source: From DUIKER. Contemporary World History 5e (p. 29). Copyright © 2010 Cengage Learning.
What question could you create from the title of this passage?
What is the philosophy of colonialism?
The answer you look for might be an explanation or definition of colonialism. This
answer leads you closer to the main idea and suggests a possible overall pattern of
organization—definition/example. You will not know for sure using just the strategy of
questioning yourself, but other strategies will help support your answer.

7-3b Look for Organizational Word Clues
After you question yourself, look for clues that signal a pattern of organization. In
Chapter 4, you learned that word clues alert you to the twists and turns in the path of an
author's thinking. Organizational word clues (words or phrases that signal a pattern of
organization an author uses for a reading) are similar to the word clues that you learned
about in Chapter 4, but instead of just showing how single ideas are connected,
organizational word clues signal a reading's overall organization.
Sometimes these organizational word clues are obvious and present in the text. Other
times, authors omit them but still expect you to infer the larger organization. Table 7.1
shows you some of the common organizational word clues associated with the patterns.
Table 7.1
Common Patterns of Organization
Pattern
Deﬁnition
Organizational Word Clues
Listing
One thing after another in a
list
Example
I have several items on my
shopping list:
ﬁrst is milk,
second—eggs
third—chicken
fourth—spinach, and
ﬁnally, whole wheat
bread.
and
ﬁrst… second… third
ﬁrst of all
secondly… ﬁnally
the four levels of
one way… another
way… a third way
further, furthermore
additionally, last
Analysis
Shows the parts of something
Example
Textbooks include several
features that help readers
navigate the text, including a
title page, a table of
contents, chapters, and an
index.
features
properties
characteristics
one sense or one part
aspects
one way, another way
is made up of
includes

Pattern
Deﬁnition
Organizational Word Clues
categories
classiﬁed as
traits
involves
elements
components
functions
attributes
levels
ﬁndings
analysis
in this case
types
Cause/Eﬀect
Tells the cause of something
happening and the eﬀect
caused by it
Example
When there is a big storm,
schools are closed due to past
experiences. There are many
reasons, but the primary one
is safety.
since
thus
because, because of
consequently
as a result of
cause(s)
eﬀect(s)
reason(s)
indicates
result(s)
for this reason, for
these reasons
if … then
is due to, may be due
to

Pattern
Deﬁnition
Organizational Word Clues
creates
occurred
consequence(s)
ﬁnding(s)
leads to
then, therefore
aﬀect
it is evident
Comparison/Contrast Explains how things are
compared. Author will show
likenesses and diﬀerences.
Example
These two stories are similar
because they are both about
families. They also have
obvious diﬀerences. The ﬁrst
story is rich with humor,
unlike the second story, which
seems to be one tragedy
after another.
however
compared with
on the other hand
but
diﬀerent from
although
on the contrary
in opposition
unlike
although
whereas
as compared with
like
contrasted with
yet
in the same way
similar to
in other words
along

Pattern
Deﬁnition
Organizational Word Clues
similarly
too
as with
opposed to
Deﬁnition/Example
Deﬁnes something and/or
uses an example to help
readers' understanding
Example
A dessert is something sweet,
which might be a piece of
cake, a slice of pie, ice cream,
or chocolate candy.
for example
as deﬁned as
means the same as
translated as
is called
synonymous with
another meaning
also refers to
as
to illustrate
interpreted as
such as
states that
is
Sequence/Time or
Process
The order in which things
appear or occur or outline of
a process or procedure
Examples
Sequence/Time
Several events caused the
war.
First, none of the countries
would
sign the nuclear weapons
ban.
Second, the invasion into
ﬁrst… second… third
ﬁrst of all… secondly…
ﬁnally
one way… another way
after that…
then…
following…
next
before

Pattern
Deﬁnition
Organizational Word Clues
France
forced smaller countries to
come
together.
Process
The ﬁrst step in baking
cookies is to have a recipe.
Next, you need the
ingredients listed. Then,
everything needs to be
measured and mixed. The
ﬁnal step is to spoon the
dough onto the cookie sheet
and bake the cookies.
after
subsequently
yesterday/today
/tomorrow
eventually
step, steps
procedure, process
Organizational word clues can also help you determine the level of importance of an
author's ideas. Those like most importantly tell you that what you are about to read is
really important. Others such as for example let you know that a point is going to be
illustrated. (An example is usually not the main idea.) When an author uses on the other
hand, he or she shows another viewpoint (which could be the main idea). When an
author uses first, second, and third, a process or sequence is introduced; what follows are
often major supporting details. Being aware of these clues helps you make sense of what
you are reading; knowing the pattern helps you to organize the information.
7-4 Common Patterns of Organization
Knowing the different patterns of organization helps you make sense of what you are
reading and will also help you remember the content more accurately. Table 7.1 shows
common patterns of organization along with their definitions and commonly used
organizational word clues.

Activity 7B
Figure Out the Pattern
Using Table 7.1, figure out which pattern the author uses in the following
passage. The organizational word clues that signal the pattern are circled. You
will be asked to identify those on your own in future activities. Don't forget to
think about the author's purpose; it can be the best clue.
1 Some people who undergo hypnosis may be influenced to develop false memories,
even when they are warned in advance about the possibility of creating fictional past
events. In a study at Ohio State University's Lima campus, 28% of subjects who
underwent hypnosis were induced by a researcher to develop false memories about
recent incidents in their lives. 
 This occurred,  even though they were warned that
“hypnotized participants may confuse what they imagine with what really occurred.”
Moreover, 44% of participants who were not warned about possible pseudomemories
were induced  to develop a false memory.
2 The results suggest  that many people have unrealistic and distorted views of the
power of hypnosis, indicates  professor of psychology Joseph Green. “There's a cultural
expectation that hypnosis will lead to more accurate and earlier memories, but  that's
not true. Hypnosis can be helpful for some people, but  it is subject to the same
restrictions and pitfalls of any other memory-retrieval method.” 
3 The issue of false memories has grown in recent years as more clinicians have used
hypnosis to help patients recover lost memories of early traumatic events. There has
been controversy about whether these recovered memories always are real.
Source: From Jeff Grabmeier, “Despite Warning, People May Form False Memories During
Hypnosis.” Reprinted by permission of the author.
What pattern is used in this passage? (Keep in mind that you have not yet
fully learned about patterns of organization. You are basing your answer
on what you currently know about patterns.)
1.
7-4a Listing
Using what you know about asking questions and organizational word clues, read the
following passage from a communications textbook and see if a pattern becomes
apparent to you. Using Table 7.1 as a guide, circle any organizational word clues you
notice.

1 Think about the last time you experienced a conflict. How did you react? Did you avoid
it? Give in? Force the other person to accept your will? Did you compromise? Or did the
two of you use a problem-solving approach? When faced with a conflict, you can
withdraw, accommodate, force, compromise, or collaborate (Lulofs & Cahn, 2000).
2 One of the most common and easiest ways to deal with conflict is withdrawing or
avoiding the conflict. Withdrawing involves physically or psychologically removing
yourself from the conflict. You withdraw physically by leaving the site. For instance,
imagine Eduardo and Justina get into an argument about their financial situation.
Eduardo may withdraw physically by saying, I don't want to talk about this and walk out
the door. Psychological withdrawal occurs when you simply ignore what the other
person is saying. So, when Justina begins to talk about their financial situation, Eduardo
may ignore her and act as though she has not spoken. When you repeatedly use
withdrawing, you risk damaging your relationship. First, in terms of the dialectical
(method of argument to get to the truth) tension in the relationship, withdrawing signals
closedness rather than openness and autonomy (independence) rather than connection.
Further, withdrawing doesn't eliminate the source of the conflict and it often increases
the tension. In many cases, not confronting the problem when it occurs only makes it
more difficult to deal with in the long run. Nevertheless, as a temporary strategy,
withdrawing allows tempers to cool and may be appropriate when neither an issue nor a
relationship is important.
3 A second style of managing conflict is accommodating, which means satisfying others
needs or accepting others' ideas while neglecting your own. So people who adopt the
accommodating style of conflict will use passive behavior. For instance, during a
discussion of their upcoming vacation, Mariana and Juan disagree in their thinking
about whether to invite friends to join them. Juan uses accommodation when Mariana
says, “I think it would be fun to go with another couple, don't you?” and he replies, “OK,
whatever you want.”
4 Accommodating can result in poor communication because important facts,
arguments, and positions are not voiced. There are situations, of course, in which it is
appropriate and effective to accommodate. When the issue is not important to you, but
the relationship is, accommodating is the preferred style. Hal and Yvonne are trying to
decide where to go for dinner. Hal says, I really have a craving for some Thai food
tonight. Yvonne, who prefers pizza, says, OK, that will be fine. Yvonne's interest in pizza
was not very strong, and because Hal really seemed excited by Thai food, Yvonne
accommodated.
5 A third style of dealing with conflict is forcing or competing. Forcing means satisfying
your own needs or advancing your own ideas with no concern for the needs or ideas of
the other and no concern for the harm done to the relationship. Forcing may use
aggressive behavior such as physical threats, verbal attacks, coercion (to make one do
something against one's will through threats) , or manipulation. If you use forcing in a
conflict and your partner avoids or accommodates, the conflict seems to subside. If,
however, your partner answers your forcing style with a forcing style, the conflict
escalates.
6 Although forcing may result in a person getting her or his own way, it usually hurts a
relationship, at least in the short term. There are times, however, when forcing is an
effective means to resolve conflict. In emergencies, when quick and decisive action must
be taken to ensure safety or minimize harm, forcing is useful. When an issue is critical to
your own or the others' welfare and you know you are right, you may find forcing

necessary. Finally, if you are interacting with someone who will take advantage of you if
you do not force the issue, this style is appropriate. For example, David knows that,
statistically speaking, the likelihood of death or serious injury increases dramatically if
one does not wear a helmet when riding a motorcycle. So he insists that his sister wear
one when she rides with him, even though she complains bitterly about wearing one.
7 A fourth way to manage conflict is through compromising, which involves giving up
part of what each wants, to provide at least some satisfaction for both parties. Under this
approach, both people have to give up part of what they really want or believe, or they
have to trade one thing they want to get something else. For example, if Heather and
Paul are working together on a class project and need to meet outside of class but both
have busy schedules, they may compromise on a time to meet.
8 Although compromising is a popular and effective style, there are drawbacks
associated with it. One drawback is that the quality of a decision is affected if one of the
parties trades away a better solution to find a compromise. Compromising is appropriate
when the issue is moderately important, when there are time constraints, and when
attempts at forcing or collaborating have not been successful.
9 A fifth style of dealing with conflict is through problem-solving discussion, or
collaboration. When you collaborate, you both try to fully address the needs and issues
of each of you and arrive at a solution that is mutually satisfying. In this approach, both
of you view the disagreement as a problem to be solved, so you discuss the issues,
describe your feelings, and identify the characteristics of an effective solution. With
collaboration, both people's needs are met and both sides feel that they have been heard.
For example, if Juan and Mariana decide to collaborate on their conflict about asking
friends to join them on vacation, Mariana may explain to Juan how she thinks that, by
vacationing with friends, they can share expenses and lower their costs. Juan may
describe his desire to have alone time with Mariana. As they explore what each wants
from the vacation, they may arrive at a plan that meets both of their needs. So, they may
end up vacationing alone, but spending several nights camping to lower their expenses.
Source: From VERDERBER/VERDERBER. Communicate! 12e (pp. 188–9). Copyright © 2008 Cengage Learning.
What did you notice? Some questions you can ask about the passage are:
What choices are there when faced with a conflict?
What are the ways someone can deal with conflict?
As you read and questioned yourself, you may have noticed a pattern right away. At the
end of the first paragraph, the authors write: When faced with a conflict, you can withdraw,
accommodate, force, compromise, or collaborate. This paragraph gives a list of choices:
withdraw, accommodate, force, compromise, collaborate. Then, the paragraphs that
follow describe each item on the list. Most of the paragraphs begin with organizational
word clues: Paragraph 2 begins “One of the ways….” Paragraph 3, “A second style….”
Paragraph 5, “A third style….” Paragraph 7, “A fourth way….” Paragraph 9, “A fifth style….”
These organizational word clues signal the overall pattern of organization is listing.
Authors use listing (pattern that lists ideas, events, or concepts) to enumerate events,
ideas, or other concepts. Lists can be organized in a variety of ways: alphabetically,
numerically, by order of importance, or by category. For example, an author of a political
science text might list the Amendments to the Constitution, an author of a chemistry
textbook might list the elements in order of their atomic number, and a history textbook

might list articles of clothing worn for battle in the Middle Ages. Listing is sometimes
also known as addition. Table 7.2 provides examples of organizational word clues that
signal an author's use of listing.
Table 7.2
Organizational Word Clues for Listing Pattern
ﬁrst… second…
third
ﬁrst of all
… secondly
… ﬁnally
the four levels
of….
one way
… another
way
… a third
way
further
furthermore
additionally
last
After you identify an author's pattern of organization as listing, you can visually
represent the information in your notes. Figure 7.1 is an example of how to visually
show the passage's listing relationship.
Figure 7.1
Visual for Listing Pattern
Choices When Faced with Conflict
withdraw
1.
accommodate
2.
force
3.
compromise
4.
collaborate
5.
Here's an important test-taking tip: Want to know how to guess what will be on the test?
Questions that you ask yourself about a reading passage and jot down in your notes or in
your textbook are very likely to be questions an instructor might ask on an exam. Here is
an example of a question you could ask yourself about the previous passage in order to
prepare for a test:
What choices does one have when faced with a conflict?
Activity 7C
Practice Identifying a Listing Pattern

Read this passage from a criminal law textbook. The author uses listing as an
overall pattern of organization, but there aren't many organizational word clues.
How do you know the pattern is listing?
1 City governments, understandably enough, wish to minimize the amount of street
crimes that occur. The use of criminal laws directed at conduct or persons believed to be
related to criminal acts is common, but they must be tailored to avoid infringing
(overstepping or going somewhere it doesn't belong) on individual rights. Some such
laws include:
Anti-cruising laws: Fines for prohibited cruising—driving cars on designated routes
on certain streets during late night hours—can be as high as $1,000 in some places
and may also include short jail sentences. The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported
on April 24, 2007, that the city's new anti-cruising laws resulted in the issuance of
658 tickets and 86 arrests in one weekend. Four shootings occurred in that same
weekend.
truancy (one who should but doesn't go to school) arrests or detentions (holding
or keeping from moving freely) : State laws vary on the treatment of truancy, but in
many states authorities are authorized to detain a school-age child not attending
school and in some cases obtain criminal convictions of the child's parents.
Enforcement of truancy laws has been shown to cut down on crimes such as
burglary, criminal damage to property, theft, and criminal graffiti.
Juvenile curfew laws: Daytime curfew laws are aimed at keeping children in
school, while nighttime curfews seek to minimize teen drinking, drug use, fighting,
vandalism, and gang activities. Such curfews have generally been upheld, if they
are not overbroad, that is, written to prohibit conduct that is permitted, like
attending school or church events in the evening.
Source: From GARDNER/ANDERSON. Criminal Law 11e (p. 239). Copyright © 2012 Cengage
Learning.
What organizational word clues did you find in the passage?
1.
What else helped you determine that the overall organizational pattern is
listing?
2.
What is the main idea of the passage?
3.

Comprehension Check
What do you understand about what you have read so far?
Using your own words, explain patterns of organization and
organizational word clues.
7-4b Analysis
Using what you know about asking questions and organizational word clues, read the
following passage and see if a pattern becomes apparent to you. Using Table 7.1 as a
guide, circle any organizational word clues you notice.

Aspects of Business
1 Business is a broad domain. Within it, there are many different kinds of jobs, from
human resources management to sales to finance to accounting. So you might wonder
whether our genes influence our preference for functional areas of business as well.
“Yes” is the answer. Let's take a look at what some of the studies show.
2 One aspect of work in the business world is managing other people. Like the character
Michael Scott on the hit TV show “The Office,” supervising others is what many business
people do on a day-to-day basis. You might be surprised to learn that your interest in this
kind of work is more heavily influenced by your genetic endowment than by how your
mom and dad raised you. About 25 percent of the variation in interest in managing
people is attributed to genes, while only 8 percent is accounted for by family
environment. (Note to the producers of “The Office”: You might consider an episode that
explores the genetic origins of Michael Scott's and Dwight Schrute's desire to manage
others.)
3 Another kind of work in the business world involves managing the ongoing operations
of companies, what researchers have called “the day-to-day functioning of business and
commercial organizations.” After all, companies don't order raw materials, manage their
own inventory, or run their own assembly lines. Someone has to do that for them. Like
managing other people, this aspect of business attracts some people more than others.
And, as with managing other people, the appeal of this work is affected by your genes.
Studies show that genetic factors account for the approximately 59 percent of the
variation in people's interest in “the day-to-day functioning of business and commercial
organizations.”
Source: Born Entrepreneurs, Born Leaders: How Your Genes Aﬀect Your Work Life, NY: Oxford University Press, 2010,
pp. 53–54.
What about the heading of this passage gives you a clue to how the passage is organized?
What question could you ask?
What are the different aspects of business?
The different aspects or parts of business might be listed, defined, and discussed. The
first sentence helps you picture in your mind how the author sees business—as a
domain (a range, area, or realm). Then the author identifies that the domain of business
has many related parts or aspects. These clues suggest that the passage is organized with
analysis.
With analysis (pattern that breaks a concept down into its specific characteristics,
properties, or basic elements) , authors break a concept down into its specific
characteristics, properties, or basic elements. The authors' purpose might be to show the
different parts or details of a complex issue in order to make it easier to understand. For
example, a medical writer discussing diabetes could give readers information about its
cause, symptoms, and treatment options. Analysis is also sometimes known as
classification.
In a way, the analysis pattern of organization is like listing because it lists parts. The
difference is that a list can be organized randomly, such as a list of favorite activities:
swimming, shopping, and reading. Analysis is more than listing because it shows the
parts with respect to and in relation to the whole. Think about the skills needed to excel
in swimming: you need the skills of agility, coordination, speed, strength, and quick

mental processing. All of these skills are related to the whole (swimming). If swimmers
had agility but no coordination, they would not be very good. This would be considered
an analysis of the skills needed for a good swimmer.
Activity 7D
Analyze What You Know
Choose your favorite sport or activity, and create a list that includes the parts,
elements, or aspects that make it your favorite. Then write a paragraph
explaining how each part you identified relates to the activity you chose. Circle
the words that you used to show the specific parts—these are the organization
word clues you used.
Table 7.3 provides examples of organizational word clues that signal an author's use of
analysis.
Table 7.3
Organizational Word Clues for Analysis Pattern
features
properties
characteristics one sense
aspects
one way
another way
is made up
of
categories
classiﬁed
as
traits
includes
involves
elements
components
functions
attributes
levels
ﬁndings
analysis
in this case types
one part
 
To help you identify analysis as an author's pattern of organization, you can visually
represent the information in your notes. Seeing the relationship visually might help you
distinguish between a random listing and a discussion of parts of a whole. Figure 7.2 is
an example of how to visually show the analysis relationship in the previous passage.
Figure 7.2
Visual for Analysis Pattern
Aspects of Business

Managing other people
5% of variation due to
genes
Managing the ongoing
operations of companies 59% of
variation due to genes
Knowing that an author has purposefully used the analysis pattern of organization helps
you predict possible test questions. Here is an example of an analysis question an
instructor might ask about the earlier passage.
What are some aspects of the business world?
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Earlier in this chapter, the second visual pathway in the brain was
mentioned—the where pathway—which organizes information about where you
are, as the name implies. However, it also appears to be involved in organizing
the understanding of relationships. The brain makes sense of material by
understanding and organizing relationships. To use your brain well when you
read, analyze the relationships between ideas.
Now examine the following world history passage. In it, the author describes an ancient
Japanese art form that includes realistic and highly detailed representations of people.
Keep in mind what the analysis pattern of organization does—it breaks something down
into parts. Circle any organizational word clues that signal that analysis is being used.
During the Kamakura period (1185–1333) the hand scroll with its physical realism and
action-packed paintings of the new warrior class achieved great popularity. Reflecting
these chaotic times, the art of portraiture flourished, and a scroll would include a full
gallery of warriors and holy men in starkly realistic detail, including such unflattering
features as stubble, worry lines on a forehead, and crooked teeth. Japanese sculptors
also produced naturalistic wooden statues of generals, nobles, and saints. By far the most
distinctive, however, were the fierce heavenly “guardian kings,” who still intimidate the
viewer today.
Source: From DUIKER/SPIELVOGEL. World History 4e (p. 303). Copyright © 2004 Cengage Learning.

© BeBa/Iberfoto/The Image Works
One way to know that the overall pattern of organization is analysis is to ask yourself
good questions. Your answers help you infer what pattern is used.
What are the authors talking about (topic)? Ancient Japanese art
How do the authors explain the art? They offer lots of detail, but the detail is not
just a list of things. The authors describe the subject of the art (people) and aspects
(analysis organizational word clue) of those subjects (warriors, holy men, saints,
kings—action-packed scenes—worry lines, stubble, crooked teeth).
In the last sentence, the authors say, “By far the most distinctive….” The most
distinctive what? The most distinctive feature (analysis organizational word clue)
of this type of art.
Another way to infer an author's pattern of organization is by ruling out patterns that do
not fit the reading. The Japanese art passage presents more than a list. Also, it does not
compare or contrast anything. The authors say this kind of art gained popularity but do
not say why. What caused this art to be popular? The reader does not know. A process of
elimination like this can help you make a reasonable inference about what pattern an
author uses.
Activity 7E
Use Inference with an Analysis Pattern
Based on the distinctive features described in the Japanese art passage,
what can you infer about the value the Japanese placed on realism? In
other words, what was the point of providing the features of the art?
1.
What did the analysis of the art teach you about the art?
2.

7-4c Cause/Eﬀect
Using what you know about asking questions and organizational word clues, read the
following passage and see if a pattern becomes apparent to you. Using Table 7.1 as a
guide, circle any organizational word clues you notice.
1 For my job I spent 300 days traveling the world last year. I met a lot of happy people.
Who they are and where they live will surprise you.
2 The other day, as I took a taxi ride across Manhattan, the driver was pondering (to
think about) the state of the world. “I can't believe all these disasters happening
everywhere,” he said. “If it's not a flood, it's a tsunami. There are fires and hurricanes
and earthquakes… then there are riots and bombs and wars and shootings.” He kept
shaking his head as he muttered, “What is this world coming to?”
3 On the one hand, it's difficult not to agree with him. We need look no further, after all,
than the latest headlines to see the world has turned into a pretty horrifying place. But
then again: Is this really the case?
4 Let me explain. My job as a brand guy has a few advantages. One of them is that I get to
see a lot of different places—I spent 300 days away from home last year—and my
research takes me into a lot of private homes. And the upshot? I've begun seeing people
in a new light. I've begun to question the reasons why some people find happiness
wherever they may be, and others don't. Last week I visited one of the poorest districts in
Medellin, Colombia. The town's very first escalator had recently been installed. The
technology was so unfamiliar, it required strategically located spotters with the sole
purpose of instructing people how to ride it. I was thoroughly absorbed watching the
looks on the faces of the kids who were transfixed
 by the site of moving stairs. When
I asked them about happiness, they waved their hands in the air and laughed. They
dismissed happiness as a Western thing, and suggested we stop talking about it and just
get on with the business of living.
5 I had a similar encounter in a remote region of Thailand, where even though electricity
was scarce, there was a general sense of well-being in the village. Therefore, I found that
the kids happily played in the streets, a sight one rarely encounters these days in
Western suburbs. A kindly older woman told me that happiness is because the family is
together. Given the fairly intact
 nature of the rural village, people looked pretty
content with their lot.
6 Another journey took me way into the Australian bush to a place where a toilet capable
of flushing would be a novelty. Kids were busy kicking around a football on the street,
but almost all took time out to speak to me, curious about who I was and what I was
doing there. A young man told me that he felt happy because he helped others. He tried
to perform one act of kindness a day. Consequently, this young man had only seen
television twice in his life.

© Thomas Cockrem/Alamy
7 But it was when I got the chance to visit some of the 60 million newly built homes in
China that all this really hit, well, home. Each new home was wired for the 21st century.
Every room had television screens hooked up to high-speed Internet and each home
came equipped with the latest in electronic gadgetry. In fact, the entire block was
connected to a community intranet designed to help the neighbors stay in touch. As a
result, I couldn't help noticing that there was an important element missing: smiles. I
didn't see one of them.
8 I pursued my questions of happiness with a young Chinese family who had only been
living in the city for two years. Their responses were measured. They said, “We're doing
fine, but there is still so much to achieve before we will become truly happy.” It seems
the family aspired
 to all the things they were seeing being won on the daily online
video shows. “I've seen what you can get, and we still don't have many of the things. So,
for this reason we need to work harder. Then, I'm sure, one day we will get there.”
9 The city was orderly. There were no children playing outside. I'd been instructed to
wear a mask, wrap my shoes in plastic, and sit on a cover on the chair. Everything was to
stay clean and uncontaminated. Almost all the homes I visited around Beijing and
Shanghai shared the same idea that sanitary living meant living a longer life.
10 An old boss of mine once instructed me never to reveal my salary to anyone. He
maintained that it was a necessary secret because, if people knew what others earned,
the results would only lead to unhappiness. He was right. I came to realize that the more
informed we are, the less happy we become because of our tendency to get caught up in
constant comparisons. Working on this principle, it seems that the more limited the
access to electronic media, the more time people spend together as friends and family
and the higher the happiness quotient seemed to be. (Of course, this is just one man's
observation: There is no shortage of studies and best-selling books on the subject.)
Meanwhile, my Chinese family, who had the chance to compare their life with others,
seemed unhappier than ever. Using a bar set by the mass media, they felt they'd failed to
achieve their full potential.
11 Now I know what I should have told my despairing
 taxi driver. The reality is that
the additional effects of our contemporary techno-media wonderland means that
whenever a disaster occurs, almost anywhere in the world, we know about it within
hours. Only recently, we heard about a cruise ship sinking off the coast of Italy, a
shooting incident in Belgium, and a bushfire in Western Australia. Our brains are not
really wired to accommodate such a proliferation
 of bad news, regardless of it
happening thousands of miles away. As a result of one disaster after another
compounds, and increases feelings of helplessness.
12 Does that mean that on some level we've lost our way? Absolutely not. But what it

does mean is that we need to realize that with the ever-increasing media outlets, we
must be vigilant
 in maintaining our own personal view of happiness. No matter how
high you set your goals, you may never actually get there. So, what is my definition of
happiness? A good friend once said to me, “Happiness is not measured by the number of
days you live but, rather, by the number of days you remember.”
13 I'll buy that. One thing is for sure, I won't be forgetting my time with all those happy
people.
Source: Reprinted by permission of Martin Lindstrom. More information on Martin Lindstrom can be found at
martinlindstrom.com.
As you read this passage, you may have noticed a pattern. Although the author compares
reasons for happiness and unhappiness, the overall pattern of organization is cause and
effect. The author focuses on people's happiness and why others do not find happiness.
The author states the main idea in paragraph 4: “I've begun to question the reasons why
some people find happiness wherever they may be, and others don't.” The unhappiness
he experiences around him is the original cause for his study. Some questions you can
ask about the passage are:
What organizational word clues does the author use?
What is the main idea of this reading?
What is the cause for some people's happiness?
What are the effects of their happiness?
How does technology seem to affect happiness?
When authors use cause/effect (pattern that shows why something happened, the effects
of something that occurred, or the outcome of an event) , they show why something
happened, the effects of something that occurred, or the outcome of an event. When you
locate the main idea, the author states or implies a question asking why something
happens and what the effects are. In the previous passage, the author looks at the effects
of people's happiness. The author clearly uses cause/effect organizational word clues:
reasons, therefore, is because, consequently, as a result, results, effects. The author explains
to the reader what causes happiness and unhappiness and how that affects people. It
seems that the less people know and have directly relates to states of happiness. The
author also describes the places where these happier people live as having a “general
sense of well being.” Where technology was more advanced, the people seem less happy.
The gadgetry connects them to the world around them, exposing them to more sadness.
They can see how much others have and feel driven to try to achieve more. Technology
allows people to lose their own personal view of happiness and begin comparing what
they have to what others have.
Table 7.4 provides examples of organizational word clues that signal an author's use of
the cause/effect pattern.
Table 7.4
Organizational Word Clues for Cause/Eﬀect Pattern
since
because
consequently
as a
account

result of
for
reasons
results
eﬀect
for these
reasons
leads to
if… then causes
for this
reason
may be
due to
explains
why
creates
because
of
the
consequences
ﬁndings
thus
analysis
in this
case
types
therefore through
this
To help you understand the cause/effect relationship between ideas in a passage, you can
visually represent the information in your notes by using arrows. Figure 7.3 is an
example of how to visually show the cause/effect relationship from the earlier passage.
Figure 7.3
Visual for Cause/Eﬀect Pattern
Now that you understand cause/effect and the organizational word clues for this pattern,
you can predict the types of exam questions your professor may ask, such as:
What was the cause of some people's happiness?
What were the happiness states of the Chinese families who owned advanced technology?
What are some of the reasons for unhappiness?
Activity 7F
Practice Identifying a Cause/Eﬀect Pattern
Read the following passage from a sociology textbook, and circle the cause/effect
organizational word clues.
1 The number of Americans in their 20s and early 30s living with their parents has
increased rapidly in recent decades. One reason for this phenomenon is economic. In
the first few decades after World War II, housing and education costs were low, and the
number of years one had to spend in school to get a steady, well-paying job was modest.

Today, housing and education costs are high, and young people must typically spend
more years in school before starting their careers (Furstenberg et al., 2004). As a result,
many young people continue to live in their parents' home into their 20s and 30s as a
matter of economic necessity.
2 For upper-middle-class families, a change in child-rearing practices also seems to
account in part for the reluctance of some young adults to grow up. Many well-educated
and well-to-do parents seem to be raising children who are simply too dependent. They
are reluctant to insist that their children get part-time jobs when they are in their
mid-teens, and they neglect to teach them the importance of saving money by always
giving them as much money as they want. They provide too much assistance with
schoolwork (either by themselves or by hiring tutors), and they organize too many
extracurricular activities for their children, thus not giving them enough space to figure
out their interests for themselves.
Source: From BRYM/LIE. Sociology: Your Compass to a New World Brief Edition 2e (p. 68).
Copyright © 2010 Cengage Learning.
What reasons does the author give for adult children living with their
parents?
1.
7-4d Comparison/Contrast
Using what you know about asking questions and organizational word clues, read the
following passage and see if a pattern becomes apparent to you. Using Table 7.1 as a
guide, circle any organizational word clues you notice.
1 There is no universal definition of family because contemporary household
arrangements are complex. Family structures vary across cultures and have changed
over time. In some societies, a family includes uncles, aunts, and other relatives. In other
societies, only parents and their children are viewed as a family.
How Families are Similar
2 The institution of the family exists in some form in all societies. Worldwide, families
are similar in fulfilling some functions, encouraging marriage, and trying to ensure that
people select appropriate mates.
Family Functions
3 Families vary considerably in the United States and globally but must fulfill at least five
important functions to ensure a society's survival (Parsons and Bales 1955):

Sexual regulation. Every society has norms regarding who may engage in sexual
relations, with whom, and under what circumstances. In the United States, having
sexual intercourse with someone younger than 18 (or 16 in some states) is a crime,
but some societies permit marriage with girls as young as 8. One of the oldest rules
that regulate sexual behavior is the incest taboo, a set of cultural norms and laws
that forbid sexual intercourse between close blood relatives, such as brother and
sister, father and daughter, or uncle and niece.
Reproduction and socialization. Reproduction replenishes a country's population.
Through socialization, children acquire language; absorb the accumulated
knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, and values of their culture; and learn the social and
interpersonal skills needed to function effectively in society.
Economic security. Families provide food, shelter, clothing, and other material
resources for their members. Increasingly in the United States, as you'll see
shortly, both parents must work to purchase life's basic necessities such as housing
and food.
Emotional support. Families supply the nurturance, love, and emotional
sustenance that people need to be happy, healthy, and secure. Our friends may
come and go, but our family is usually our emotional anchor.
Social placement. We inherit a social position based on our parents' social class.
Family resources affect children's ability to pursue opportunities such as higher
education, but we can move up or down the social hierarchy in adulthood. Many
contemporary sociologists now include recreation as a basic U.S. family function.
It's not critical for survival but since the 1950s, many parents have focused on
having fun with their children and spending much more time with them on leisure
activities, such as visiting amusements parks and playing video games together
(see Coontz 2005).
Marriage
4 Marriage, a socially approved mating relationship that people expect to be stable and
enduring, is also universal. Countries vary in their specific norms and laws dictating who
can marry whom and at what age, but marriage everywhere is an important rite of
passage that marks adulthood and its related responsibilities, especially providing for a
family.
Endogamy and Exogamy
5 All societies have rules, formal or informal, defining an acceptable marriage partner.
Endogamy (sometimes called homogamy) is the practice of selecting mates from within
one's group. The partners are similar in religion, race, ethnicity, social class, and/or age.
Across the Arab world and in some African nations, about half of married couples
consist of first or second cousins because such unions reinforce kinship ties and
increase a family's resources (Aizenman 2005; Bobroff-Hajal 2006). Exogamy (sometimes
called heterogamy) is the practice of selecting mates from outside one's group. In the
United States, for example, 24 states prohibit marriage between first cousins, even
though violations are rarely prosecuted. In some parts of India, where most people still
follow strict caste rules, the government is encouraging exogamy by offering a $1,250
cash award to any-one who marries someone from a lower caste. This is a hefty sum in

areas where the annual income is less than half that amount (Chu 2007).
How Families Differ
6 There are also considerable worldwide variations in many family characteristics. Some
variations affect the structure of the family, whereas others regulate household
composition, as well as other behaviors.
Nuclear and Extended Families
7 In Western societies, the typical family form is a nuclear family that is made up of
married parents and their biological or adopted children. In much of the world,
however, the most common family form is the extended family, which consists of
parents and children, as well as other kin, such as uncles and aunts, nieces and nephews,
cousins, and grandparents. As the number of single-parent families increases in
industrialized countries, extended families are becoming more common. By helping out
with household tasks and child care, adult members of extended families make it easier
for a single parent to work outside the home. Because the rates of unmarried people
who are living together are high, nuclear families now comprise only 23 percent of all
U.S. families, down from 40 percent in 1970 (U.S. Census Bureau 2010). Residence and
Authority Families also differ in their living arrangements, how they trace their descent,
and who has the most power. In a patrilocal residence pattern, newly married couples
live with the husband's family; in a matrilocal residence pattern, they live with the wife's
family; and in a neolocal residence pattern, the newly married couple sets up its own
residence.
8 Around the world, the most common residence pattern is patrilocal. In industrialized
societies, married couples are typically neolocal. Since the early 1990s, however, the
tendency for young married adults to live with the parents of either the wife or the
husband—or sometimes with the grandparents of one of the partners—has increased. At
least half of all young American couples can't afford a medium-priced house; others
have low-income jobs, are supporting children after a divorce, or just enjoy the comforts
of a parental nest.
9 As a result, a recent phenomenon is the boomerang generation, young adults (and
twice as many are men compared with women) who move back into their parents' home
after living independently for a while or who never leave home in the first place. Parents
try to launch their children into the adult world but, like boomerangs, some keep coming
back. Some U.S. journalists call this group adultolescents because they're still “mooching
off their parents” instead of living on their own.
10 Residence patterns often reflect who has authority within the family. In a matriarchal
family system, the oldest women (usually grandmothers and mothers) control cultural,
political, and economic resources, and consequently, have power over males. Some
American Indian tribes were matriarchal, and in some African countries, the eldest
women have considerable authority and influence. For the most part, however,
matriarchal societies are rare.
11 A more widespread system is a patriarchal family system, in which the oldest men
control cultural, political, and economic resources, and consequently, have power over
females. In some patriarchal societies, women have few rights within the family and
none outside the family, such as not being permitted to vote, drive, work outside the
home, or attend college. In other patriarchal societies, women may have considerable
decision-making power in the home, but few legal or political rights, such as the right to

obtain a divorce or to run for a political office.
12 In an egalitarian family system, both partners share power and authority fairly
equally. Many Americans think they have egalitarian families, but patriarchal families
are more common. For example, employed women shoulder twice as much child care as
men. As you'll see shortly, women are considerably more likely than men to experience
intimate partner violence (IPV) and economic hardship after a divorce. Also, employed
women are twice as likely as their male counterparts to provide caregiving to aging
family members (Houser 2007).
Source: From BENOKRAITIS. SOC 2e (pp. 233–6). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
The brain loves metaphors because a metaphor compares two things. By bringing
in another idea to compare to a new idea, the brain activates a larger network
with more information. It is especially helpful when someone compares
something you do not know much about to something for which you have a good
network of information. In that way, you can use what you do know to help
understand what you do not know. Looking at ways things are similar
(comparison) and ways they are different (contrast) brings a larger network of
information to the thought process while making information easier to
remember. When you study, ask yourself, “How is this like something I already
understand?” The metaphor's image will stay in your mind more easily and help
you recall the new information.
What about the headings of this passage gives you a clue about how the passage might be
organized? What questions could you ask? When looking for the overall pattern of
organization of a reading, look to the major headings to begin looking for clues.
How are families similar?
How are families different?
The first paragraph introduces the topic of the reading—families. After skimming the
headings, notice that the major ones have the words similar and differ. What similarities
do families have? What differences do they have? Paragraph 2 includes this sentence,
which establishes similarities: “The institution of the family exists in some form in all
societies.” Paragraph 3 lists the functions of families, but it appears a listing organization

is limited to only that paragraph. In paragraph 6, the author uses the phrase worldwide
variations, which suggests that differences will be discussed. Paragraphs 6–9 explore the
differences between patrilocal, matrilocal, and neolocal residence patterns. Paragraphs
10 and 11 bring out differences in patriarchal families. The reading is set up in an overall
comparison/contrast pattern of organization.
When authors use comparison/contrast (pattern that examines the similarities or
differences between two or more ideas, people, objects, or events) , they examine the
similarities and/or differences between two or more ideas, people, objects, and events.
For example, a political science author might explore the similarities and differences
between a monarchy and a democracy. An author of a biology textbook could detail the
similarities among animal cells. A textbook on criminal justice might include differences
in prison systems in different countries.
Activity 7G
Describe Similarities and Diﬀerences
Describe the similarities and differences between reading for pleasure and
reading required assignments for classes. Complete the chart provided here.
Similarities
because
Reading for
Pleasure
Required
Reading
Assignments
Reading for
Pleasure
Required
Reading
Assignments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 7.5 provides examples of organizational word clues that signal an author's use of
the comparison/contrast pattern.
Table 7.5
Organizational Word Clues for Comparison/Contrast Pattern
however
on the other hand
but
diﬀerent
variation
although
on the contrary
as
compared with
some… others

like
contrasted with
yet
in the same way
although
similar to
in other words
in opposition
unlike
too
whereas
as compared with
along
similar
similarly
To help you identify the comparison/contrast pattern of organization, you can visually
represent the information in your notes. Using charts or tables can help you organize
the similarities and differences you find in a passage.
Figure 7.4 is an example of how to visually show the previous passage's
comparison/contrast relationship.
Figure 7.4
Visual for Analysis Pattern
Families
 
Similarities
Diﬀerences
1
Five important
functions of a family
Family forms (nuclear,
extended)
2
Marriage is important
Diﬀerent residence
patterns (patrilocal,
matrilocal, neolocal)
3
Rules deﬁning
marriage partners
Diﬀerences among
patriarchal family
systems
Here are some examples of the types of comparison/contrast questions an instructor
might ask on a test about the earlier passage and, therefore, the kind you should ask
yourself before a test:
What similarities does the idea of marriage have among cultures?
How are patrilocal and neolocal residence patterns different?

Activity 7H
Practice Identifying a Comparison/Contrast Pattern
Read the following passage, and circle the comparison/contrast organizational
word clues.
One of the greatest things about being a professor of English is that you get to keep
meeting old friends. For beginning readers, though, every story may seem new, and the
resulting experience of reading is highly disjointed.
 Think of reading on one level, as
one of those papers from elementary school where you connect the dots. I could never
see the picture in a connect-the-dot drawing until I'd put in virtually every line. Other
kids could look at a full page of dots and say, ‘Oh, that's an elephant,’ ‘That's a
locomotive.’ Me, I saw dots. I think it's partly predisposition—
some people handle
two-dimensional visualization better than others—but largely a matter of practice: the
more connect-the-dot drawings you do, the more likely you are to recognize the design
early on. Same with literature. Part of pattern recognition is talent, but a whole lot of it is
practice: if you read enough and give what you read enough thought, you begin to see
patterns, archetypes, recurrences. And as with those pictures among the dots, it's a
matter of learning to look.
Source: Foster, Thomas, C. How to Read Literature Like a Professor. NY: HarperCollins,
2003, pp. 28–29.
List two organizational word clues that do not signal comparison/contrast
in this passage.
1.
What two things does the author compare?
2.
7-4e Deﬁnition/Example
Using what you know about asking questions and organizational word clues, read the
following passage and see if a pattern becomes apparent to you. Using Table 7.1 as a
guide, circle any organizational word clues you notice.
Contracts

1 Both oral and written communication with your company's customers must meet the
requirements of several laws. Among the most important forms of communication is the
contract, a legally binding agreement between two or more parties. A proposal or offer
by one party and acceptance by the other party or parties creates a contract. The
contract may involve completing a particular action, providing a particular item or
service, or refraining from doing a certain action.
2 An enforceable contract may result from an exchange of letters—one that makes a
clear and definite offer and another that accepts the offer without making conditions on
the acceptance—or a series of letters that makes clear the parties have reached
agreement about material elements of the contract. A contract does not have to be
written in a letter or on a particular form if it includes essential elements of the
agreement and has the necessary signatures. Oral agreements are sometimes valid
contracts. A valid contract must have the following elements:
Offer and acceptance
1.
Competency of parties
2.
Legality of subject matter
3.
Consideration (money, motive, or promise exchanged)
4.
iStockphoto.com/Pali Rao
Businesses generally use the services of a lawyer or forms reviewed by a lawyer for all
but the simplest contracts. Examples of contracts are agreements for the sale of goods or
services, transfer of property or interests in property, and contracts of employment.
Source: From KRIZAN. Business Communication 7e (p. 79). Copyright © 2008 Cengage Learning.
Use the title of the passage to create a question: “What are contracts?” or “What about
contracts?” The answer can be found in the passage, where contracts are clearly defined
and examples are given. The organizational word clue is is a subtle example because is is
such a common word. However, in this passage, the word is signals a definition. The title
of the passage tells you that the subject is contracts. What else is in the passage? More
information about what a contract is (definition) and examples of a contract.
Authors use definition/example (pattern that clarifies the meaning of key concepts by
defining them or providing examples) to clarify the meaning of key concepts.
Definition/example is not always obvious at first. Boldface type can sometimes signal a
definition of a key term. When you suspect a definition/example pattern, look for other
clues to confirm your hunch. Headings and organizational word clues can lead you to
decide whether the entire reading is organized in a definition/example pattern.

Table 7.6 provides examples of organizational word clues that signal an author's use of
the definition/example pattern.
Table 7.6
Organizational Word Clues for Deﬁnition/Example Pattern
for example
as deﬁned
as
means the
same as
translated
as
synonymous
with
another
meaning
also
referred to
as
interpreted
as
such as
states that which
means
seen as
After reading this passage and identifying the author's pattern of organization as
definition/example, you can visually represent the information as shown in Figure 7.5.
Figure 7.5
Visual for Deﬁnition/Example Pattern
Here are some examples of the types of definition questions an instructor might ask on
an exam based on the passage and, therefore, the kind you should ask yourself:
What are contracts?
Give an example of a contract.
Activity 7I
Practice Identifying a Deﬁnition/Example Pattern
The following passage from a biology textbook uses a definition/example pattern
of organization. Circle the organizational word clues; you might notice that there
are not many in this passage.
1 You could test your hypothesis by performing an experiment. An experiment is a
procedure designed to test some idea. In this case, all you would need to do would be to
try the light switch in the kitchen. If the lights in the kitchen worked, you would reject
your original hypothesis and form a new one. Perhaps, you hypothesize, the circuit

breaker to your study had been tripped. To test this idea, you would “perform” another
experiment, locating the circuit breaker to see if it was turned off. If the circuit breaker
was off, you would conclude that your second hypothesis was correct. To substantiate
your conclusion, you would throw the switch and see if your computer worked.
2 This process involving observations, hypothesis, and experimentation forms the
foundation of the scientific method. Although scientific experimentation may be much
more complicated than discovering the reason for a computer failure, the process itself
is the same.
3 Proper experimentation in biology usually requires two groups: experimental and
control. The experimental group is the one that is tested or manipulated in some way.
The control group is not tested or manipulated. Valid conclusions come from such
comparisons because, in a properly run experiment, both groups are treated identically
except in one way. The difference in treatment is known as the experimental variable.
Consider an example to illustrate this point. In order to test the effect of a new drug on
laboratory mice, a good scientist would start with a group of mice of the same age, sex,
weight, genetic composition, and so on. These animals would be divided into two groups,
the experimental and control groups. Both groups would be treated the same
throughout the experiment, receiving the same diet and being housed in the same type
of cage at the same temperature. The only difference between the two should be the
drug given to the experimental group. Consequently, any observed differences between
the groups could be attributed to the treatment (the experimental variable).
Source: Chiras, Daniel D. Human Biology. Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2012, pp. 10–11.
What is the definition of experiment?
1.
What example of an experiment is given?
2.
7-4f Sequence
Using what you know about asking questions and organizational word clues, read the
following passage and see if a pattern becomes apparent to you. Using Table 7.1 as a
guide, circle any organizational word clues you notice.
Journals
1 Professors assign weekly or monthly journals to illustrate more vividly the importance
of journal writing for the study of history. In the computer and telephone age, people
rarely write diaries or journals. For centuries, however, this was a common means by
which people organized their thoughts and described their lives.

2 Journals written by historical figures such as Abigail Adams, Marco Polo, or
Christopher Columbus will appear in class syllabi. Reading them provides you with an
invaluable insight into their thoughts and their activities at pivotal (vitally important,
critical) moments in world history. But writing your own journal will give you added
insight into the experiences and motivations of these men and women. You will discover
that it is more difficult to articulate (express) your opinions on paper than in your own
mind. As you write your own journal, going through the same process as these other
journal writers, you will be better equipped to analyze their words and deeds. You will
recognize, for example, how opinions change as external circumstances change. Did
Marco Polo's views of non-Europeans change during the course of his travels? If so, why
did they change? What were the circumstances surrounding his change of opinion?
3 The first step in journal writing is to do the assignment required by the professor. Even
if she collects the journals only once or twice during the semester, you have to keep up
with the work. If the professor requires you to write in your journal once a week, write
in it once a week. Don't wait until the deadline to write out three or four quick entries.
The professor wants to see the progression of your views, which may change
dramatically as new information comes to light in the classroom and the class readings.
4 The second step is to think of the journal in the same way you think of any other
written assignment. In other words, you should follow all grammar and spelling rules.
Finally, make sure you follow the professor's instructions. Some journal assignments
require that you give personal insights about your own life; some ask you to analyze the
different readings and topics in class. If you do not understand the assignment, ask the
professor to clarify what he wants.
Source: From BERKIN/ANDERSON. The History Handbook (pp. 48–9). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
When you see the title of this passage, you might decide that the author will define
journals. As you read the first paragraph, you realize, instead, that he assumes you know
what journals are and spends his time trying to persuade you that they are worthwhile.
The author continues with the benefits of journal writing in paragraph 2 and then
mentions the word process. Paragraphs 3 and 4 actually begin with sequence/process
organizational word clues: the first step, the second step. The author uses a sequence
pattern of organization.
When authors use sequence (pattern that shows the steps in a process or the
chronological order of certain events) , they show the steps in a process or the
chronological order of certain events. The sequence pattern is also sometimes known as
process. Most writing organized in a sequential pattern is fairly easy to recognize.
However, sequence is not to be confused with listing because in sequence the order in
which the steps or events occurred is important. A list is just a list. When you begin your
semester, you get lists of books you need to purchase for your classes. It will not matter
if you buy your biology textbook before your history book, as long you buy both before
classes start. On the other hand, if you write down directions to a different campus
where your friend attends college, the order of the directions matter because they must
be followed in sequence.
Table 7.7 provides examples of organizational word clues that signal an author's use of
sequence.
Table 7.7

Organizational Word Clues for Sequence Pattern
ﬁrst…
second…
third
next
order of
events
stages
the
following
phases
processes
cycles
sequence
steps
procedures
ﬁrst of all
ﬁnally
another
way
presented
as a series
of events
in a
particular
order
 
 
To help you understand the sequence of steps or events in a passage, you can visually
represent the information in your notes. Timelines or flowcharts are especially useful
for representing sequence. Figure 7.6 is an example of how to visually show the
sequence relationship from the earlier passage.
Figure 7.6
Visual for Sequence Pattern
Journals
Do the assignment required by the professor. (Do not wait until the last
minute.)
1.
Think of the journal like any other written assignment. (Observe grammar
and spelling rules.)
2.
Follow professor's instructions.
3.
Here are some examples of the types of exam questions an instructor might ask based
on the passage and, therefore, the kind you should ask yourself before a test:
Why is the first step in journal writing important?
What is the second step in journal writing?
Activity 7J
Practice Identifying a Sequence Pattern

Read the following passage from a history textbook. Circle any organizational
word clues that help you identify a sequence pattern, and notice how the dates
help you follow the sequence.
1 The Ottoman army, led by Sultan Suleyman the Magnificent, arrived at Mohcs, on the
plains of Hungary, or an August morning in 1526. The Turkish force numbered about
100,000 men, and in its baggage were three hundred new long- range cannons. Facing
them was a somewhat larger European force, clothed in heavy armor but armed with
only one hundred older cannons.
iStockphoto.com/Duncan Walker
2 The battle began at noon and was over in two hours. The flower of Hungarian cavalry
had been destroyed, and twenty thousand foot soldiers had drowned in a nearby swamp.
The Ottomans had lost fewer than two hundred men. Two weeks later, they seized the
Hungarian capital at Budapest and prepared to lay siege (military action in which forces
surround an area) to the nearby Austrian city of Vienna. Europe was in a panic. It was to
be the high point of Turkish expansion in Europe.
3 In launching their Age of Exploration, European rulers had hoped that by controlling
global markets, they could cripple the power of Islam and reduce its threat to the
security of Europe. But the dream of Christian nations to expand their influence around
the globe at the expense of their great Muslim rival had not been achieved. On the
contrary, the Muslim world, which seemed to have entered a period of decline with the
collapse of the Abbasid caliphate during the era of the Mongols, managed to revive in the
shadow of Europe's Age of Exploration, a period that witnessed the rise of three great
Muslim empires. These powerful Muslim states of the Ottomans, the Safavids, and the
Mughals dominated the Middle East and the South Asian subcontinent and brought
stability to a region that had been in turmoil for centuries.
4 This stability lasted for about two hundred years. By the end of the eighteenth century,

much of India and the Middle East had come under severe European pressure and had
returned to a state of anarchy (a condition without governmental control or military) ,
and the Ottoman Empire had entered a period of gradual decline. But that decline was
due more to internal factors than to the challenge posed by a resurgent (rise that
happens after a time of no movement) Europe.
Source: From DUIKER/SPIELVOGEL. World History 6e (pp. 419–420). Copyright © 2011
Cengage Learning.
What can you tell from the sequence of events about the Muslim empires?
1.
Create a visual that depicts the sequence pattern of this passage.
2.
What is the main idea of the passage?
3.
Activity 7K
Identify Patterns of Organization
Based on what you have learned about patterns of organization, try to determine
what pattern is used in each of the following passages. Circle any organizational
word clues that signal the overall pattern of organization.
If for some reason you left college without developing the basic skills in the ten
know-how groups, graduate school can accomplish what your college education
did not. First of all, most of your peers, if you go to a halfway program, will have
those skills. Just associating and competing with them will raise your level. In
addition, they will have other more advanced skills than you might have, which
they will help you learn. Second, graduate programs tend to be more skill oriented.
They will have some courses that provide the opportunity to develop basic and
advanced skills. Third most good graduate programs will have significant
internship or fieldwork requirements.
Source: Coplin, Bill. (2003. 10 Things Employers Want You to Learn in College. Ten
Speed Press: Berkeley, California. p. 196.
1.
What is the overall pattern of organization?

2
3
4
If you were arrested for a crime in France, the very fact that you were arrested
would place the responsibility on your shoulders to prove that you were
innocent. On the other hand, if you are arrested for a crime in the United
States, the responsibility is on the state (processing attorney) to prove that you
are guilty. In France there is a presumption of guilt when you are accused of a
crime. But, in this country there is always a presumption that the person
accused of a crime is innocent until he is proven guilty. This is a great
protection to the individual. It prevents many innocent people from being sent
to a prison for crimes they didn't commit. On the other hand, it is not
uncommon for the accused in France to spend three months or more in
prison; accused, but never convicted.
Source: Crabtree, Arthur. (1964). The Law and You. Holt, Rinehart and Winston: New
York.
What is the overall method of organization?
Poverty is staying up all night on cold nights to watch the fire, knowing one
spark on the newspaper covering the walls means your sleeping children die in
flames. In summer, poverty is watching gnats and flies devour your baby's
tears when he cries. The screens are torn and you pay so little rent you know
they will never be fixed. Poverty means insects in your food, in your nose, in
your eyes, and crawling over you when you sleep. Poverty is hoping it never
rains because diapers won't dry when it rains and soon you are using
newspapers. Poverty is seeing your children forever with runny noses. Paper
handkerchiefs cost money and all your rags you need for other things. Even
more costly are antihistamines. Poverty is cooking without food and cleaning
without soap.
Source: Goodwin Parker, Jo. What is Poverty? America's Other Children: Public
Schools Outside Suburbia by George Henderson. University of Oklahoma Press, 1971.
What is the overall pattern of organization?
The Thirty Years' War ruined the economy and decimated the population in
many parts of the empire and had long-term political consequences for the

5
empire as a whole. One reason for the war's devastation was a novel
application of firepower to warfare that increased both the size of armies and
their deadly force in battle. This was the use of volley fire, the arrangement of
foot soldier in parallel lines so that one line of men could fire while another
reloaded. This tactic, pioneered in the Netherlands around the turn of the
century, was refined by Gustav Adolf of Sweden. He amassed large numbers of
troops and increased the rate of fire so that virtually continuous barrage was
maintained. He also used maneuverable field artillery to protect the massed
infantry from cavalry charges.
Source: From Nobel/Strauss/Osheim/Neuschel. Western Civilization Beyond
Boundaries 6e. Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
What is the overall pattern of organization?
1 Biologists look at all aspects of life, past and present. Their focus takes them
all the way down to atoms, and all the way up to global relationships among
organisms and the environment. Through their work, we glimpse a great
pattern of organization in nature.
2 The pattern starts at the level of atoms. Atoms are fundamental building blocks
of all substances, living and nonliving.
3 At the next level of organization, atoms join with other atoms, forming
molecules. Among the molecules are complex carbohydrates and lipids, proteins,
and nucleic acids. Today, only living cells make these “molecules of life” in nature.
4 The pattern crosses the threshold to life when many molecules are organized as
cells. A cell is the smallest unit of life that can survive and reproduce on its own,
given information in DNA, energy inputs, raw materials, and suitable
environmental conditions.
5 An organism is an individual that consists of one or more cells. In larger
multicelled organisms, trillions of cells organize into tissues, organs, and organ
systems, all interacting in tasks that keep the whole body alive.
Source: From Starr. Biology: The Unity and Diversity of Life 12e (pp. 4–5). Copyright ©
2009 Cengage Learning.
What is the overall pattern of organization?

6
7
Blood returning to the heart from the body tissues is low in oxygen and high in
carbon dioxide. This blood first enters the right atrium and flows into the right
ventricle. Next, the right ventricle pumps it through the pulmonary arteries to
the lungs. The pulmonary arteries are the only arteries that carry oxygen-poor
blood. All other arteries carry oxygen-rich blood. As the blood travels through
the capillaries in the lungs, it gains oxygen and gets rid of carbon dioxide.
Source: Cebco. Biology: The Study of Life. Allyn and Bacon: Newton, MA. p. 155.
What is the overall pattern of organization?
1 Suppose you had been born in 1940. Your childhood and adolescence would
have been very differen from today: no Internet, computers, IPods, cell
phones, air conditioners, automatic dishwashers, or appliances for washing
and drying clothes. You would have listened to radio instead of watching
television. Long-distance telephone calls were a luxury. Few women or
minorities went to college, and those few had limited job opportunities
afterward. If you had lived then, how would you have been different?
2 People of different generations differ in many ways, which psychologists call
cohort effects. A cohort group of people born at a particular time, or a group of
people who enter an organization at a particular time is a group of people born at a
particular time or a group of people who enter an organization at a particular time.
3 The era
 in which you grew up is a powerful influence on your personality,
social behavior, and attitudes. For example, people whose youth spanned the Great
Depression and World War II learned to save money and to sacrifice their own
pleasures for the needs of the country. Even after the war was over and prosperity
reigned,
 most remained thrifty and cautious (Rogler, 2002). In contrast, young
people of today have had much more leisure time (Larson, 2001). Jean Twenge
(2006) has compared cohort effects to the differences among cultures. Indeed, the
technology you have grown up with may seem unfamiliar and alien to your
grandparents, who in some ways are like “immigrants” to modern culture. Many
aspects of intellect and personality differ between generations, as we shall
examine in later chapters.
Source: From KALAT. Introduction to Psychology 9e (pp. 160–1). Copyright © 2011
Cengage Learning.

8
9
What is the overall pattern of organization?
1 Sports were foreign to me until I gave birth to three sons. Sports can be
defined as a particular activity, as in athletic game. But I learned it was more…
Webster didn't play sports! Each one of my sons introduced me to this leisure
obsession simply as a result of his being born. It's as if the sports were born
right along with them, through them; in a sense I guess they were. For
example, each one had a golf club, custom made, before he learned how to
walk. Each one had been gifted hockey, baseball, and soccer jerseys, in sizes
birth to Toddler 2 before taking his first breath of air. Each one had at least one
or three of every sport's balls manufactured at the time of his birth. And, I'm
sure I remember that their first spoken words were “Red Wings, Tigers and
Lions….oh my.”
2 Ah, yes, to illustrate my point: the lessons. The lessons began the moment each
one could balance himself. Each was put into the middle of the ice with a small
chair and encouraged for 30 minutes to skate forward, thrown into a pool to see if
he could float, lined up against a wall to learn how to hold and swing a bat, put into
a sand-trap to punch a little white ball out with that miniature club, or to run and
kick the “big ball.” Even eating dinner became a sport.
3 In addition to hockey, swimming, and soccer there was T-Ball, track, and softball
along with college golf and lacrosse. My sons were rewarded with souvenirs for
their efforts. Their efforts are synonymous with rooms filled with team photos,
posters, plaques, team books, medallions, sticks, and certificates.
What is the overall pattern of organization?
These facts have serious implications. They tell us a great deal about the
impact geography and especially climate have on the people of an area and
their economy. Much of Eurasia is subject to great ranges of temperature.
Russia and the former Soviet Union have occupied a very extensive landmass
with no large bodies of water to modify temperature extremes. Thus, much of
Siberia can be blisteringly hot in the summer and frigidly cold in the winter.
Source: Richards and Vaillant. From Russia to USSR and Beyond, 2nd Ed. White
Plains, NY: Longman. pp. 4–5.

10
What is the overall pattern of organization?
1 Every living thing on earth is made up of primarily water. A tomato (S) about
95% H O. Human beings are approximately 65% water (a character on Star
Trek: The Next Generation referred to us as “ugly bags of mostly water”), and
men are sloshier than women. We can live without food for about thirty days,
but without water we would last only a week. Americans use more than 175
gallons of water a day per person.
2 The traits of water are interesting. Water is the only substance to be found in
solid, liquid, and gaseous states in normal earth conditions. “Because of nature's
water cycle,” the World Book Encyclopedia tells us an important finding, “there is as
much water on the earth today as there ever was—or ever will be. Water changes
only from one form to another, and moves from one place to another. The water
you bathed in last night might have flowed in Russia's Volga River last year. Or
perhaps Alexander the Great drank it more than 2,000 years ago.”
Source: Adapted from Malesky, Kee. All Facts Considered. John Wiley & Sons:
Hoboken, New Jersey, 2010, pp. 125–126.
What is the overall pattern of organization?
1.
7-4g Mixed Patterns
Some longer readings use more than one pattern of organization within sentences,
different patterns between paragraphs, and an altogether different overall pattern.
Other readings have a mix of dominant overall patterns, not just one. No matter what
the reading, begin by questioning yourself as you read so you can figure out an author's
point and the path he or she takes to get to that point.
To do this, ask questions of headings and subheadings if there are any. If there are no
headings, question yourself from the topic. The answers to all these questions will lead
you close to the main idea. As you look for it, search also for the pattern the main idea
fits into, the pattern of organization that the author purposefully picked in order to
make his point. When you recognize any organizational word clues, look at what is
around them and decide if they tell you something about the sentence, paragraph, or
2

whole reading.
Consider the following passage from novelist Stephen King about writing. Notice that the
organizational word clues are circled. Read the passage carefully, and ask yourself
questions to figure out the main idea and overall pattern of organization.
1 In my view, stories and novels consist of three parts:  narration, which moves the
story from point A to point B and finally  to point Z; description, which creates a sensory
reality for the reader; and dialogue, which brings characters to life through their speech.
2 You may wonder where plot is in all this. The answer—my answer, anyway—is
nowhere. I won't try to convince you that I've never plotted any more than I'd try to
convince you that I never told a lie, but I do both as infrequently as possible. I distrust
plots for two reasons: first, because  our lives are largely plotless, even when you add
in all our reasonable precautions and careful planning; and second, because  I believe
plotting and the spontaneity of real creation aren't compatible. It's best that I be as clear
about this as I can—I want you to understand that my basic belief about the making of
stories is that they pretty much make themselves. The job of the writer is to give them a
place to grow (and transcribe them, of course). If you can see things this way (or at least
try to), we can work together comfortably. If, on the other hand,  you decide I'm crazy,
that's fine. You won't be the first.
3 When, during the course of an interview for The New Yorker, I told the interviewer
(Mark Singer) that I believed stories are  found things, like fossils in the ground, he said
that he didn't believe me. I replied that that was fine, as long as he believed that I
believed it. And I do. Stories aren't souvenir tee-shirts or GameBoys. Stories are  relics,
part of an undiscovered pre-existing world. The writer's job is to use the tools in his or
her toolbox to get as much of each one out of the ground intact as possible. Sometimes
the fossil you uncover is  small; a seashell. Sometimes it's enormous, a Tyrannosaurus
Rex with all those gigantic ribs and grinning teeth. Either way, short story or
thousand-page whopper of a novel, the techniques of excavation remain basically the
same.
4 No matter how good you are, no matter how much experience you have, it's probably
impossible to get the entire fossil out of the ground without a few breaks and losses. To
get even most of it, the shovel must give way to more delicate tools: airhose, palm-pick,
perhaps even a toothbrush. Plot is a far bigger tool, the writer's jackhammer. You can
liberate a fossil from hard ground with a jackhammer, no argument there, but you know
as well as I do that the jackhammer is going to break almost as much stuff as it liberates.
It's clumsy, mechanical, anti-creative. Plot is, I think, the good writer's last resort and the
dullard's first choice. The story which results from it is apt to feel artificial and labored.
5 I lean more heavily on intuition, and have been able to do that because my books tend
to be based on situation rather than story. Some of the ideas which have produced those
books are more complex than others, but  the majority start out  with the stark
simplicity of a department store window display or a waxwork tableau. I want to put a
group of characters (perhaps a pair; perhaps even just one) in some sort of predicament
and then watch them try to work themselves free. My job isn't to help them work their
way free, or manipulate them to safety—those are jobs which require the noisy
jackhammer of plot— but  to watch what happens and then write it down.
6 The situation comes first.  The characters—always flat and unfeatured, to begin
with—come next. Once these things are fixed in my mind, I begin  to narrate. I often
have an idea of what the outcome may be, but I have never demanded of a set of

characters that they do things my way. On the contrary,  I want them to do things their
way. In some instances, the outcome is what I visualized. In most, however,  it's
something I never expected. For a suspense novelist, this is a great thing. I am, after all,
not just the novel's creator but its first reader. And if I'm not able to guess with any
accuracy how the damned thing is going to turn out, even with my inside knowledge of
coming events, I can be pretty sure of keeping the reader in a state of page-turning
anxiety. Any why worry about the ending anyway? Why be such a control freak? Sooner
or later  every story comes out somewhere.
Source: Reprinted with the permission of Scribner, a Division of Simon & Schuster, Inc. and The Lotts Agency, from On
Wrting: A Memoir Of The Craft by Stephen King. Copyright © 2000 by Stephen King. All rights reserved.
This passage has no headings or subheadings, so you have to begin reading and ask
yourself, “What is the author saying about writing?” Look for that answer as you read,
and note organizational word clues as you go along. Paragraph 1 talks about parts of a
story. Could this be analysis? Paragraph 2 deals with why the author does not like
planned plots in books. Could this be cause/effect? In the same paragraph, the author
draws our attention to one point: “It's best that I be as clear about this as I can—I want
you to understand that my basic belief about the making of stories is that they pretty
much make themselves.” He gets our attention by using phrases of emphasis. At the end
of paragraph 2, you find the organizational word clue, on the other hand. What is being
contrasted? Opinions about Stephen King—is he crazy or not? The reading is about
stories, not King, so on the other hand just organizes those two ideas (is he crazy or not)
and not the larger reading.
Paragraph 3 goes in depth about what stories are. Is this analysis? King even creates a
metaphor of excavating a fossil to illustrate his point that stories are there to be
uncovered. Paragraph 4 continues with the analysis. Paragraph 5 contains a sequence
word clue and two comparison/contrast word clues. What is the author's purpose in
paragraph 5? To describe the process of creating a story. Paragraph 6 continues with this
process.
Now put it all together: The topic is writing stories. What is the main idea? What does the
author say about stories? What is emphasized as a central point? How does the author
frame his support for this main idea? He used a lot of word clues but some showed
relationships among sentences and other relationships among ideas in paragraphs.
What is the overall pattern? Ask yourself a question about the main idea. How do stories
make themselves? To answer this question, the author takes a lot of time to make sure
you understand what a story is, how it is a fossil waiting to be unearthed. He uses
analysis to do this. Then he explains the process he takes in writing a story. He uses
sequence to do this. The overall pattern is mixed: analysis and sequence.
Remember that the main idea and the overall pattern of organization should
complement one another. The main idea fits into the pattern. Good questioning helps
you uncover both.
Activity 7L
Identify Mixed Patterns
The following passage has a mixed pattern of organization. The main idea is
highlighted for you. Organizational clue words are circled, but not all of them
relate to the overall pattern. Read through the passage carefully, and question

yourself using what you have learned.
What is the organization of paragraph 1?
1.
In paragraph 2, what is the word clue concluded a clue to? Is it an
organizational word clue or a clue to something else?
2.
How are paragraphs 3 and 4 organized?
3.
What is compared in paragraphs 5 and 6?
4.

What is the author's purpose in paragraphs 5 and 6? What causes
intellectual growth?
5.
What two patterns dominate the organization of the passage?
6.
7-5 Staying Focused on the Overall Pattern
It is easy to get distracted by the individual paragraphs and miss the overall pattern of
organization of the larger reading. One way you can stay focused on the overall pattern
within a longer reading is using the note card technique.
This technique is simple and effective. Using index cards or half sheets of paper, write
the main idea and pattern of organization of each paragraph. Then spread the cards or
sheets out and determine which primary pattern of organization was used by the author.
This technique makes it easier to see the larger, overall pattern no matter what is going
on with each individual paragraph.
Activity 7M
Practice the Note Card Technique
Use the note card technique to help you recognize which patterns are being used
in the following passage from a sociology textbook. Read the passage, and
complete the following tasks to help you determine the overall pattern of
organization:
Circle organizational word clues, and identify which pattern of
organization is being used in each paragraph.
1.
Write each paragraph's pattern of organization on a separate note card. On
the same note card, write the paragraph's main idea.
2.
Put cards in piles according to their pattern of organization.
3.
Decide the overall pattern of organization of the passage by seeing which
pile has the most cards. Note: If a paragraph does not have obvious word
clues, you can still determine its organization. For example, an author may
elaborate on examples, a cause, or a reason without using organizational
word clues.
4.

(1)
(2)
(3)
Resocialization and Total Institutions
1 In concluding our discussion of socialization agents, we must underline the
importance of resocialization
 in contributing to the lifelong process of social
learning. Resocialization takes place when powerful socializing agents deliberately
cause rapid change in people's values, roles, and self-conceptions, sometimes against
their will.
2 You can see resocialization at work in the ceremonies that are staged when someone
joins a fraternity, a sorority, the U.S. Marines, or a religious order. Such a ceremony, or
initiation rite, for example, signifies the transition of the individual from one group to
another and ensures his or her loyalty to the new group. Initiation rites require new
recruits to abandon old self-perceptions and assume new identities. To illustrate this
point, when initiation rites take place during resocialization, they typically involve a
three-stage ceremony:
separation from one's old status and identity (ritual rejection);
degradation (lower in the opinion of others or in self respect) , disorientation,
and stress (ritual death); and
acceptance of the new group culture and status (ritual rebirth).
3 Much resocialization takes place in what sociologist Erving Goffman (1961) called total
institutions. Total institutions are settings where people are isolated from the larger
society and under the strict control and constant supervision of a specialized staff.
Asylums and prisons are examples of total institutions. Because of the “pressure cooker”
atmosphere in such institutions, resocialization in total institutions is often rapid and
thorough, even in the absence of initiation rites.
4 A famous failed experiment illustrates the immense resocializing capacity of total
institutions (Haney, Banks, and Zimbardo, 1973; Zimbardo, 1972). In the early 1970s,
researchers at Stanford University created their own mock prison. They paid two dozen
male volunteers to act as guards and inmates. The volunteers were mature, emotionally
stable, intelligent college students from middle-class homes. By the flip of a coin, half the
volunteers were designated prisoners, the other half guards. At the mock prison, each
prisoner was stripped, deloused, put into prison-issue clothes, given a number, and
placed in a cell with two other inmates. The guards made up their own rules for
maintaining law and order.
5 To understand better what it means to be a prisoner or a prison guard, the researchers
wanted to observe and record social interaction in the mock prison for 2 weeks.
However, they were forced to end the experiment abruptly after only 6 days because
what they witnessed frightened them. In less than a week, the prisoners and prison
guards could no longer tell the difference between the roles they were playing and their
“real” selves. Much of the socialization that these young men had undergone over a
period of about 20 years was quickly suspended.
6 About a third of the guards began to treat the prisoners like despicable
 animals,
taking pleasure in cruelty. Even the guards who were regarded by the prisoners as tough
but fair stopped short of interfering in the tyrannical and arbitrary use of power by the
most sadistic
 guards. All of the prisoners became servile and dehumanized, thinking
only about survival, escape, and their growing hatred of the guards. If they were thinking

as college students, they could have walked out of the experiment at any time. Some of
the prisoners did in fact beg for parole. However, by the fifth day of the experiment they
were so programmed to think of themselves as prisoners that they returned docilely to
their cells when their request for parole was denied.
7 The Stanford experiment suggests that your sense of self and the roles you play are not
as fixed as you may think. Radically alter your social setting, and like the college students
in the experiment, your self-conception and patterned behavior are likely to change too.
Such change is most evident among people undergoing resocialization in total
institutions. However, the sociological eye is able to observe the flexibility of the self in
all social settings, including those that routinely greet the individual in adult life.
Adapted Source: From BRYM/LIE. Sociology: Your Compass to a New World Brief Edition 2e
(pp. 75–6). Copyright © 2010 Cengage Learning.
What is the overall pattern of organization of this passage?
1.
7-6 Chapter Review
7-6a Practice with a Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Based on the title, what do you expect the following passage to be about?
1.
Before you read, predict what you think the author is going to say about
neat and sloppy people.
2.
As you read, circle all the organizational word clues that signal the overall
pattern of organization.
3.
Neat People vs. Sloppy People
By Suzanne Britt

1 I’ve finally figured out the difference between neat people and sloppy people. The
distinction is, as always, moral. Neat people are lazier and meaner than sloppy people.
2 Sloppy people, you see, are not really sloppy. Their sloppiness is merely the
unfortunate consequence of their extreme moral rectitude (correctness of procedure) .
Sloppy people carry in their mind's eye a heavenly vision, a precise plan that is so
stupendous, so perfect, it can't be achieved in this world or the next.
3 Sloppy people live in Never-Never Land. Someday is their métier (area in which one is
considered an expert) . Someday they are planning to alphabetize all their books and set
up home catalogs. Someday they will go through their wardrobes and mark certain items
for tentative mending and certain items for passing on to relatives of similar shape and
size. Someday sloppy people will make family scrapbooks into which they will put
newspaper clippings, postcards, locks of hair, and the dried corsage from their senior
prom. Someday they will file everything on the surface of their desks, including the cash
receipts from coffee purchases at the snack shop. Someday they will sit down and read
all the back issues of The New Yorker.
4 For all these noble reasons and more, sloppy people never get neat. They aim too high
and wide. They save everything, planning someday to file, order, and straighten out the
world. But while these ambitious plans take clearer and clearer shape in their heads, the
books spill from the shelves onto the floor, the clothes pile up in the hamper and closet,
the family mementos accumulate in every drawer, the surface of the desk is buried
under mounds of paper, and the unread magazines threaten to reach the ceiling.
5 Sloppy people can't bear to part with anything. They give loving attention to every
detail. When sloppy people say they're going to tackle the surface of a desk, they really
mean it. Not a paper will go unturned; not a rubber band will go unboxed. Four hours or
two weeks into the excavation (area dug out) , the desk looks exactly the same, primarily
because the sloppy person is meticulously (extremely careful in attending to details)
creating new piles of papers with new headings and scrupulously stopping to read all the
old book catalogs before he throws them away. On the other hand, a neat person would
just bulldoze the desk.
6 Neat people are bums and clods at heart. They have cavalier attitudes toward
possessions, including family heirlooms. Everything is just another dust-catcher to
them. If anything collects dust, it's got to go and that's that. Neat people will toy with the
idea of throwing the children out of the house just to cut down on the clutter.
7 Neat people don't care about process. They like results. What they want to do is get the
whole thing over with so they can sit down and watch the rasslin' on TV. Neat people
operate on two unvarying principles: Never handle any item twice, and throw everything
away.
8 Unlike the messy person, the only thing messy in a neat person's house is the trash can.
The minute something comes to a neat person's hand, he will look at it, try to decide if it
has immediate use and, finding none, throw it in the trash.
9 Neat people are especially vicious with mail. They never go through their mail unless
they are standing directly over a trash can. If the trash can is beside the mailbox, even
better. All ads, catalogs, pleas for charitable contributions, church bulletins, and money-
saving coupons go straight into the trash can without being opened. All letters from
home, postcards from Europe, bills and paychecks are opened, immediately responded
to, and then dropped in the trash can. Neat people keep their receipts only for tax

purposes. That's it. No sentimental salvaging of birthday cards or the last letter a dying
relative ever wrote. Into the trash it goes.
10 Neat people place neatness above everything else, even economics. They are
incredibly wasteful. Neat people throw away several toys every time they walk through
the den. I knew a neat person once who threw away a perfectly good dish drainer
because it had mold on it. The drainer was too much trouble to wash. And neat people
sell their furniture when they move. They will sell a La-Z-Boy recliner while you are
reclining in it.
11 Neat people are no good to borrow from. Neat people buy everything in expensive
little single portions. They get their flour and sugar in two-pound bags. They wouldn't
consider clipping a coupon, saving a leftover, reusing plastic nondairy whipped cream
containers, or rinsing off tin foil and draping it over the unmoldy dish drainer. You can
never borrow a neat person's newspaper to see what's playing at the movies. Neat people
have the paper all wadded up and in the trash by 7:05 A.M.
12 Neat people cut a clean swath (a path) through the organic as well as the inorganic
world. People, animals, and things are all one to them. They are so insensitive. After
they've finished with the pantry, the medicine cabinet, and the attic, they will throw out
the red geranium (too many leaves), sell the dog (too many fleas), and send the children
off to boarding school (too many scuff-marks on the hardwood floors).
Source: Copyright © Suzanne Britt. Reprinted by permission of the author.
Check Your Understanding
Use context clues and word part analysis to define the following words
from this passage.
tentative (paragraph 3): 
accumulate (paragraph 4): 
scrupulously (paragraph 5): 
4.
Highlight the main idea of this passage in green.
5.
Identify the overall pattern of organization of this passage, and explain how
you determined it.
6.
Create a visual representation of this passage on a separate piece of paper
that covers at least four of its paragraphs.
7.
What is the author's purpose for writing this essay?
8.
List the major supporting details of this passage.
9.

Decide if you think the author is a neat or sloppy person, and provide at
least two reasons for your decision.
10.
Chapter Review
7-6b Chapter Summary
Patterns are everywhere. You have recognized them and used them your whole life,
from understanding the organization of a grocery store to figuring out a Sudoku puzzle.
Your brain naturally seeks order in things, which is why it is satisfying when you can
figure out things around you. Maximize this tendency in your brain to make order of
things by looking for patterns in your college reading. Authors write in organized ways
with the hope that you understand what they are saying. As you read, look for these
patterns of organization. They will help you understand what authors are thinking.
Effective strategies for recognizing patterns of organization are to question yourself and
look for organizational word clues. You should question yourself not only about the title
or heading, if there is one, but also about each paragraph you are reading. The answers
to your questions can lead you to the main idea and can help you navigate an author's
pattern of organization. Common patterns of organization are: listing, analysis,
cause/effect, comparison/contrast, definition/example, and sequence. These patterns can
be found in individual paragraphs but can also be the larger organization of an entire
reading. Sometimes authors will use more than one pattern of organization as the
dominant pattern, called mixed patterns. The note card technique can help you stay
focused on the overall pattern of organization of what you read.
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw the amount of dendrites you imagine that you have now about recognizing
patterns of organization. Compare your drawing of dendrites with what you drew
at the beginning of the chapter. If the amounts are different, explain why.

pattern of organization
1.
organizational word clues
2.
listing
3.
analysis
4.
cause/effect
5.
comparison/contrast
6.
definition/example
7.
sequence
8.
mixed patterns of organization
9.
pattern that shows why
something happened, the
effects of something that
occurred, or the outcome of an
event
a.
pattern that clarifies the
meaning of key concepts by
defining them or providing
examples
b.
words or phrases that signal a
pattern of organization an
author uses for a reading
c.
pattern that examines the
similarities or differences
between two or more ideas,
d.
Comprehension Check
What is the most valuable point you learned in this chapter?
If you could ask the authors a question about this chapter, what would
you ask?
Chapter Review
7-6c Post Test
Part 1: Objective Questions
Match the key terms from the chapter in Column A to their definitions in
Column B.
Column A Column B

people, objects, or events
pattern that lists ideas, events,
or concepts
e.
pattern that breaksss a concept
down into its specific
characteristics, properties, or
basic elements
f.
pattern that shows the steps in
a process or the chronological
order of certain events
g.
a way to organize ideas
through the use of specific
pattern types
h.
author's use of more than one
pattern of organization
i.
Circle the best answer to the following true/false questions.
The brain does not like patterns.
10.
Authors use compari on/contrast to show why events occur.
11.
Authors tend to use only one pattern per reading.
12.
Provide three organizational word clues for the following patterns of
organization.
listing
13.
analysis
14.
cause/effect
15.
comparison/contrast
16.
definition/example
17.
sequence
18.
Academic Reading
Part 2. Objective Questions
Prepare to Read
Based on the title, what do you expect the following passage to be about?
1.
Develop two questions that you think the passage will answer.
2.

Write down any words that may have prevented you from completely
understanding the passage as you read.
3.
Circle any organizational word clues that signal a pattern as you read.
4.
We're Born to Learn
By Rita Smilkstein
1 Recently I was working with a sixth-grade class. First, we did the natural human
learning process (NHLP) activity. Then I showed them pictures of the brain, and we
talked about how the brain learns. I said to them, “Your brains are no different from the
brains of adults in the way you learn. You are just as capable of learning as adults are.
The only difference is that adults have lived a longer time and, because of that, have had
more opportunities to learn from more experiences. This means they have grown and
connected more dendrites and synapses so they know more. That's the only difference.
Your brains want to learn, know how to learn, and are, in fact, learning all the time, just
like adult brains.”
2 A strange thing happened as I spoke to them. I began seeing them as I had just
described, as small beings with adultlike brains eager and ready to learn, but not yet
having had the time and opportunity to grow and connect as many dendrites, synapses,
and neural networks as adults. So of course, they knew less.
3 They seem transfixed by what they had been hearing about how the brain learns; they
were intensely attentive and alert. When some of them came up afterward to ask more
questions, I looked down at their faces and saw their intelligence and intellectual
excitement. I had theorized before that the child's brain is similar to the adult's brain in
its nature and capabilities, but now I really knew it. The brain of a child must grow
trillions of dendrites on, and synapses between, billions of neurons to learn about the
world, what is going on in it, how it works. This includes learning about life, self, other,
language, communication (verbal and nonverbal), cause and effect, things, quantity,
emotions, social interaction, ad infinitum. Everything. The child does this from personal
experience.
4 The child's brain, apparently operating with the same power as an adult brain, grows
dendrites, new ones constructed on prerequisite ones. Over time this learning produces
a brain filled with networks that are completely interrelated.
5 We are seeing a work in progress when we watch a child negotiate the world, trying to
see how to be empowered in it, feeling, acting, reacting, interacting, communicating,
playing, trying to figure something out, or solving a puzzle at the level of network growth
the child has thus far achieved.
6 If these learning drives and capabilities seem to disappear when children get older, it is
only because the children are somehow prevented from enjoying them. If they seem to
disappear in school, while the students, young or old, are learning with interest and
motivation outside school, perhaps there is a lack of opportunity in the classroom to use

their innate resources and some of the brain's rules for learning, to think, explore,
experiment—in short, to be the natural and naturally motivated learners they were born
to be.
Source: From Rita Smilkstein, We're Born to Learn: Using The Brain's Natural Learning Process To Create Today's
Curriculum. Copyright © 2011 Sage Publications Inc. Reprinted with permission.
Check Your Understanding
Using context clues and word part analysis, define each of the following
words from the passage:
transfixed (paragraph 3): 
theorized (paragraph 3): 
ad infinitum (paragraph 3): 
prerequisite (paragraph 4): 
innate (paragraph 6): 
6.
What is the purpose of the passage?
7.
What is the main idea?
8.
List the pattern of organization and main idea for each paragraph.
Paragraph 1
Pattern of organization:
Main idea:
Paragraph 2
Pattern of organization:
9.

Main idea:
Paragraph 3
Pattern of organization:
Main idea:
Paragraph 4
Pattern of organization:
Main idea:
Paragraph 5
Pattern of organization:
Main idea:
Paragraph 6
Pattern of organization:
Main idea:

What is the overall pattern of organization of the passage?
10.
Chapter Review
7-6d 
 Brain Strength Options
Your project for this chapter consists of a presentation of each type of pattern of
organization. Refer to Table 7.1 to make sure you include each pattern. The
presentation must include at a minimum the name of each pattern of
organization with some kind of example or illustration of that pattern that you
either find using your textbooks, Internet sources, magazines, or books you are
reading or create by writing or drawing. You may work by yourself or in a group
of no more than four students. You will be graded on the following:
Completeness of the list
Accuracy of the examples: Does your example really show that pattern?
Effectiveness of the examples: Does your example convey to others the
nature of that pattern?
You can select your presentation format from the following or propose an
alternative to the instructor:
PowerPoint with examples typed or scanned in
Poster with examples pasted on
Written report with examples embedded by scanning or typing

Chapter 8
Using Preview, Study-Read, and Review (PSR)
Chapter Introduction
8-1 Preview, Study-Read, and Review (PSR)
8-1a Stage One: Preview
8-1b Stage Two: Study-Read
8-1c Stage Three: Review
8-2 Chapter Review
8-2a Practice with a Reading Passage
8-2b Chapter Summary
8-2c Post Test
8-2d  Brain Strength Options
Chapter Introduction
“Reading without reflecting is like eating without digestion.”
— Edmund Burke
Student to Student
Demis Droganici
The first time I attended college was about 12 years ago. Now I am back in school
with the hopes of finishing what I started then. Even though I find my classes to
be extremely difficult after a 12-year layoff, to my surprise, I find that maturity
and life experiences lead me to achieve better grades. Back in my first college, I
earned a D in English Composition, but now I've managed to achieve an A for the
same class. I think the difference from then to now is the fact that I am a little bit
older and more realistic to the realities of life. It is well established that “a mind
is a terrible thing to waste,” and I believe that with dedication and focus people
can achieve their goals. I have a career goal now that I am excited about and I
know that the classes and textbooks will help me get to my goal. Now I approach

Making Connections
Describe your method for tackling a
chapter or reading assignment. How
do you begin? Do you have a process
or steps that you take?
1.
When you finish reading a chapter,
what is your next step?
2.
Where in your daily life do you come
across previews?
3.
What is the value to you of a
preview?
4.
Where in school have you come
across a preview?
5.
How is a preview like the framing of a
house?
6.
my textbooks with the attitude that I want to learn, not just do. I really study the
book and don't just do the assignments. I follow the steps the teachers suggest,
even though it seemed at first like they would take more time. By looking over
the chapter first, then studying it, and taking time to review, I get the most out of
my study time. I found out I learned the material better. If only I knew then what
I know now, things would've been a lot different.
Currently attends Keiser University and works at The Westin Diplomat
Resort and Spa in Hollywood, Florida
Courtesy of Demis Droganici

© Cengage Learning
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw on the brain cell how many dendrites you imagine you have for how
much you know about previewing, study-reading, and reviewing.
8-1 Preview, Study-Read, and Review (PSR)
Imagine that a classmate asks you to visit her hometown with her during Thanksgiving
break. You agree, not knowing much about her hometown, Birmingham. You ask,

“Birmingham, Alabama?” She begins to explain by offering facts about the general area,
things she thinks you may already know. “No, Birmingham, Michigan,” she says. “Near
Detroit, you know, Motown? The Motor City?” Oh yeah, you know Detroit. Is Birmingham
far from Detroit, you wonder? Hey, it's cold in Detroit in November! “Yes,” she says, “it's
usually cold during Thanksgiving.” She goes on to describe the plan. “We'll go to the
Thanksgiving Day Parade, see a football game, eat turkey, and Saturday night we'll go to a
club in Detroit.”
Your friend just gave a preview of the proposed weekend so you would know what you
were getting yourself into. She began with what you already knew: Detroit, Michigan.
When you go, you will learn new things like the unpredictable weather in Michigan (it
can be as cold as 30°F or as warm as the mid-70s in late November), your friend's mom is
a good cook, the Detroit Lions are Detroit's professional football team, and the club in
Detroit features live music performed by local musicians. If you want to remember
particulars from this trip, such as the recipe for a moist turkey or that club in Detroit,
you have to do something with the new information you learn. You might write down
the turkey recipe or keep the cocktail napkin from the club. You could use these cues to
recall the information later when you need it.
You can approach a textbook in a similar way. In college, you are expected to know the
material you learn in one class to help you prepare for the next-level course; and in
many cases, you are learning the information for your intended career. The course
information is aligned. Information covered in exit tests and finals in one course (100
level) is often the foundational information you are expected to know for the next level
(200 level). In order to optimize your learning, you need to use a reading method that
will help you read, learn, and remember effectively. You have learned that repetition is a
key to learning. If you use a study system that builds in repetition using the least amount
of time and the most efficient method, you can make the best use of your study time.
One such method is called PSR—preview, study-read, review. Using this method, you get
multiple repetitions of the most important material. Preview (preparing to read by
skimming, asking questions, predicting answers, and recalling prior knowledge about the
topic) the chapter, calling to mind information you already know on the subject.
Study-read (critically reading by asking and answering questions, monitoring your
reading, and determining the main idea(s)) the chapter, taking care to notice important
points and details. Review (last stage of reading by returning to main idea statements
and reorganizing information for retrieval) the chapter so you can retrieve important
information later for an exam.
The key to previewing, study-reading, and reviewing is purposeful, direct questioning
before, during, and after reading. Creating effective questions about your reading
material, and then answering them, helps you confirm that you have correctly identified
main ideas and details. What you should ask yourself depends on when in the reading
process you are asking the questions. There are several benefits to questioning yourself
during all the stages of your reading:
You establish a purpose for reading, which gets your brain ready to learn.
You create a mental framework that holds new information in an organized way.
You give yourself the opportunity to react to what you read and not just accept
what an author says.
You read more closely because you are looking for answers to your questions.

8-1a Stage One: Preview
Before gps in cars, people who found themselves lost frequently stopped to ask
directions at a nearby gas station or convenience store. The store clerk or gas station
attendant usually began with a phrase like, “Keep going on the street you were on, Mack
Avenue. Go down to…” The clerk or attendant started with what the driver knew, the
street she was just on, and acquainted her with what else to expect—construction, a stop
sign, a bank on the corner—in a logical way until he led her to her destination. She then
knew her path before she got back into her car.
Open your textbooks with the same plan. First, ask yourself what your purpose is for
reading. What are you expected to learn? Why did the instructor assign this reading?
What type of information do you expect the reading to provide? How does this
information connect with the course lectures or discussions? What do you intend to get
out of the reading? Remember what you have learned in every chapter so far about
making connections. It is critical for you to continually ask yourself what you predict
you will be learning and connect it with what you already know.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Remember that in order to “wire” your new learning, you must make a
connection to your existing neural network—the information you already know.
The preview step in reading is critical because it starts that process. Now that you
know more about how you learn, you know that taking that step is a time-saver in
the long run. It gives you the first “firing” so you can begin to “wire” the
information.
Previewing is like looking at a map to see where you are and where you are going. To
preview, skim what you are about to read, think of good questions to ask yourself, predict
what you will be reading about, and recall information you already know about the
topic. In other words, get yourself mentally ready to interact with what the author is
about to say.
When you preview, you develop a framework of ideas that you fill in as you read.

Previewing also lets you gauge how difficult or long a chapter is so you can plan the
appropriate amount of study time. It also encourages you to read actively. When you
develop questions (beginning with the reading's title), you naturally begin to seek out
answers. Remember that your brain is a natural problem solver and loves to figure
things out.
Activity 8A
Try Previewing
Look at the picture for exactly one minute. As you look, try to remember as many
details as you can.
© 1994–2008 Stephen L. Spanoudis & theotherpages.org. All Rights Reserved Worldwide
After one minute, answer the questions.
Did you have a difficult time answering the questions? There is no reason for you
to know what the answers are. It is an overcluttered picture intended to be
difficult for you to recall so the following point could be made: If you knew what
questions you were going to be asked about the picture, you would have been
more focused on finding the answers.
What color is the tractor?
1.
How many whistles are there?
2.
What green animal is next to the school bus?
3.
What is directly above the letter U?
4.

What colors is the butterfly?
5.
You probably had a difficult time answering the questions in Activity 8A. This activity
shows that if you know what you are looking for before you read, you will be better able
to answer questions about your readings. If you know the questions before you read,
finding the answers will be easier. Previewing requires that you develop questions before
you read, which prompts you to actively search for answers as you read. You improve
your focus and create your purpose for reading.
When you first looked at the photo in Activity 8A, you may have noticed that it has a lot
of detail. Without focus and purpose, your mind may have taken in the detail but not
retained much of it, which made answering the questions difficult. The same is true
about reading textbooks. Reading a textbook chapter without first creating questions or
reading the questions provided at the end of the chapter can be a lot like looking at a
picture with lots of detail: overwhelming. After reading, you may find yourself asking,
“What did I just read?” You will find that consistently developing questions or reading
end-of-chapter questions results in understanding and remembering more of what you
read.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Suppose you are going to read an article about the BP oil spill in the Gulf of
Mexico. The headline is “Oil Slick Endangers Sea Birds.” You may know about the
oil leak but do not really know what an “oil slick” is. If you can't visualize “oil
slick” it may be hard for you to get the full understanding of the article. Searching
the Internet yields many images of oil slicks, such as the one shown here. Images
like this one can really help you picture the situation before you read the article.
Talk about an effective preview!
Source: http://c1.ecolocalizer.com/ﬁles/2007/12/oiled-bird-south-korea.jpg
There are three steps to the previewing stage:
Preview Step 1: Skim the reading.
Preview Step 2: Develop questions and predict answers.

Preview Step 3: Recall prior knowledge.
Preview Step 1: Skim the Reading
Skim the amount of reading you plan to accomplish in one study session. Skimming
(reading only some of the words on a page) means reading through quickly, skipping
details, and focusing on the title of the chapter and, when available, the introduction,
main headings, subheadings, and summary. If a book doesn't have these resources, skim
the first sentence of every paragraph to help you get an overview of the content. Also,
read any questions included at the end of the chapter. Skimming provides the
framework or mental outline you need before you begin to study-read.
Look at the following passage from a sociology textbook, and take note of the highlighted
text. If you were skimming this passage, you would read only what is highlighted.
1 Popular Culture and the Media Because of iPods, iPhones, texting, YouTube, and social
networking sites such as Facebook, young people are rarely out of the reach of the
electronic media. How does such technology affect socialization?
Electronic Media
2 The American Academy of Pediatrics (2001: 424) advises parents to avoid television
entirely for children younger than 2 and to limit the viewing time of elementary school
children to no more than 2 hours a day, to encourage more interactive activities “that
will promote proper brain development, such as talking, playing, singing, and reading
together.” Still, 68 percent of children under age 2 view 2 to 3 hours of television daily,
and 20 percent have a television in their bedroom, as do one-third of 3- to 6-year-olds
(Garrison and Christakis 2005; Vandewater et al. 2007).
3 The average young American now spends practically every waking minute—except for
the time in school—using a smartphone, computer, television, or other electronic
device. In 2009, those ages 8 to 18 spent 7.5 hours a day engaged with some type of
electronic media, up from 6.5 hours in 2004. The 53 hours in 2009 were greater than the
amount of time most adults spend at a full-time job. Generally, youths who spend more
time with media have lower grades and lower levels of personal contentment (see Table
4.4). These findings are similar across all ages, for girls and boys, race/ ethnicity, parents'
social class, and single- and two-parent households (Rideout et al. 2010).
4 High media usage can decrease academic success, but two-thirds of parents are
especially concerned that the media contributes to young people's violent or sexual
behaviors (Borzekowski and Robinson 2005; Rideout 2007). Are such concerns justified?
Many researchers agree that there are negative aspects of electronic media, such as
obesity (because frequent sitting replaces playing outside and encourages eating foods
advertised on children's programs that are high in fat and sugar). They contend,
however, that there is still no evidence that television viewing causes violence. For
example, violent crimes in society have decreased despite the increased depiction of
violence on television and other electronic media (Powell et al. 2007; Sternheimer 2007).
5 A recent study found that middle-school-aged children, both girls and boys, who almost
exclusively played rated M (for mature) games more than 15 hours a week were more
likely than their counterparts to be bullies in school, get into fights, destroy property, and
argue with their teachers. The researchers point out that it may be that more aggressive
children are drawn to more violent games, and not that the games themselves are to
blame (Kutner and Olson 2008). There is growing consensus,
 however, that violent

video games make violence seem normal. Playing violent video games such as Grand
Theft Auto: Chinatown Wars and God of War 3 can increase a person's aggressive
thoughts, feelings, and behavior both in laboratory settings and in real life. Violent video
games also encourage male-to-female aggression because much of the violence is
directed at women (Anderson et al. 2003; Carnagey and Anderson 2005).
6 Still, it's not clear why violent video games affect people differently. Many young males
enjoy playing such video games, for example, but aren't any more aggressive, vicious, or
destructive than those who aren't videogame enthusiasts (Williams and Skoric 2005;
Kutner and Olson 2008).
Advertising
7 Increasingly, advertisers are targeting children as early as possible. A new form of
advertising called adver-gaming combines free online games with advertising.
Advergaming is growing rapidly. Sites such as those operated by Nestlé
(http://www.wonka.com), Mattel (Barbie.com), and M&Ms (http://mms.com/us/fun-games)
attract millions of young children and provide marketers with an inexpensive way to
“draw attention to their brand in a playful way, and for an extended period of time”
(Moore 2006: 5).
Tip From the Brain Doctor
Sometimes when you see a reading title, nothing will fire in your mind. You just
cannot imagine what the reading could be about! For example, a highly
entertaining book is called The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat. What in the
world does that title mean? You cannot connect it to what you already know, but
it does arouse your curiosity, doesn't it? Curiosity is also powerful for the brain.
Reading the book, you would find out that, amazingly, there is a brain disease
wherein people cannot recognize faces. The book talks about that amazing and
unusual medical case, as well as others.
8 In the print media, young people see 45 percent more beer ads and 27 percent more
ads for hard liquor in teen magazines than adults do in their magazines (Strasburger et
al. 2006). It's been estimated that girls ages 11 to 14 are subjected to about 500
advertisements a day on the Internet, billboards, and magazines, but that “the majority
of [the models are] nipped, tucked, and airbrushed to perfection” (Bennett 2009: 43).
9 What effect do such ads have on girls' and women's self-image? About 43 percent of 6-

to 9-year-old American girls use lipstick or lip gloss, 38 percent use hairstyling products,
and 12 percent use other cosmetics. Eight- to 12-year-old girls spend more than $40
million a month on beauty products (Bennett 2009). Many women, especially white
women, are unhappy with their bodies. In an analysis of 77 recent studies of media
images of women, the researchers concluded that there is a strong association between
exposure to media depicting ultra-thin actresses and models, and many women's
dissatisfaction with their bodies and their likelihood of engaging in unhealthy eating
behaviors, such as excessive dieting (Grabe et al. 2008).
Source: From BENOKRAITIS. SOC 2e (pp. 73–5). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
Notice that only the main heading, introduction, and two subheadings are highlighted?
This content is all you would read while skimming. If you were previewing a larger
reading assignment, such as an entire chapter, you would also read over the chapter
summary and questions at the end of the chapter, if provided.
Tip From the Brain Doctor
Make the most of your brain by giving it a purpose. Set questions before you read,
and let your brain seek out the answers. You are not wasting time when you take
the time to mentally create questions—you are actually working with your brain
more efficiently. You will save time and have better results in the long run. You
know what they say: “Work smarter, not harder.”
Preview Step 2: Develop Questions and Predict Answers
Reread the title, headings, and, whenever available, the subheadings and chapter
summary, and develop questions about them using these six words: who, what, when,
where, why, and how. (If you happen to be working with a textbook that does not have
some of these features, you can still preview by looking at the first sentence of each
paragraph to get an idea of what the reading is about.) Although many of the questions
you create during this step may be basic, they will help you pay closer attention as you
read. As questioning becomes more of a habit for you, you will probably be able to ask
the questions in your head, but while you are learning this technique, write your
questions in the margin of the reading or on a separate piece of paper. Then predict the
answers to your questions.
One preview question you could ask about the passage from the sociology textbook is:

How is popular culture affected by the media?
A prediction of an answer to this question might be:
Our culture is exposed to so much violence in video games and on television that
people have become desensitized to violence.
Activity 8B
Ask Preview Questions and Predict Answers
What other questions could you ask about the passage from the sociology
textbook? Remember to use information from skimming along with these
question words: who, what, when, where, how, and why.
1.
Now predict answers to the questions you developed in #1.
2.
What pattern of organization does it look the like author may be using?
3.
Preview Step 3: Recall Prior Knowledge
Now that you have a framework for what you think the reading will be about, consider
what else you know about the topic. Search your memory for every experience and
every piece of information or knowledge you have stored there about that topic. New
information is best remembered when purposefully connected to information you
already know about a subject. While you are learning this technique, you may want to
write out what you already know to help you focus. Then you—and your brain—will be
prepared to study-read successfully.
Activity 8C
Recall Prior Knowledge
What prior knowledge do you have about the topic of the sociology
passage?
1.

Comprehension Check
Explain the previewing stage of reading.
What do you think is meant by “giving your brain a purpose” when
reading?
Activity 8D
Practice Previewing
Practice previewing using the following passage from a political science
textbook. Even though the passage is an excerpt from a larger chapter,
use the same previewing steps you would with a longer reading such as
an entire chapter. Practice here and then try the steps with your own
textbooks. Remember that you do not need to read the passage in its
entirety. Complete the following previewing tasks to prepare yourself to
read:
Step 1: Skim the passage.
Step 2: Develop questions from the title, heading, subheadings,
summary, and/or end-of-chapter questions.
Step 3: Predict content and recall your own knowledge on the
subject (making connections).
Chapter 10 Political Socialization: The Making of a Good Citizen
1 The year is 1932. The Soviet Union is suffering a severe shortage of food, and
millions go hungry. Joseph Stalin, leader of the Communist Party and head of the
Soviet government, has undertaken a vast
 reordering of Soviet agriculture
that eliminates a whole class of landholders (the kulaks) and collectivizes all
farmland. Henceforth, every farm and all farm products belong to the state. To
deter
 theft of what is now considered state property, the Soviet government
enacts a law prohibiting individual farmers from appropriating
 any grain for
their own private use. Acting under this law, a young boy reports his father to the
authorities for concealing grain. The father is shot for stealing state property.
Soon after, the boy is killed by a group of peasants, led by his uncle, who are
outraged that he would betray his own father. The government, taking a radically

different view of the affair, extols
 the boy as a patriotic martyr. Stalin
considered the little boy in this story a model citizen, a hero. How citizenship is
defined says a lot about a government and the philosophy or ideology that
underpins it.
The Good Citizen
2 Stalin's celebration of a child's act of betrayal as heroic points to a distinction
Aristotle originally made: The good citizen is defined by laws, regimes, and rulers,
but the moral fiber (and universal characteristics) of a good person is fixed, and it
transcends the expectations of any particular political regime.
3 Good citizenship includes behaving in accordance with the rules, norms, and
expectations of our own state and society. Thus the actual requirements vary
widely. A good citizen in Soviet Russia of the 1930s was a person whose first
loyalty was to the Communist Party. The test of good citizenship in a totalitarian
state is this: Are you willing to subordinate
 all personal convictions and even
family loyalties to the dictates of political authority, and to follow the dictator's
whims no matter where they may lead? In marked contrast are the standards of
citizenship in constitutional democracies, which prize and protect freedom of
conscience and speech.
4 Where the requirements of the abstract good citizen—always defined by the
state—come into conflict with the moral compass of actual citizens, and where
the state seeks to obscure
 or obliterate
 the difference between the two, a
serious problem arises in both theory and practice. At what point do people cease
to be real citizens and become mere cogs in a machine—unthinking and
unfeeling subjects or even slaves? Do we obey the state, or the dictates of our
own conscience?
5 This question gained renewed relevance in the United States when captured
“illegal combatants” were subjected to “enhanced interrogation techniques”—an
Orwellian euphemism
 for torture—during the Bush administration's war on
terror from 2002 to 2008. One prisoner was waterboarded 183 times (strapped to
a board with towels wrapped around his head while water was poured slowly
onto the towels until he smothered). Other harsh interrogation methods were
also used.
6 Torture is outlawed by the Third Geneva Convention (1949), to which the United
States is a party, as well as by the U.S. Code (Title 18, Chapter 113C). In addition,
torture is a gross violation of the moral code we are taught to observe in our
everyday lives from earliest childhood. As a presidential candidate, Barack
Obama denounced torture and the use of “extraordinary” methods and
procedures in the war on terror. As president, he ordered the closing of the
Guantanamo Bay detention camp (Gitmo) and an end to waterboarding and other
extremely harsh interrogation techniques practiced there and elsewhere.
7 Question Number One: Can anyone in any position of authority who orders the
use of torture be justified in so doing? Question Number Two: Can anyone who
carries out such an order be a good citizen? Question Number Three: Is it ever
right to obey orders that are wrong—that is, illegal and (or) immoral? Keep these
questions in mind as you read on.
Deﬁning Citizenship

Box 10.1Focus On
8 Throughout history, people of diverse moral character have claimed to be
models of good citizenship. The relationship between the moral character of
citizens and different forms of government underscores Aristotle's observation
that the true measure of a political system is the kind of citizen it produces.
According to this view, a good state is one whose model citizen is also a good
person; a bad state is one whose model citizen obeys orders without regard for
questions of good or evil. Simple though this formulation may sound, it offers
striking insights into the relationship between governments and citizens,
including, for example, the fact that we cannot divorce civic virtue or public
morality from our personal integrity or private morality.
9 It is little wonder that different political systems embrace different definitions
of citizenship. In many authoritarian states, people can be classified as citizens
only in the narrowest sense of the word—that is, they reside within the territory
of a certain state and are subject to its laws. The relationship between state and
citizen is a one-way street. Ordinary citizens have no voice in deciding who rules
or how, or even whether they have a vote. In general, the government leaves
them alone as long as they acquiesce in the system.
10 By contrast, in totalitarian states, where the government seeks to transform
society and create a new kind of citizen, people are compelled to participate in
the political system. From the standpoint of citizenship, however, their
participation is meaningless because it is not voluntary and stresses duties
without corresponding rights. Loyalty and zealotry form the core of good
citizenship, and citizens may be forced to carry out orders they find morally
repugnant
11 In democratic societies, people define citizenship very differently. In
elementary school, the good citizenship award typically goes to a pupil who sets a
good example, respects others, plays by the rules, and hands in assignments on
time. Adults practice good citizenship by taking civic obligations seriously,
obeying the laws, paying taxes, and voting regularly, among other things. In a
democracy, the definition of good citizenship is found in the laws, but the
legislators who write the laws are freely elected by the people—in other words, a
true republic at its best erases (or at the very least eases) the tension between
citizenship and moral conscience.
12 Many individuals, including civil libertarians, emphasize that the essence of
citizenship lies in individual rights or personal liberties. The formal
requirements of citizenship in the United States are minimal (see Box 10.1), even
though people the world over envy its rewards (hence the steady flow of
immigrants into the United States, compared with the trickle of U.S. citizens
emigrating to other countries). According to the Fourteenth Amendment, “All
persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction
thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside.”
Note that citizens of the United States are distinguished from aliens not on the
basis of how they act or what they have done but simply on the basis of
birthplace—to be born in the United States is to be a U.S. citizen. Moreover, the
presumption is once a citizen, always a citizen, barring some extraordinary
misdeed (such as treason) or a voluntary renunciation of citizenship.
A Classical View
13 The minimalist view of

Citizenship and War: Democracy and Duty
In the United States, apart from paying
taxes, the demands of citizenship are quite
limited. They became especially limited
once the United States switched to an
all-volunteer army in 1972, largely as a
response to the backlash against the
Selective Service System (often called “the
draft”) many considered unfair during the
Vietnam War. Since then the law has been
changed—citizenship no longer entails the
duty of all males over the age of 18 to
register for the draft or, in the event of war,
to defend the country.
Defenders of an all-volunteer army argue
that it is more professional and proficient,
that willing recruits are likely to make
better soldiers than are conscripts, and that
the military provides excellent
opportunities for young men and women
from minority and low-income groups to
acquire the self-confidence, discipline, and
technical skills that can lead to high-paying
jobs in the civilian economy.
Many veterans of past U.S. wars, among
others, decry the ending of the draft.
Others advocate making at least one year of
national service mandatory for young
adults who do not enlist in the armed
forces.
Some who argue for bringing back the draft
do so on the surprising grounds that it
would make war less likely. Why? Because
voters are often apathetic when an issue
does not affect them directly and too easily
swayed when patriotism is invoked—as it
always is in war. This issue resurfaced in
2003 when President George W. Bush, in
effect, declared a “presidential
war”—defined as the use of force outside
the United States without a formal
declaration of war by congress as required
under the Constitution—on Iraq.
Was President Bush justified in ordering
U.S. troops to invade a country that did not
(and could not) attack the United States? Is
it right to send the sons and daughters of
minorities and the poor to fight our wars,
citizenship described in Box 10.1
may provide a convenient way of
distinguishing citizens from
aliens (foreigners), but it does not
do justice to a time-honored
concept in Western civilization.
To the ancient Greeks, the
concept of citizenship was only
partly related to accidents of
birth and political geography;
rather, responsible and selfless
participation in the public affairs
of the community formed the
vital core of citizenship. Aristotle
held that a citizen “hares in the
administration of justice and in
the holding of office.” The Athens
of Aristotle's time was a small
political society, or city-state,
that at any given time accorded a
proportionately large number of
citizens significant decision-
making power (women and
slaves were excluded).
Citizenship was the exalted
vehicle through which public-
spirited and properly educated
free men could rule over, and in
turn be ruled by, other free men
and thereby advance civic virtue,
public order, and the common
good.
14 In eighteenth-century Europe,
the Greek ideal reemerged in a
modified form. Citizen became a
term applicable to those who
claimed the right to petition or
sue the government. Citizens
were distinguished from slaves,
who had no claims or rights and
were regarded as chattel
(property). Citizens also differed
from subjects, whose first and
foremost legal obligation was to
show loyalty to and obey the
sovereign.
 According to the
German philosopher Immanuel
Kant (1724-1804), citizens, as
opposed to slaves or subjects,
possessed constitutional
freedom; that is, the right to obey

while the children of the rich who run the
country's corporations and have close ties
to the power elite never have to serve if
they don't chose to? What kind of society
starts wars, kills countless people in a
foreign country, and calls upon the vast
majority of its own people to make no
sacrifices? Why not reinstitute the draft, or
at least a universal national service of
some sort? Questions of this nature help
explain why the United States has been so
deeply divided over politics in the post-9/11
era and why the war in Iraq figured so
prominently in the 2008 presidential
election.
After the unpopular Vietnam War, the
United States abolished the draft in
favor of an all-volunteer armed forces.
Library of Congress, World War I Posters,
LC-USZC4-594
only laws to which they
consented. Kant also contended
that citizens possessed a civil
equality, which relieved them of
being bound by law or custom to
recognize any superior among
themselves, and political
independence, meaning a
person's political, status
stemmed from fundamental
rights rather than from the will
of another. No longer were
citizens to be ruled arbitrarily by
the state. Republican
government came the closest to
this ideal of citizenship. In the
final analysis, as Kant and other
eighteenth-century thinkers
recognized, the freedom and
dignity of the individual inherent
 in the concept of citizenship
could flourish only under a
republican government, and
such a government could
function only if its rank-and-file
members understood and
discharged the responsibilities of
citizenship.
15 One distinguishing feature of
the modern era is the extension
of citizenship. In the United
States, for instance, it took many
years for racial minorities,
women, and individuals without
property to gain the right to vote
and the right to protection under
the law in the exercise of their
civil rights. Yet, as the number of
citizens (and of people in general) has risen, effective political participation for
individuals has often become more difficult. It is one thing for society to embrace
ideas such as citizenship for all and equal rights in theory; it is quite another to
provide the civic education and social development necessary to make the ideal
of a society of equals a practical reality.
The chapter doesn't end here, but this passage does. Continue on to read the
chapter summary:
Summary
Different governments treat the concept of citizenship in different ways. All
states demand adherence to the rules (laws), of course, and most treat birth in, or
naturalization into, the political order as a requirement of citizenship. In

democratic states, the concept of citizenship is also tied to the ideas of equality
and liberty, as well as to meaningful participation in politics, such as voting in
periodic elections. This ideal of democratic citizenship dates back to the ancient
Greek city-states, which were small enough to permit direct democracy (self-
representation of enfranchised adults through public assemblies and
plebiscites).
Political socialization is the process whereby citizens develop the values,
attitudes, beliefs, and opinions that enable them to relate to and function within
the political system. Specific influences on the developing citizen include the
family, religion, public education, the mass media, the law, peer groups, and key
political values. Political socialization is of paramount
 importance; if a
nation fails to socialize its citizenry on a large-scale basis, its political stability
can be endangered.
Now read the end-of-chapter questions:
Chapter Questions
Why was the concept of citizenship of central importance to Aristotle
and other political thinkers?
1.
In what contrasting ways can we define citizenship? Which definition
best describes your understanding of citizenship? Explain your choice.
2.
It is sometimes argued that true citizenship can be found only in a
democracy. What does this statement mean? Do you agree with it?
Why or why not?
3.
What factors influence the political socialization of citizens? Which
ones do you think have been most influential on you? On your peers?
Your parents?
4.
Source: From MAGSTADT. Understanding Politics: Ideas, Institutions, and Issues 9e (pp. 300–304; 323–324).
Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
Highlight or underline the parts of the passage you would read to
skim it.
1.
What questions can you develop from the parts of the passage you
skimmed?
2.
What do you predict the whole passage will be about?
3.

Recall your own knowledge on the topic of the passage.
4.
8-1b Stage Two: Study-Read
Now that you have set up a framework of what you are about to read, you are ready to
study-read. Study-reading is a careful reading of an assignment during which you ask
and answer questions as you read. Begin with the questions you created in the
previewing stage, and refine them as you delve deeper into the details of the reading.
Remember that, just like the lost traveler after receiving directions, you have a plan and
now can actively get to your destination.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Remember what you learned about the limits of working memory in Chapter 2?
You can only hold a few bits of information at a time—and not for very long.
Then you have to take steps to move the information into long-term memory.
Apply what you learned about the methods of moving information into
long-term memory as you work through this step of study-reading. If you pause
to think about and process small parts of what you read, you will reduce your
cognitive load and move material out of working memory and into long term
memory.
As you read, fill in your framework or draw a mind map with the answers to your
questions. To determine whether you have truly understood the reading material, try to

restate what you have learned to a classmate. If he or she cannot follow your thinking or
believes you misunderstood what you read, meet with your instructor for clarification.
This stage of reading focuses on understanding, so take your time and seek out help if
you need it.
There are four steps to the study-reading stage:
Study-Read Step 1: Ask and answer questions.
Study-Read Step 2: Monitor your reading.
Study-Read Step 3: Determine main ideas.
Study-Read Step 4: Cross-reference prior knowledge.
Study-Read Step 1: Ask and Answer Questions
Start reading at the first heading or subheading and ask the questions you developed
during the preview stage. For example, when you previewed “Political Socialization: The
Making of a Citizen”, you could have asked the following preview questions:
How is citizenship defined?
1.
What makes a good citizen?
2.
If you were to study-read the whole chapter, you would be looking for the answers to
these questions and others.
Read one complete section of a chapter at a time. Read either from heading to heading
or, for more challenging material, from paragraph to paragraph. Then pause to ask and
answer your previewing questions. Do not read chapters from beginning to end without
pausing for questions and answers.
Study-Read Step 2: Monitor your Reading
Textbook chapters contain too much information to remember everything all at one
time. Monitor your understanding of what you have read in one section before moving
on to the next, using the following thinking prompts:
What do I understand about what I have read so far?
1.
Where in the text did I lose concentration or become confused?
2.
Of everything I have read, what makes the least sense?
3.
Tip from the Brain Doctor

By reading, highlighting, and then writing or note taking, you have accomplished
three repetitions of the material. Add in your preview stage, and you have
acquired four repetitions before studying for the exam. Remember how
important repetition and using different pathways are for moving information to
long-term memory (Chapter 2)? Look at what you accomplish by using these
simple steps.
These questions help you separate what you do understand from what is still unclear.
Interrupting your reading with thinking prompts may seem like a nuisance at first, but
comprehension is more important than speed. You should pause and reflect to make
sure you understand so you can quickly isolate what you do not understand and figure
out the problem.
Take notes on what you read to prepare for the review stage, so you will not have to
reread the entire chapter but only what is essential. Do not forget to highlight main ideas
in green and major supporting details in yellow. Sometimes just writing down what you
have difficulty with helps you clarify it. If you realize that some points still confuse you,
use the second prompt to identify where in the text you lost concentration or started
having difficulty following the author's train of thought. This will help you pinpoint
where you should reread. If after rereading, you still find the information unclear, seek
help from your instructor or a classmate.
Maybe you did not lose concentration or become confused while reading. If so, chances
are, you are right on track. The third thinking prompt—Of everything I have read, what
makes the least sense?—encourages you to push your understanding even further. Is
there an unfamiliar term or concept? Is there anything in the reading that you could
learn more about? Seek a full understanding of what you read. Do not just do the
minimum. Do some outside research to fill in your prior knowledge.
Activity 8E
Monitor your Reading
Read the political science passage that you previewed.
Ask yourself the preview questions you created as you read. What are the
answers to your questions?
1.
What do you understand about what you have read so far?
2.

Where in the passage did you lose concentration or become confused?
3.
Of everything you have read of this passage, what makes the least sense?
4.
Study-Read Step 3: Determine Main Ideas
As you study-read, read one section at a time and then pause to determine what the
main idea of each section is. A section is usually defined as the amount of reading from
one heading to the next. If a reading is very long or unfamiliar to you, you might make
your sections from one subheading to the next or even paragraph to paragraph. As you
determine the main idea for each section, recall the stated main idea and implied main
idea strategies you learned in Chapters 4 and Chapter 6.
Activity 8F
Determine the Main Idea
Refer to the political science passage. This passage is one section (one heading
and two subheadings) of an entire chapter.
What is the main idea for this section? Highlight it in green.
1.
What is the overall pattern of organization of this section? Explain why.
2.
Study-Read Step 4: Cross-Reference Prior Knowledge
Suppose the teacher in your meteorology class at a college in New York City says, “It
rarely rains in Seattle.” Do you, as a student who grew up in Seattle, just lift up your pen
and, without bothering to think about what he said, simply write it down in your
notebook? Or do you say, either out loud or to yourself, “Hey, wait a minute! That isn't
true!” But what if you grew up in New York and have never been to Seattle and do not
know anything about it? You would probably nod your head and just write the
information down in your notebook as a true statement.
Why could someone who knows Seattle tell whether the teacher's statement was true or
false? That person makes a connection with prior knowledge stored in the brain about

the topic of Seattle. In other words, he or she determines the statement's validity based
on his or her own experience. When you connect new information with something in
your memory that you already know, your neural network fires. When you check what
you are reading with what you already know, you are trying to see whether you can learn
something new.
On the other hand, if you have no prior knowledge about the new information, your
brain will create a new memory of it. A new connection will be created and wired.
However, if the new information is incorrect and is, nevertheless, wired into your brain
as a new memory, you will have a problem. An incorrect memory will cause you to make
mistakes in the future about what you remember and, therefore, think is true. You might
be talking one day with a friend who just returned to New York after graduating from a
school in Seattle and say, “You sure were lucky going to a college in a city where it rarely
rains.” Your friend will wonder what you are talking about and might say, “That's a good
joke! Ha ha ha!” You will not understand why your friend thinks you made a joke. The
two of you might even end up in an argument if you insist on firing your incorrect
memory.
But if you trust him or her, you can ask your friend—who is an expert on the subject
—whether it is true that it rarely rains in Seattle. Or if you do not know any people who
are trustworthy, knowledgeable sources, you can go to the library or search online.
When you finally have the correct information, you must consciously make a stronger
memory to override the old, incorrect one that still lurks in your brain. We cannot
remove information, but we can create a stronger competing network. On the other
hand, if you can find no absolute proof that something you are reading is true or not,
keep investigating, keep looking, keep asking, and keep reflecting. Do not let your brain
work against you by keeping a specific memory of something that might not be true.
Your reflection about that memory, instead, should be, “I'm not sure about this. Let me
keep reading, asking, and trying to understand.” Being open-minded, trying to discover
what is true, and trying to see and understand will help you learn.
This kind of checking is called cross-referencing (checking what you are reading with
your prior knowledge to accept new knowledge, to change prior knowledge, or to judge
new information) . It helps readers think more critically, understand more, and learn
more than just taking for granted that what they are reading is true—when it may not be.
Here is another example of how cross-referencing can help you understand and learn.
Suppose in an English history course, you learn that, in 1588, England, under Queen
Elizabeth, defeated the powerful Spanish navy and became the master of the seas and
the greatest world power. Then, in a following term, you take a literature course on
William Shakespeare (1564–1616) where you learn that Shakespeare lived in what was
called a “golden age” of English culture and that Shakespeare wrote with admiration and
love for Queen Elizabeth.
By cross-referencing, you come across information you stored in your memory earlier
about England's history in the time of Queen Elizabeth. You can put that information
together with what you are now learning about England's golden age and Shakespeare's
admiration of Queen Elizabeth. “Ah ha!” you say. “Sure! England had just become the
greatest world power. No wonder there was a golden age. No wonder Shakespeare
admired the queen so much. This makes a lot of sense!” Now you are better able to
reflect on the relevance of Shakespeare's themes about the power of royalty. You can
understand and appreciate that he was living in a time when his country was the
greatest world power and his queen was the most powerful sovereign in the world.

Cross-referencing adds richness and depth to your studying and understanding.
You cross-reference new information by determining what is similar (comparison) or
different (contrast) between new information and your prior knowledge. At first, if you
are not used to cross-referencing it might take some effort and concentration. However,
as you gain experience and practice, you will not only find it easier and quicker, but you
will also begin to enjoy pulling together pieces of information stored away in your
memory to give a fuller, richer dimension of understanding to the topic under study or
discussion. The benefits of cross-referencing are:
If the new and prior knowledge are the same, you reinforce what you already have
stored in your memory.
1.
If the new and prior knowledge are different, you know that you need to continue
to question, reflect, and investigate until you figure out what is correct.
2.
You understand the new knowledge better.
3.
You respond with more depth and completeness to your own questions, a test
question, or a discussion.
4.
Have you ever had the experience of reading something and saying to yourself, “That
reminds me of something I read earlier. I have a vague recollection of it”? What do you
do when this happens? Do you flip backward through the pages until you find the
previous mention of the idea? Or do you just shrug your shoulders and go on reading,
forgetting about that vague recollection? If you forget about it, you are, unfortunately,
missing an opportunity to increase your understanding.
Page-flipping (type of cross-referencing where you check one part of your reading with
something else in a reading or in your notes) is a type of cross-referencing where you
check one part of your reading with another part. Page-flipping can also be cross-
referencing your reading with notes taken during a lecture or in-class discussion or with
something you heard or read outside class. Whenever you are reading and have a feeling
that your memory is trying to give you a recollection, stop and think. If you cannot bring
up the memory, you can page-flip until you find it.
But what if your memory does not give you a recollection of ideas you read or heard
earlier? How can you make sure that your memory will give you important recollections
so you will pay attention to them? Simple: Cross-reference the information. This will
help ensure that a firm memory will be stored in your brain.
Figure 8.1 models what an expert reader would do and think during the study-read stage
of PSR.
Figure 8.1
Model of Study-Read Stage

8-1c Stage Three: Review
In the review stage of reading, you organize and recall what you have read. By the time
you reach the review stage of reading, you should completely understand what you have
read. If you do not, reviewing becomes very difficult. For example, if a traveler in an
unfamiliar town arrives at her destination but cannot tell you how she got there, she will
find her return trip home very difficult.
There are two steps to the reviewing stage:
Review Step 1: Return to main idea statements.
Review Step 2: Organize material for retrieval.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Recall what you learned about “firing” and “wiring.” The preview and questioning
stages are “firing” stages. Then when you review, by going back over the material
and gathering details, you begin to “wire” the information into your long-term
memory. This last step is just as important as the others.

Review Step 1: Return to Main Idea Statements
Review at the end of your entire reading assignment. Begin by confirming the main
idea(s). Does the main idea answer the questions you asked during the preview stage?
Does the main idea seem general enough to include all the other ideas presented?
Remember to highlight main ideas (in green or any consistent color you choose). This
helps when you review and flip through a chapter; you can immediately recognize all the
main ideas because they are highlighted.
If the main idea is not stated, infer the main idea from what you have read and write it
down at the beginning or end of your reading. Some students use this symbol ஃ, which
means therefore in logic courses and conclusion in math courses, to label any main ideas
they write down.
Review Step 2: Organize Material for Retrieval
After you have read something, organize the new information in a meaningful way,
relating it to information you already know. As you learned in Chapter 2, in order to
learn and retrieve information, you need to organize it in a way that makes sense to you.
The more you organize and work with the information, the easier it will be to retrieve.
You may want to create mnemonics to help trigger your memory or mind maps to help
you visualize the relationships between pieces of information. You may prefer to outline
the chapter.
Sometimes it helps to consider using the author's pattern of organization to create
visuals. For example, if you know that the author uses a comparison/ contrast pattern,
create a chart that shows how things are similar and different. If you know that the
author uses listing or process, create a visual that shows a list or the steps to that
process. Although you can create your own visuals in any manner you wish, using the
author's pattern of organization helps you decide how to organize the information. You
will learn more about note taking and creating visuals in Chapters 9 and Chapter 10.
Activity 8G
Organize with a Mind Map
Create a mind map for the political science passage. Put the main idea in the
middle and three supporting ideas branching out, one of which should include
three sub-branches with information you already know on the subject.

8-2 Chapter Review
8-2a Practice with a Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Based on the title, what do you expect the following passage to be about?
1.
Preview the reading. Create two questions from the title or topic of the
passage.
2.
What do you already know about the topic of the passage?
3.
Study-read the passage. List the steps you will use to effectively complete
this stage of reading.
4.

Practice Forms of Mental Hygiene
By Richard Restak
1 In the nineteenth century, many psychiatrists and psychologists (William James among
them) emphasized the importance of healthy mental attitudes and practices. They
coined the term “mental hygiene” to describe the measures a person can take to make
the brain function more efficiently. Just as the body benefits from exercise, good diet,
and a temperate lifestyle, the brain works better if a person follows certain mental
guidelines. The most important guideline involves not paying too much attention to our
feelings. “There is no better known or more generally useful precept in one's personal
self-discipline, than that which bids us pay primary attention to what we do and express,
and not to care too much for what we feel. Action seems to follow feeling, but really
action and feeling go together; and by regulating the action, which is under the more
direct control of the will, we can indirectly regulate the feeling, which is not,” according
to James.
2 Over the years, James's point of view fell out of favor. Remember the injunctions
 a
few years ago to “let it all hang out”? And if we needed help, there was always primal
scream and other therapies that emphasized getting in touch with our feelings and, most
importantly, expressing them in some way, whatever the consequences for other
people's sensibilities. Additional knowledge about the brain has revealed the perils of
placing too much emphasis on the unrestrained expression of our emotions. Nor can we
give in to negative emotional states.
3 For instance, people suffering from depression exhibit abnormal PET scans and other
measures of brain activity. Moreover, this abnormal brain activity accompanying
depression can cast a pall
 over events of the past.When depressed we tend to dwell
on the losses and hurts we've encountered in our lives. Even good things appear paltry
 and inconsequential when viewed through the distorting lens created by low
moods. “The self-same person, according to the line of thought he may be in, or to his
emotional mood, will perceive the same impression quite differently on different
occasions,” wrote James.
4 Research shows that brain changes indicative of depression can occur in
non-depressed volunteers if they allow themselves to think sad or depressing thoughts.
This result suggests that, at least in the initial stages, it is the negative thoughts and
attitudes that unfavorably alter brain function, rather than the other way around. In
time, as the depression deepens, this sequence may be reversed; the dysfunctional brain
becomes the culprit and produces increasingly depressive thoughts, ultimately
culminating in illness and even suicide. But at least, in the earliest stages, this sequence
can be favorably influenced by mental attitude.
5 One important attitude change involves keeping ourselves physically and mentally
occupied. Internal distress often results from having too much empty time on our
hands. Physical and mental inactivity leads to boredom, anxiety, and depression. In turn,
these uncomfortable states exert powerfully negative effects on our functioning. We
start to dwell on the negative, perhaps a holdover from the time when our ancestors had

to contend with so many physical threats to their survival, health, and well-being.
6 Today most of our perceived threats don't involve death or severe physical
impairment. Indeed, most of them are the creations of our own imagination. If we could
learn to take our situations and ourselves less seriously, we would be better able to cope.
To be sure some of life's more serious threats, such as the loss of a job or the breakup of
a marriage, are not trivial matters. But neither do they involve life or death.
7 Whatever the threat, worry and other forms of negativity make things worse because
they always exert a powerfully destructive effect on the brain's functioning. When
worried or experiencing other negative thoughts, we find ourselves drawn toward
imagined disaster. For instance, even though we may be in excellent health, we're
inclined to focus on whatever minor ills may exist at the moment. At such times, our
attention is exclusively focused on the threatening and the negative—whether involving
other people or just us.
8 Since the brain can keep only one thought at a time in the foreground of consciousness,
it's important to emphasize uplifting rather than depressing and negative
preoccupations. While this tendency toward the morbid
 can be overcome by
encouraging positive thinking, we can't depend entirely on pure willpower. That's why
it's important to keep your brain active, challenged, and curious.
Source: From MOZART'S BRAIN AND THE FIGHTER PILOT by Richard M. Restak, M.D., copyright © 2001 by Richard M.
Restak, M.D. Used by permission of Harmony Books, a division of Random House, Inc.
Check Your Understanding
Use context clues and word part analysis to define the following words
from this passage.
precept (paragraph 1): 
dysfunctional (paragraph 4): 
exert (paragraph 5): 
5.
In paragraph 1, the author uses an analogy. What is he comparing? What
does he want you to infer from the comparison?
6.
What is the most important guideline in paragraph 1?
7.
What is James's point at the end of paragraph 1?
8.

The author quotes James. Write what James means in your own words.
9.
According to this passage, what happens when people think of depressing
thoughts?
10.
What can negatively affect brain function as discussed in paragraph 4?
11.
What is mentioned as important in the last paragraph?
12.
Answer the question(s) you asked yourself before you read the passage.
13.
What is the topic of this passage?
14.
What is the main idea of this reading?
15.
What are four major supporting details from the passage?
16.
What pattern(s) of organization does the author use in this passage?
17.
What was the author's purpose for writing this passage?
18.

Do you detect any bias in the author's writing?
19.
What is significant about the number of thoughts we keep in the
foreground of our consciousness?
20.
Chapter Review
8-2b Chapter Summary
The PSR (preview, study-read, review) technique helps you read your college material
more thoroughly because it encourages you to actively work with your memory as you
encounter new material. You wire, or make connections, in your brain when you read
information that is completely new to you and about which you have no prior
knowledge. When you connect new information with information you already know,
your neural network about that topic will fire.
The first stage of PSR is previewing, which prepares you for what you will read by giving
you an overview of the content. When previewing, you skim the reading assignment and
begin to develop questions about the topic and predict what the content will be about.
You also recall any prior knowledge about the topic. Then as you study-read (the second
stage of PSR), you ask the questions you developed in the preview stage and attempt to
answer them. You also monitor your reading to make sure you are concentrating well
and comprehending as you go. You must do both to thoroughly digest the new reading
material. You will then determine the main ideas from the reading and cross-reference
what you have read with your prior knowledge. Another way to cross-reference is
page-flipping which helps reinforce what you learn. In the review stage of PSR,
determine the accuracy of the main ideas from the study-reading stage. Main idea
statements are most accurate after you have read the entire reading assignment. As you
recall the main ideas, decide how you will organize the information. It is always best to
purposefully store new information with information you already know on the subject.
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw the amount of dendrites you imagine that you have now about previewing,
study-reading, and reviewing. Compare your drawing of dendrites now with what
you drew at the beginning of this chapter. If the amounts are different, explain
why.

preview
1.
skimming
2.
study-read
3.
review
4.
page-flipping
5.
cross-referencing
6.
reading only some of the
words on a page
1.
critically reading by asking and
answering questions,
monitoring your reading, and
determining the main idea(s)
2.
preparing to read by skimming,
asking questions, predicting
3.
Comprehension Check
With what stage of PSR are you most familiar?
1.
Create a mnemonic to help you remember the stages and steps of PSR.
2.
With which stage of PSR do you need the most practice?
3.
What will you do to fine-tune your own PSR system?
4.
Chapter Review
8-2c Post Test
Part 1: Objective Questions
Match the key terms from the chapter in Column A to their definitions in
Column B.
Column A Column B

answers, and recalling prior
knowledge about the topic
a type of cross-referencing
where you check one part of
your reading with something
else in a reading or in your
notes
4.
last stage of reading by
returning to main idea
statements and reorganizing
information for retrieval
5.
checking what you are reading
with your prior knowledge to
accept new knowledge, to
change prior knowledge, or to
judge new information
6.
True
False
True
False
True
False
10.
11.
12.
Circle the best answer to the following multiple-choice questions.
One of the most important times to question yourself is right before you
begin to read.
7.
The review stage is more important than the preview.
8.
Previewing and skimming are identical activities.
9.
Study-reading means:
reading at a convenient time, when you have time to read the chapter
straight through, and then making time to question yourself.
a.
asking and answering the questions you developed in the preview
stage as you read.
b.
stopping to take a break after reading every 15 paragraphs.
c.
a bad habit of stopping to think about what you have read before you
finish reading the entire chapter.
d.
If you do not understand what you have just read, you should:
focus on what you do know.
a.
seek assistance immediately for clarification from a tutor, instructor,
or classmate.
b.
write what you do not understand in your journal and return to it in
one week.
c.
do nothing; it is just one of many reading selections.
d.
An example of active reading is:
reading and walking simultaneously.
a.
completing your reading during regularly scheduled time throughout
the week.
b.
creating questions so that you are reading with a purpose.
c.
playing music while you read to activate your right brain.
d.
Short-Answer Questions

List the three steps of the preview stage of reading.
13.
How do you develop your questions during the study-read stage of reading?
14.
Based on your understanding of the PSR method for textbook reading, what
is the main difference between reading textbooks and reading for personal
entertainment?
15.
Academic Reading
Part 2. Reading Passage
Prepare to Read.
The following passage is from a sociology textbook. What does the title
mean to you?
1.
What do you already know about the topic of this passage?
2.
Preview the passage, and create five preview questions.
3.
Material and Nonmaterial Culture
By Joan Ferrante
Material Culture
1 Whatever item you named, it is part of what sociologists call material culture. Material
culture consists of all the physical objects that people have invented or borrowed from
other cultures. Examples of material culture are endless and include iPods, cars,
clothing, tattoos, and much more. From a sociological point of view, physical objects are
windows into a culture because they offer clues about how its people relate to one
another and about what is important. In order to grasp the social significance of material
culture, sociologists strive to understand the context during which material culture is
created, the purposes for which it is used, the reasons it is modified or abandoned, and
the meanings assigned to it.
Nonmaterial Culture

2 When sociologists study material culture, they are also interested in learning how it
affects relationships among people. Consider the microwave. In the United States and
elsewhere the microwave oven played a significant role in changing the relationships
among family members—specifically, it changed norms about what and when family
members should eat; it helped change beliefs about children's ability to prepare meals.
To put it another way, the microwave changed aspects of what sociologists call
nonmaterial culture, the intangible human creations that include beliefs, values, norms,
and symbols.
Beliefs
3 Beliefs are conceptions that people accept as true concerning how the world operates
and the place of the individual in relationship to others. Beliefs can be rooted in faith,
experience, tradition, or the scientific method. Whatever their accuracy or origins,
beliefs can exert powerful influences on actions because they can be used to justify
behavior ranging from the most generous to the most violent, and they have a profound
effect on behavior.
Values
4 Nonmaterial culture also consists of values, general, shared conceptions of what is
good, right, desirable, or important. One classic study identified 36 values that people
everywhere share to differing degrees, including the values of individual freedom,
happiness, true friendship, broadmindedness, cleanliness, obedience, and national
security. The study suggested that cultures are distinguished from one another not
according to which values are present in one and absent in another, but rather according
to which values are the most cherished and dominant (Rokeach 1973). For example,
consider the following list of potential values:
Obedience
Freedom
Health and fitness
Modesty
Honesty
Self-esteem
Which value is most important to the personal principles guiding your life? Which one is
least important? If you selected freedom, self-esteem, or honesty, then your values are in
line with values that many Americans declare as being among the most important. If you
selected obedience, health and fitness, or modesty, then your values are more in line
with those Saudis define as most important (Miller and Feinberg 2002).
Norms
5 A third type of nonmaterial culture is norms, written and unwritten rules that specify
behaviors appropriate and inappropriate to a particular social situation. Examples of
written norms are rules that appear in college student handbooks (e. g., to be in good
academic standing, maintain a 2.0 GPA); on signs in restaurants (No Smoking Section);
and on garage doors of automobile repair centers (Honk Horn to Open). Unwritten
norms exist for virtually every kind of situation: wash your hands before preparing food;
raise your hand to indicate that you have something to say; do not hold hands with a

friend of the same sex in public. Sometimes norms are formalized into laws.
6 Depending on the importance of a norm, punishment can range from a frown to death.
In this regard, we can distinguish between folkways and mores. Folkways are norms that
apply to the mundane
 aspects or details of daily life: when and what to eat, how to
greet someone, how long the workday should be, how often caregivers should change
babies' diapers. As sociologist William Graham Sumner (1907) noted, “Folkways give us
discipline and support of routine and habit”; if we were forced constantly to make
decisions about these details, “the burden would be unbearable”. Generally, we go about
everyday life without asking why until something reminds us or forces us to see that
other ways are possible. Whereas folkways apply to day-to-day details, mores are norms
that people define as essential to the well-being of a group. People who violate mores are
usually punished severely: they may be ostracized, institutionalized, or condemned to
die. Mores are regarded as the only way. Most Americans, for example, have strong
mores against marrying cousins, especially first cousins. Marrying a cousin is simply
inconceivable. In Iraq, however, 50 percent of marriages are between first and second
cousins. In such situations the spouse is not viewed as an outsider coming into the
family but a member of a kin group (Bobroff-Hajal 2006). The practice helps us to
understand why family bonds are much stronger in Iraq than the United States.
Symbols
7 Another type of nonmaterial culture are symbols, which are anything—a word, an
object, a sound, a feeling, an odor, a gesture, an idea—to which people assign a name and
a meaning. In the United States, when someone touches the tip of the index finger to the
tip of the thumb and holds the other three fingers open, it is the symbol that everything
is okay or a job well done. However, that meaning is not self-evident, because the
interpretation of this symbol can vary. When sociologists say that the meaning of a
symbol is not self-evident, they mean that positioning the hand does not universally
elicit
 an interpretation of “okay.” In Latin American countries, a hand held in this
way conveys a derogatory
 meaning, and in France it conveys the value of “zero” or
that something is worthless. In the broadest sense of the word, language is a symbol
system that assigns meaning to particular sounds, gestures, pictures, or specific
combinations of letters. The level and complexity of human language sets people apart
from animals. In addition, language is among the most important symbol systems
humans have created. When we learn the words of a language, we acquire a tool that
enables us to establish and maintain relationships, convey information, and interpret
experiences. Learning a language includes an expectation that we will communicate and
organize our thoughts in a particular way (Whorf 1956). For example, some languages
such as Korean are structured so that speakers have no choice but to address people
using special age-based hierarchical titles. For Koreans age is an exceedingly important
measure of status: the older the people, the more status they can assume. As another
example, in the United States the word my is used to express ownership of persons or
things over which the speaker does not have exclusive rights: my mother, my school, my
school bus, my country. The use of my reflects an emphasis on the individual and not the
group. In contrast, the Korean language expresses possession as shared: our mother, our
school, our school bus, our country. Linguists Edward Sapir and Benjamin Whorf (1956)
advanced the linguistic relativity hypothesis, also known as the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis,
which states that “No two languages are ever sufficiently similar to be considered as
representing the same social reality. The worlds in which different societies live are
distinct worlds, not merely the same world with different labels attached” (Sapir 1949).
For example, it is certainly possible to translate Korean words into English—a translator
can emphasize our teacher, not my teacher—but lost in translation will be a Korean

5.
6.
7.
worldview that actually thinks in terms of our teacher. It is difficult for an English-
speaking American who has no first-hand experience with Korean or another culture
that makes the group the central point of reference (rather than the individual) to grasp
thinking in terms of “our.”
Source: From FERRANTE. Seeing Sociology: An Introduction 1e . Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning
Check Your Understanding
Use context clues and word part analysis to define the following words
from this passage.
intangible (paragraph 2): 
formalize (paragraph 5): 
hypothesis (paragraph 7): 
4.
Circle the best answer to the following multiple-choice questions.
How does the author define material culture?
all electronic devices that positively influence our society including
iPods and cell phones
a.
only physical objects that are man-made
b.
all the physical objects that people of a particular generation use
c.
all the physical objects that people have invented or borrowed from
other cultures
d.
What is the author's purpose?
to entertain
a.
to inform
b.
to persuade
c.
to explain
d.
What overall pattern of organization does the author use?
sequence
a.
definition/example
b.
listing
c.
comparison/contrast
d.

Short-Answer Questions
What is the main idea of this passage?
8.
What examples of nonmaterial culture can you think of? Give one example
for each type.
9.
Can you think of another type of nonmaterial culture not given in the
passage? Are the authors correct in saying there are only four types?
Explain.
10.
Chapter Review
8-2d 
 Brain Strength Options
Your project for this chapter is to apply what you have learned in a real-life
application. Using a textbook from another class, apply PSR to a chapter and
write a 400- to 600-word reflection to submit to your instructor. A reflection is an
informal piece of writing in which you reflect on what you did and what you
thought about something. A reflection is personal and there are no right or
wrong answers, but it can be either complete or incomplete (see guidelines
below). In this case, you will describe what you did and reflect on how the PSR
process worked for you. Be sure to include every step in the process. At the end,
compare PSR to how you previously read and studied and draw a conclusion.
Each reflection must include the following:
Name of the textbook
1.
Name of the chapter
2.

A description of your process
3.
A description of how each step in this process worked for you. What did it
accomplish? How did you feel about it? What did you notice? What was
going on in your mind/brain?
4.
A conclusion that briefly compares your previous reading process to PSR.
5.
Your instructor will advise whether the reflection should be submitted in writing
or via e-mail. If you are using a current textbook, pick a chapter you have not yet
covered so this activity will help you in your other course. If you do not have an
appropriate textbook to use, borrow one or check out a library book on an
academic subject that interests you. This project will take several hours. Of
course, getting better at something is always helpful, and that is the purpose of
this real-life project.
38 of 38
6/25/2014 7:56 PM

Chapter 9
Taking Control of your Textbook: Marking and Note Taking
Chapter Introduction
9-1 Getting the Right Mindset for Marking and Note Taking
9-2 Understanding Textbook Parts
9-3 Textbook Marking Gets you Right to the Point
9-4 Four Steps to Textbook Marking
9-4a Step One: Preview
9-4b Step Two: Study-Read
9-4c Step Three: Highlight
9-4d Step Four: Write Margin Notes
9-5 Deciding what Else to Mark
9-6 Take Control of your Textbook by using Focused Notes
9-7 Chapter Review
9-7a Practice with a Reading Passage
9-7b Chapter Summary
9-7c Post Test
9-7d  Brain Strength Options
Chapter Introduction
“In a world that is constantly changing, there is no one subject or set of subjects that
will serve you for the foreseeable future, let alone for the rest of your life. The most
important skill to acquire now is learning how to learn.”
— JOHN NAISBITT
Student to Student

Joselyn Evans
A junior at Western Michigan University majoring in business
Courtesy of Joselyn Evans
I preview the chapter, mostly to see how long it is. Then, I read straight through,
taking notes as I go. I use the headings to create an outline as I read. For example,
when I get to the first heading, I write down a “I” and then the heading after it.
Then I read and take notes on everything important under that heading. When I
come to the second heading, I write a “II” and the heading and then take notes on
everything important under that heading. I keep going with the Roman numerals,
the headings from the book, and the important notes until I'm done.
Writing as I read helps me monitor my understanding of the material. Sometimes
when I get bored, I review what I have written in my notes and sometimes realize
I have no idea what I am reading. I reread when that happens.
I also look for any bold words. Those are important. When I see a word in bold, I
read the word, and then I go back and read what came before it and what came
after it so I really get what it means. Just reading the definition given in the
margin isn't enough. I make sure I get the whole meaning of the word before I
start reading other stuff.
When I don't get something that I'm reading, I pull stuff apart and look at the
individual parts. If I understand one part, I go on to the next. When I start to
understand the pieces, I try to put them back together and see if I can understand
the whole thing. This is how I got through calculus.
Making Connections
What is the purpose of reading a textbook?
1.
Is everything in a chapter of a textbook equally important?
2.
How can you tell what actually is most important in a textbook?
3.
If you were reading your textbook and came across something you
wanted to remember for the test, what would you do? List all the
possibilities.
4.
How do you control your attention when you read a textbook? What
works and does not work?
5.

Have you ever seen someone write in a book? Why do you suppose
they would? Have you ever written in a book? If so, why? If not, why
not?
6.
© Cengage Learning
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw on the brain cell how many dendrites you imagine you have for how
much you know about marking and note taking.

9-1 Getting the Right Mindset for Marking and Note Taking
The brain is wired to make it easier to learn information that affects our ability to
survive. This survival instinct is a powerful learning mechanism in the brain. For
example, in early human history, if someone found a location where berries were
plentiful, it would be easier for that person to recall the specific location than if he were
just taking a nature hike unrelated to his survival instincts. The food source was
meaningful to early humans. It affected their ability to survive and was pleasurable and
rewarding. How does this relate to reading and learning? If something is meaningful or
pleasurable and has a significant effect on your life, it might tap into that powerful
survival pathway that makes it easier to remember. While this powerful learning
mechanism happens in your life without your conscious awareness, you can also tap
into it deliberately to make information easier to remember. Here are two powerful
strategies to keep in mind before you begin to mark, take notes, and study from your
textbooks. These will set the stage for better reading and learning.
Make It Meaningful. Activities that are meaningful have a more powerful impact
on emotions and the brain than meaningless activities that we perform in a rote
manner. Did you ever start out for a destination on your day off and suddenly
realize that you were actually on the route to work? You were going through the
motions without much attention and automatically went the way you frequently
go. Did you ever start reading an assignment and after several pages realize that
you had no idea what you just read? Your eyes were going through the motions,
but your mind was a million miles away! That happens in the classroom, too, when
you are supposed to be learning how to do a math equation, for example. You were
looking and listening, but your frontal lobes—the thinking part of your
brain—were not engaged. You did not direct your attention to the material.
However, if something that you are reading or learning is meaningful to you, you
learn it much more quickly because the brain focuses attention on it and gives it
importance. For example, you probably learned to text using your cell phone
quickly because you wanted to use that information. If you were just required to
learn the steps of texting for a test but it was not something you intended to
actually do (like maybe how you feel when you learn algebra formulas that you
think do not apply to real life), you probably would not it learn as quickly.
To take advantage of this strategy, try to relate the material you read to something
meaningful in your life. Obviously, becoming a faster reader with better
comprehension pays off almost every day of your life, so learning to become a
better reader is a meaningful activity. However, if you perceive the activities that
you do in this textbook as just “school work,” then you lose the meaning and may

go through them in that rote, uninvolved way. The more you do with information,
the more you will remember it.
The same principle applies to your other textbooks. Maybe you do not see a
purpose for this information in your life. However, life is big! Statistics say that
people will have seven or more different careers throughout their life. And the
world is changing rapidly. We cannot really know what might be useful to us later.
Knowledge is never wasted. Sooner or later what you learned will come in handy,
or come up in conversation, or provide a foundation for something you need or
want to learn. With this understanding, perhaps you can approach your textbooks
with more purpose and attention. The best way to do this is to actually see a
purpose or feel an interest in the information. If you cannot—and often we
cannot—we have to summon up a way to relate it to something meaningful or take
responsibility to find a way to engage with the material.
Keep It Rewarding. As it turns out, feeling involved and engaged does more than
help you recall information. When you figure something out or put forth effort to
learn something and then you actually do learn it, you get a burst of good
chemicals in your brain. You feel good. This is because the survival pathway in the
brain is also called the pleasure pathway. If something is necessary for humans to
survive, such as eating, then the brain makes that activity pleasurable so that we
will make the effort to get food even under difficult circumstances. Learning (not
just studying or sitting in school, but actually learning) activates the
survival/pleasure pathway in the brain.
Some people are actually addicted to learning. This means that they choose to
engage in this activity as often as possible because it makes them feel good. They
take more courses and keep going to school. They love reading material that
enables them to learn new information. They devour books. They have learned
that learning is a very pleasurable activity. These are lifelong learners. Because our
world is changing so rapidly, these are people that can learn, change, adapt, and
continue to have a great quality of life no matter what life throws at them. Sounds
good, doesn't it?
How can you take advantage of this? First, in order to get that feelgood feeling, you
have to actually learn, and that means you have to be emotionally engaged and
involved with the material. Approach a textbook with the attitude that you are
actually going to learn, not just go through the motions.
Think about when you choose to work a puzzle or play a computer game. You can
get that pleasurable feeling when you solve it, find where a piece goes, or figure out
how to win the game. Now apply that to your textbook marking. When you have a
reason for your reading, you will want to engage more with the material—you will
want to figure it out. Sometimes when you are given the opportunity to figure
something out, you may be motivated to rise to the challenge for these reasons:
When given this invitation, you know there is something to figure out.
1.

You know that you are considered capable of figuring it out.
2.
Your brain was born to figure things out.
3.
Your brain enjoys figuring things out because, when the brain learns, it
produces endorphins and dopamine, the feel-good chemicals.
4.
You can, and should, take advantage of your amazing brain and its natural learning
ability.
This chapter provides strategies for how to keep your attention engaged using textbook
marking when reading so that you get the most out of your reading and study time.
9-2 Understanding Textbook Parts
Before you can dive into meaningful marking and note taking, it is important to
understand that textbooks include many parts, each serving a purpose to help you
understand the information. Figure 9.1 shows many of the different parts that make up a
textbook. Some of these parts offer important background information, definitions that
you might need to reference, first-hand sources that you could access for research, or an
outline of the whole book showing you how each chapter is related to the next.
Figure 9.1
Textbook Parts
Courtesy of Janet Zadina

Some textbook parts may be more helpful at times than others, but you should know
why each is there and how to get the most from each one. Not all textbooks will include
all of these parts, but try to make use of the parts that are included.
Title Page: This page at the very front of the book gives you basic information
—title, author(s), and publishing house. Do you recognize the author's or
publisher's name? What are they known for? Answers to these questions can help
you decide if the information in the book comes from credible sources.
About the Author: This information gives you background about the author and
provides additional writings the author may have published. Again, this helps you
determine credibility.
Table of Contents: The table of contents gives you an outline of the whole book.
Reading it lets you see how ideas are related and serves as an excellent study
guide. Turn all of the headings and subheadings into questions, and try to answer
these questions before an exam to see how well you understand and remember
the concepts of each chapter.
Preface: The preface usually explains the purpose of the textbook. It also may
present the author's philosophy and answer some commonly asked questions
about the content of the textbook.
Chapters: The book's content is organized into chapters. Chapters build upon each
other and are usually organized in a specific way to help the reader make sense of
the discipline. As you preview them, try to see the connection and the organization
of the book. Titles of chapters usually reveal the topic and help you to focus and
identify the main idea of the chapter. Turn titles into questions to take a step
toward previewing and preparing to read.
Bibliography/References: This is a list of additional, related sources that can be
useful if you are asked to write a paper on any of the course content.
Appendices: Appendices can include items like documents, text, charts, tables,
maps, or additional research. This additional information may be helpful if you
have to select a topic for your own research in the course.
Glossary: This is the book's dictionary and provides quick access to key terms
included in the chapters.
Index: The index is an alphabetical list of names and topics covered in the
textbook that provides page numbers for quick access. It can prove to be useful if
you need help understanding a topic. If you get stuck on a concept or need
additional information, you can look it up in the index and be referred to other
places in the book where the concept is discussed.
Activity 9A
Use Textbook Parts

Select a textbook that you are using this semester, and open it to your most
recent reading assignment. Then pick a part of your textbook from the list of
textbook parts just described, read or preview that part, and explain how that
part adds knowledge to your reading assignment. Be specific.
9-3 Textbook Marking Gets you Right to the Point
Have you ever listened to someone begin telling a story and then wondered when he
would get to the point? He might have opened the story with something like, “My friend
just had the best thing happen! Last Tuesday… no, maybe it was Monday… was Monday
the 11
 or the 12
?” You wait patiently for the storyteller to land on a day and move on
to the good part only to have him continue with, “Her sister was there when it happened.
I think her cousin was there, too. Well, he's not really her cousin. They grew up together.
Their moms were best friends, I think….” Okay, okay! What's the point?
You know from experience that when a person tells a story, not all of the points are
equal. Some points are more important than others. There is a recognizable structure to
a story, and when a storyteller deviates from the format, the listener gets impatient.
Experienced readers have similar expectations when they read textbooks. They know
that not all ideas are equally important, and they expect authors to write in logical,
recognizable patterns. Authors use these patterns and other clues to help readers follow
their points and distinguish main ideas from minor ones. Frequently, readers mark their
textbooks to flag these important points for later study. Refer to Chapters 4 and 5 to
review main ideas and major and minor supporting details.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Remember that you can “tell” your brain what is important. There are several
ways. Can you recall them? One is by paying attention with your body and your
mind—sitting up straight, making sure you are in an alert state, and focusing.
Another way is by doing something—some examples are taking notes, reading
aloud, and drawing the information. These tasks tell the brain that you are giving
this information special attention. Making marks and annotations in your
textbooks is an excellent way to do this.
th
th

You have already engaged in a basic form of textbook marking when, in earlier chapters
in this textbook, you marked the text by highlighting main ideas and supporting details
in readings. Now you are going to apply this technique and add margin notes. Textbook
marking (systematic way of highlighting and labeling ideas in a textbook to show how
they are related) is a systematic way of highlighting and labeling ideas to show how they
are related to each other. Marking involves highlighting, underlining, or otherwise
flagging important words, phrases, and sentences and writing margin notes (words,
phrases, abbreviations, or symbols that you write in the margin to remind or explain to
yourself why something is important) , sometimes called annotations, that explain why
you have marked something.
You may have noticed that lots of people, not just students, highlight and use margin
notes as they read. Why? They are not studying for a test. They do this because marking
important ideas as they read helps them focus and think. Marking in a book is your part
of a conversation with the author. Remember from Chapter 1 that reading is defined as a
two-way conversation between you and the author. You bring what you know to what
you read. Your background knowledge, thoughtful questions, and careful analysis of an
author's ideas are your specific tasks as a participant in this conversation. Anything less
is passive reading and not enough for college-level assignments. The purpose of textbook
marking is to help you prioritize ideas while you read and see which ideas are most
important when you study. Marking also allows you to self-test before exams by using
your margin notes to develop questions and your marked text to check whether your
responses are correct.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Research has uncovered the most powerful tool of all for preparing for a test! In
this research, students were given new vocabulary words and a brief study
period. Then they were given a test. Students who used typical study methods
scored 30% on the test of new words, but students who used this amazing
technique scored 80%! What is this amazing strategy? It is called “retrieval
practice.” All that means is that the students repeatedly tested themselves on the
material during the study time. It turns out that although students rarely use this
tool, it is very powerful for long-term retention of material. Give yourself an
advantage—keep self-testing while you are studying. You will save time and
effort in the long run.

9-4 Four Steps to Textbook Marking
As you begin to mark your textbooks, use the reading strategies you learned in other
chapters—identifying important vocabulary, main ideas, supporting details, and patterns
of organization. The following four steps are used to successfully mark your textbooks:
Step One: Preview
Step Two: Study-Read
Step Three: Highlight
Step Four: Write Margin Notes
The first two steps of textbook marking should look familiar. In Chapter 8, you learned
about PSR, which includes previewing and study-reading. Now you will add textbook
marking as part of the preview and study-read steps. It is one more detail in the process
of expert reading.
9-4a Step One: Preview
Preview the chapter, just as you learned in Chapter 8. Skim over the reading, looking at
the title, headings, subheadings, visuals, summary, and end-of-chapter questions.
Remember, if a book does not include these resources, skim the first sentence in every
paragraph to get an overview of the content.
Preview (not study-read yet) the following passage from a Western Civilization textbook,
and then read the explanation that follows. This may seem like a challenging reading
—because it is. By using all the reading strategies you have been taught, you can read
this. Just start slowly and apply the skills you have learned. As you work through the four
textbook marking steps in this chapter with this passage, you will see how you can
systematically take control of any reading.
Plato and Aristotle
1 Because Socrates
Plato's teacher

never wrote anything down, we are dependent on others for our knowledge of him.
Fortunately for us, he inspired students who committed his words and ideas to paper.
Socrates' most distinguished student, and our most important source of his thought, was
Plato (427–348 B.C.), who in turn was the teacher of Aristotle (384–322 B.C.). Together,
these men laid the foundation of the Western philosophical tradition. They were
thinkers for the ages, but each was also a man of his times.
2 Socrates grew up in confident Periclean days. Plato (PLAY-toe) came of age during the
Peloponnesian War, a period culminating
 in the execution of Socrates. Shocked and
disillusioned, Plato turned his back on public life, although he was an Athenian citizen.
Instead of discussing philosophy in public, Plato founded a private school in an Athenian
suburb, the Academy. Plato held a low opinion of democracy, and when he did intervene
in politics, it was not in Athens but in far-off Syracuse (in Sicily). Syracuse was governed
by a tyranny,
 and Plato hoped to educate the tyrant's heir in philosophy—a vain
hope, as it turned out.
3 In an attempt to recapture the stimulating give-and-take of a conversation with
Socrates, Plato did not write straightforward philosophical treatises,
 but instead
dialogues or speeches. All of Plato's dialogues have more than one speaker, and in most,
the main speaker is named “Socrates.” Sometimes this figure is the historical Socrates,
sometimes merely a mouthpiece for ideas Plato wished to explore.
4 A voluminous
 writer, Plato is not easily summarized. The word that best
characterizes his legacy, though, is idealism,
 of which Plato is one of Western
philosophy's greatest exponents. Like Parmenides , Plato distrusted the senses. Truth
exists, but come only by training the mind to overcome commonsense evidence. The
model for Plato's philosophical method is geometry. Just as geometry deals not with this
or that triangle or rectangle but with ideal forms—with a pure triangle, a pure
rectangle—so the philosopher could learn to recognize purity. A philosopher would not,
say, compare aretê
 in Athens, Sparta, and Persia; a philosopher would understand
the meaning of pure, ideal aretê. No relativist, Plato believed in absolute good and evil.
??? Who is this?
5 Philosophy is not for everyone, according to Plato. Only a few people have the
necessary intelligence and discipline. In the Republic , perhaps his best-known work,
Plato displays his idealism and its political consequences. He envisioned a society whose
elite would study philosophy and attain enlightenment. They would understand the
vanity of political ambition but would accept the responsibility of governing the masses.
Plato never makes clear precisely why they should assume this burden. Perhaps he was
enough of a traditionalist, in spite of himself, to consider a citizen's responsibility to the
polis [city, community] to be obvious. In any case, Plato's ideal state was one in which
philosophers would rule as kings, benevolently and unselfishly.
Plato’s best-known work
6 The ideal state would be like a small polis: self-sufficient and closed to outside
corruption like Sparta, but committed to the pursuit of things intellectual like Athens.
Society would be divided into three classes—philosophers, soldiers, and farmers—with
admission to each class based on merit rather than heredity. Poetry and drama would be
censored. Plato advocated public education and toyed with more radical notions: not
only gender equality, but also the abolition of the family and private property, which he
felt led to disunity and dissension.

7 Plato's ideas have always been controversial, but rarely ignored. The writings of his
great student Aristotle  better suited contemporary tastes. Originally from Macedonia,
Aristotle  spent most of his life in Athens, first as a student at the Academy, then as
founder of his own school, the Lyceum (lie-SEE-um). Like Plato, Aristotle wrote
dialogues, but none survive. His main surviving works are treatises, largely compilations
by students of his lecture notes. One of the most wide-ranging intellectuals, Aristotle
thirsted for knowledge. His writings embrace politics, ethics, poetry, botany, physics,
metaphysics, astronomy, rhetoric, zoology, logic and psychology .
Plato’s student
examples of writings
8 Though influenced by Plato's idealism, Aristotle was a far more practical,
down-to-earth thinker. His father had been a doctor, which may account for Aristotle's
interest in applied science and in biology and the biological method. Unlike Plato,
Aristotle placed great emphasis on observation and fieldwork and on classification and
systemization.
9 Aristotle agreed with Plato about the existence of absolute standards of good and evil,
but he emphasized the relevance of such standards to everyday life. Unlike Plato,
Aristotle considered the senses important guides. Change, he believed, was not an
illusion, but rather an important phenomenon. Aristotle's view of change was
teleological—
that is, he emphasized the goal (telos in Greek) of change. According to
Aristotle, every organism changes and grows toward a particular end and is an integral
and harmonious part of a larger whole. The entire cosmos is teleological, and each and
every one of its parts has a purpose. Behind the cosmos was a principle that Aristotle
called “the unmoved mover,” the supreme cause of existence.
10 Aristotle defined an object's aretê as the fulfillment of its inherent function in the
cosmos. The aretê of a horse,  for example, was to be strong, fast, and obedient; the aretê
of a rose was to look beautiful and smell sweet. As for the aretê of a human being,
Aristotle agreed with Plato: Only the philosopher achieved true aretê. As a pragmatist,
however, Aristotle did not imagine philosophers becoming kings. Even so, he did not
advocate democracy, which he considered mob rule. Instead, he advocated a
government of wealthy gentlemen who had been trained by philosophers—not the best
regime imaginable but, in Aristotle's opinion, the best one possible.
examples of aretê
Source: From NOBEL/STRAUSS/OSHEIM/NEUSCHEL. Western Civilization Beyond
Boundaries 6e (pp. 77–8). Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
At first glance of this passage, you will notice that there are no subheadings and very few
key terms marked in bold font. You may notice that some words are in italics and
therefore worth noting. (You would be right about that.) You also might come to some
quick conclusions like, it looks dry, it is about the olden days, and it has lots of unfamiliar
words such as “Periclean” and “teleological.” Fair enough. It is dry when you just skim
the surface, but you will soon see that it is much more. Notice that the heading tells you
the passage is about Plato and Aristotle. Some preview questions you could ask are:
What about Plato and Aristotle?
What point does the author make about Plato and Aristotle?

What do I already know about Plato and Aristotle?
9-4b Step Two: Study-Read
Study-reading should be performed one section (a manageable chunk of reading,
typically beginning at one major heading and ending right before the next major
heading) at a time. It is always a better idea to break up a chapter or long reading
assignment into sections instead of trying to read it straight through, like you might read
a novel. Handling your reading assignment in sections makes understanding the whole
reading assignment more manageable. If you fully understand one part or section of
your reading, move on to the next. If you do not understand what you are reading, you
should not continue with the rest of the assignment. Instead:
look up unfamiliar words,
integrate the definitions of the unfamiliar words into what you are reading,
reread what you do not understand,
restate what you are reading into your own words,
connect what you already know about the topic to the new information,
review the material with another student, tutor, or instructor.
Breaking a large reading assignment into sections and monitoring your understanding as
you read ensure comprehension. These steps prevent you from reading a whole
assignment and realizing that it doesn't make sense to you. However, if you are still
struggling, mark the difficult parts so you can ask your instructor questions.
As you focus on reading a section, try to determine the author's purpose. Mentally
answer any questions you created while previewing. As you read, try to connect what
you are learning to what you already know about the subject. Note that this task may
take a little outside work if your background knowledge on the topic of the reading is
weak. To make connections you could:
use your campus resources to help you make sense of new information. For
example, check with your reference librarians to see if faculty have special
materials in your library's reserves, such as additional readings or videos on the
topic;
find a YouTube video that gives some quick background;
meet with a tutor or someone else from your class who has a handle on the
information. Talking through sections with someone else will make a big
difference in your ability to understand.
Go back and begin study-reading the passage, keeping these questions in mind:

What about Plato and Aristotle?
What point does the author make about Plato and Aristotle?
What do I already know about Plato and Aristotle?
As you read, try to connect what you are learning to what you already know—your prior
knowledge. Remember to use the cross-referencing strategy in Chapter 8. What do you
know about Plato and Aristotle? If you do not know anything about Plato or Aristotle,
what can you do to build some prior knowledge about them before you start reading?
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Do not forget to use multiple pathways when you study vocabulary: visual
speech, and auditory—seeing, writing, saying, and hearing. The brain loves
visuals. For more impact, use an Internet search, like Google Images, to look at
pictures of the vocabulary word. Visuals are easier to remember than a written
definition.
Are you familiar with the following words from the passage: tyranny, treatises, aretê, and
pragmatists? Do not just pass over unfamiliar words. Investigate them. If there are
unfamiliar words in your reading, look them up and make sure you understand them. Do
not forget to use the card review system from Chapter 3 to help you to learn new words.
When taking notes from your textbooks, write down vocabulary words and their
definitions to make remembering them easier.
9-4c Step Three: Highlight
Once you have read and understood a section of your reading, you are ready to highlight
in your textbook. Begin by highlighting the main idea in green as you have done in other
chapters. When the main idea is implied, write the main idea after a section, using the
therefore or conclusion symbol (ஃ) you learned about in Chapter 8 so that you know at a
glance what you have written. Then highlight major supporting details in yellow.
Important vocabulary words may already be in bold and may also be defined in the

margins of your book, so you might not need to highlight them. If vocabulary is not in
boldfaced type, highlight it in a third color, underline it, or circle it—just be consistent
with your strategy so when you review your markings, you will instantly recognize what
has been marked. Important vocabulary should pop out to you as you study from your
textbook.
Here are some common errors many students make when highlighting textbooks:
highlighting too much
highlighting only interesting or familiar ideas
highlighting something without knowing why
not highlighting enough
The key to effective textbook marking is discrimination. Not everything you read
“weighs” the same. You know that when you listen to a story. Use that same
understanding as you read your textbooks. No matter what class you are taking, the
following three components are always important and should be highlighted:
main ideas (in green)
supporting details (in yellow)
important vocabulary (in another highlighter color, underlined, or circled).
Highlight the main idea of the passage in green. Mark any vocabulary words you had to
look up, such as Periclean, idealism, teleological, and aretê, by underlining or circling them.
Now mark supporting details. This gets tricky because there are a lot of details and it
might be difficult to tell what is important. Start with the main idea and then identify the
author's pattern of organization. Remember the patterns of organization from Chapter 7:
Listing
Analysis
Cause/effect
Comparison/contrast
Definition/example
Sequence
Use a process of elimination. Both Aristotle and Plato are listed in the passage, but there
is a stronger relationship between them than there is with just items on a list, so listing is
not the overall pattern, nor is sequence because there is no series of events in
chronological order. There are no organizational word clues of analysis, either. Go back
to the main idea, which is:
Together, these men laid the foundations of the Western philosophical tradition.

What do you think is being discussed? Whatever you select as the pattern of
organization, question it and justify it. How did they lay the foundation of Western
philosophical tradition? The author does not really tell you how it happened, so it is not
cause/effect. What the author does is compare and contrast the two philosophers. Note
the sentence that immediately follows the main idea in the passage.
They were thinkers for the ages, but each was also a man of his times.
What is the clue word used? In this comparison/contrast, the author lets you draw your
own conclusions about what elements of their thinking are still around. Clearly the
author thinks these two philosophers have laid the foundation. Do you?
Now use the main idea and the author's overall organization to ask yourself questions
that can lead you to the major supporting details. Some questions you might ask are:
What is the foundation of the Western philosophical tradition?
What ideas have both philosophers offered that are still around today?
Notice how these questions come right from the main idea and the overall organization
of comparison/contrast. To answer these questions, go back to the passage and look at
the ideas Plato and Aristotle had. Paragraph 1 introduces Plato and Aristotle. Paragraph 2
reveals that Plato had a low opinion of democracy. The rest of paragraph 2 gives
background on Plato. Paragraph 3 describes the kind of writing Plato engaged in.
Paragraph 4 begins to offer more ideas that Plato held. The first sentence of paragraph 4
states that “… Plato is not easily summarized.” The rest of paragraph 4 (and the two
paragraphs that follow) gives a summary of Plato, who believed in idealism, distrusted
the senses, believed in absolute truth, and believed that things had an ideal form (aretê).
Paragraphs 5 and 6 continue with Plato's ideas. In these paragraphs, you find that Plato
believed philosophy was only for the most intelligent and that philosophers should rule
as kings. There should be small states, social classes, public education, gender equality,
and abolition of private property. All of these ideas of Plato's are details but not
necessarily major supporting details. Paragraphs 7–10 offer information about Aristotle.
Activity 9B
Search for Supporting Details
In paragraph 7, the author uses the word compilations. The context clue is
that this word has something to do with students and Aristotle's lecture
notes. Com- is a prefix meaning “with or together.” The root word pile
means “a collection of things.” The suffix -ation means “that which is,” so a
compilation is a collection of things grouped together. Using your
knowledge of context clues and word part analysis, define the word
pragmatist from paragraph 7.
1.

Read paragraphs 7–10 of the Plato and Aristotle passage, and list Aristotle's
ideas.
2.
You now have a list of Plato's ideas, explained for you earlier, and Aristotle's
ideas, which you listed. Examine both of these lists, and mark only those items
that answer the questions you asked about the passage: What is the foundation of
the Western philosophical tradition? What did Plato believe that is still around today?
What did Aristotle believe that is still around today? The answers to these questions
are the major supporting ideas. Everything else is minor supporting details.
Activity 9C
Use a Visual to Show you Know it
Complete the following chart. Write down ideas that each philosopher had:
Aristotle's ideas to the right of the figure labeled Aristotle and Plato's ideas to the
left of the figure labeled Plato. Then write down the ideas both philosophers had
in common between the two figures. At the top, write down five ideas of Plato's
and Aristotle's that you think are still held today.
The ideas Plato and Aristotle had in common, which you decided still exist today,
are the major supporting details. Go back to the passage and highlight those
supporting details in yellow.
Seeing ideas that you have read in a chart such as this one helps you picture in
your mind how ideas are related. Creating visuals improves understanding. You

may not have time to create a visual each time you read a section of your
assignment, but you will find them useful to create after reading an entire
reading assignment or textbook chapter. More will be explained about creating
visuals in Chapter 10.
Comprehension Check
Up to this point in the chapter, what is unclear?
How can you get into the right mindset to mark textbooks?
9-4d Step Four: Write Margin Notes
In addition to highlighting, you should write a margin note if you do not understand
something, disagree with the author, want to identify something new, or remember an
example. Sometimes you will also need to underline additional information. When you
underline something, you should note in the margin why you felt it was important. A
margin note can be a symbol reminding why you marked or highlighted something, such
as a ? in the margin where something is unclear. The letters ex can signal an important
example. MI can show where your underlined main idea is if you do not use a
highlighter color to indicate it.
You should be able to glance at a textbook page and see where the important
information is. The margin notes you make show how you understand the reading
material. Table 9.1 is a list of common margin notes or annotations.
Table 9.1
Common Margin Notes
Textbook Information
Symbol
Important Vocabulary
and Deﬁnition
def
Main Idea
MI
Major Supporting Detail
major
Minor Supporting Detail
minor

Textbook Information
Symbol
Example
ex
Don't Understand
?
Important Information
*
Identify Steps in a
Sequence
1, 2, 3
Conclusion
con or ஃ
Author's Opinion
opin
Biased Information
bias
Margin notes can also be short words or phrases that bring your attention to something
in the text that helps you remember and easily identify key points. For example, if you
read about cell structure in your biology textbook, you learn that eukaryotic cells have
nuclei and are more complicated than prokaryotic cells and that an ostrich cell is
eukaryotic and that bacteria are prokaryotic. You might want to write the word ostrich in
the margin next to eukaryotic and bacteria next to prokaryotic so that you can remember
the difference between the two types of cells.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Remember that the brain is designed to execute action! Taking action can help
you think better. When you read a textbook, do something active. Take notes,
underline, highlight, or write in the margins.
You can and should create your own symbols. Developing a personal system of textbook
marking means adopting and consistently using specific abbreviations and/or symbols to

label your marked text. It is important to remember what the symbols and abbreviations
you use stand for, however, as they can be easy to forget when you go back to your
textbook. To help you remember your own symbols, develop a key that shows the
symbols you create along with their meanings.
Activity 9D
Create Personal Margin Notes
In the left column, put the margin notes and symbols you use regularly in your
textbooks, and in the right column, write down the meaning of the note or
symbol. The first one is modeled for you.
Margin
Note/Symbol
Meaning of Margin Note/Symbol
huh? or ???
Should make sense, but I don't really
get it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9-5 Deciding what Else to Mark
Before you mark something in your textbook, ask yourself why you want to mark it. By
doing this, you are being more reflective. As a result, you will mark based on reason and
not feeling. If you mark too much, everything will look important when you go back to
review, completely defeating the purpose of marking. You would have to reread the
whole chapter when you study if everything is marked. The goal of marking is to mark
only what is the most important information so when you go back to study, the key
information jumps off the page for you.
Is it possible for two people to mark differently and still both be correct? Yes and no. If

an author has done a good job, all readers should get the same idea from a reading and
should have the same main ideas and major supporting details highlighted. But some
examples might be more helpful to one reader than another. The reader who finds them
helpful might mark them in some way, but the reader who does not may not mark them
at all. Others who may have less background knowledge on a topic may write more
margin notes in order to gain understanding.
Knowing what else to mark, besides the main ideas, major supporting details, and
important vocabulary—if more marking is even needed—depends on these three
factors:
What You Learn in Lecture. Your instructors will usually lecture on at least some
of the content covered in your textbooks. When they do, pay close attention, as it is
important to relate what they say to what you have read. You can judge the
importance of specific information by their use of word clues such as most
important, in conclusion, and in summary. You can also judge the relative
importance of information from more subtle clues such as how much time an
instructor spends on a topic or if the instructor repeats it—he or she is making sure
you get it down for the test! Once you decide a topic covered in a lecture is an
important restatement of textbook material, you should go back and mark it in
your textbook.
What You Learn in a Lab. If your class has a lab component, you have another
opportunity to identify what information is most important in your textbook. Lab
assignments are usually practical applications of lessons being taught in your
lectures and textbook. If you are learning about the digestive system, for example,
you may well have a biology lab experiment that requires you to dissect an animal
to examine its digestive system. By doing this, you gain first-hand experience of
what you have been learning about and a clearer sense of what is important in the
digestive process. If it becomes obvious to you from participating in a lab class that
certain textbook information is important, you should label or mark it using an
asterisk (*) or other appropriate margin notes.
Unclear Information You Still Don't Understand. Anything that is unclear should
be marked in your textbook. You may write a ? in the margin beside the unclear
information or another symbol that reminds you to follow up. Some students find
it helpful to use sticky notes to flag unclear information. Sticky notes that stick out
of a closed book, alert you to the very place in the text that was unclear. Once you
have reread the information or talked to other students and your instructor to
clarify the unclear points, you can remove the sticky notes and add margin notes
that help you understand the text.
Go back to the passage, and write margin notes where appropriate. Do not pepper the
margins with everything you can think of. Just write what you think will help you to
remember the information. Some margin notes have been provided for you as a model.
Remember that margin notes are like having a conversation with the author. For
example, you may want to write the words perfect form in the margin next to the word
aretê because aretê isn't a common word and having its meaning handy as you read and
review will help you remember it. Another margin note might be senses don't always =

truth written next to “… Plato distrusted the senses” in paragraph 4. That short note
clarifies what “distrusted the senses” means. As you write this margin note, try to
connect Plato's point with something you already know. When have you been fooled by
your senses? Have you ever smelled pumpkin pie while walking through the door only to
realize the scent came from a scented candle? You do not have to write these ideas
down, but it is important for understanding and memory that you connect new
information with information you already know.
Activity 9E
Draw Conclusions from your Reading
Draw conclusions from the Plato and Aristotle passage to answer the following
questions.
What is a platonic relationship?
1.
If you looked at society today as Plato described an “ideal state,” what
would be the same? What would be different? (See paragraph 6.)
2.
If our cosmos is teleological and everything has a purposeful part to play in
the larger goal of life, why do we have mosquitoes?
3.
Aristotle and Plato agreed that there exists absolute truth. Give some
examples of ideas or norms that are absolutely timeless and eternal.
4.
What is the aretê of “student”?
5.
General James T. Conway, 34
 Commandant of the U.S. Marine Corps, in an
effort to entice people to join the Marines, is quoted as saying, “The
battlefield will change—our values are timeless.” How is he using Plato's
ideas in this quote?
6.
th

AP Photo/M. Spencer Green
Activity 9F
Practice the Four Steps of Textbook Marking
Apply the four steps of textbook marking to the following passages. Remember to
preview first, and then study-read. You do not have to break up the passages into
smaller sections as they are not that long. Highlight main ideas in green and
major supporting ideas in yellow, and write margin notes. Circle unfamiliar
vocabulary. When you complete the four steps, answer the questions that follow
each passage.
What is Technology
Passage 1
1 Technology is the creation of new products and processes that are supposed to
improve our chances for survival, our comfort level, and our quality of life. In many
cases, technology develops from known scientific laws and theories. Scientists invented
the laser, for example, by applying knowledge about the internal structure of atoms.
Applied scientific knowledge about chemistry has given us nylon, pesticides, and
countless other products.
2 Some technologies arose long before anyone understood the underlying scientific
principles. Aspirin, originally extracted from the bark of a willow tree, relieved pain and
fever long before anyone found out how it did so. Similarly, photography was invented
by people who had no inkling of its chemistry. Farmers crossbred new strains of
livestock and crops long before biologists understood the principles of genetics.
3 Science and technology differ in the ways the information and ideas they produce are
shared. Many of the results of scientific research are published and passed around freely
to be tested, challenged, verified, or modified; a process that strengthens the validity of

scientific knowledge and helps expose cheaters. In contrast, technological discoveries
are often kept secret until the new process or product is patented.
Source: From MILLER. Environmental Science: Working with the Earth 5e (p. 42). Copyright
© 1995 Cengage Learning.
In paragraph 3, the author uses the word verified. The context clue is that
this word has something to do with scientific research. Use word part
analysis to define verified.
1.
Highlight the main idea if you have not already.
2.
Highlight the three major supporting details if you have not already.
3.
Many examples of different technologies are given, but they are not
considered to be major supporting details. Why not?
4.
Why is Sociological Research Important in our Everyday Lives?
Passage 2
1 How do we know what we know? Much of our knowledge is based on tradition, a
handing down of statements, beliefs, and customs from generation to generation (“The
groom's parents should pay for the wedding rehearsal dinner” or “Flying the American
flag at home shows one's patriotism.”). Another common source of knowledge is
authority, a socially accepted source of information that includes experts, parents,
government officials, police, judges, and religious leaders (“My mom says that…” or
“According to the American Heart Association…”). Knowledge based on tradition and
authority simplifies our lives because it provides us with basic rules about socially and
legally acceptable behavior. Often, however, the information is misleading or downright
incorrect. Suppose a 2-year-old throws a temper tantrum at a family barbecue. One adult
comments, “What that kid needs is a smack on the behind.” Another person immediately
disagrees: “All kids go through this stage. Just ignore it.” Who's right? Much research
shows that neither ignoring a problem nor inflicting physical punishment (such as
spanking) stops a toddler's bad behavior. Instead, according to many researchers, most
young children's misbehavior can be curbed by techniques such as making simple rules,
being consistent in disciplining misbehavior, praising good behavior, and setting a good
example for how to act.
2 In contrast with knowledge based on tradition and authority, sociological research is
important in our everyday lives for several reasons:
It creates new knowledge that helps us understand social life. Regarding the
economy, for example, sociological research has shown that the law fails to
remedy much workplace inequality because it disregards unintentional and
unconscious discrimination, and that workplace diversity
 leads to better
1.

products and greater company profits (Berrey 2009).
It exposes myths. U. S. newspapers and television shows perpetuate
 the myth
that suicides rates are highest during the end of the Christmas holidays. In fact,
suicide rates are lowest in December and highest in the spring and fall (but the
reasons for these peaks are unclear). Another myth is that more women are
victims of domestic violence on Super Bowl Sunday than on any other day of the
year, presumably because men are intoxicated and become abusive. In fact,
intimate partner violence is common throughout the year and doesn't spike on
Super Bowl Sunday (Mikkelson and Mikkelson 2005; Annenberg Public Policy
Center 2008).
2.
It affects social policies. In many states, fatal child abuse or neglect is often under-
counted because agencies vary in their interpretations of what constitutes abuse
and neglect. For example, a child who is killed in an auto crash because the
intoxicated parent had not placed the child in a car seat may be counted as an
accident rather than parental neglect (Christensen and Therolf 2009). Sociological
research can uncover such systemic flaws, and provide attorneys and social
workers with the data they need to change laws that prevent children's deaths
because of parental abuse or neglect.
3.
It sharpens our critical thinking skills. Many Americans, especially women, rely
on talk shows such as Oprah for information on a number of topics. During 2009
alone, Oprah Winfrey featured and applauded guests who maintained, among
other things, that children contract autism from the measles, mumps, and rubella
(MMR) vaccinations that they receive as babies, that fortune cards can help people
diagnose their illnesses, and that people can wish away cancer (Kosova and
Wingert 2009)—all of which are false.
4.
Source: From BENOKRAITIS. SOC 2e (p. 22). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
What strategies did you use to figure out the main idea?
5.
What clues did you use to help identify the supporting details?
6.
Why the world does not go up in flames
Passage 3
1 The molecules of life release energy when they combine with oxygen. For example,
think of how a spark ignites tinder-dry wood in a campfire. Wood is mostly cellulose,

which is a carbohydrate that consists of long chains of repeating glucose units. A spark
initiates a reaction that converts cellulose and oxygen to water and carbon dioxide. The
reaction is exergonic, and it releases enough energy to initiate the same reaction with
other cellulose and oxygen molecules. That is why a camp-fire keeps burning once it has
been lit.
2 Earth is rich in oxygen—and in potential exergonic reactions. Why doesn't it burst into
flames? Luckily, it takes energy to break the chemical bonds of reactants, even in an
exergonic reaction. Activation energy is the minimum amount of energy that will get a
chemical reaction started. It is independent of any energy difference between reactants
and products what is produced from the reaction.
3 Both endergonic and exergonic reactions have activation energy, but the amount
varies with the reaction. For example, guncotton, or nitrocellulose, is a highly explosive
derivative of cellulose. Christian Schonbein accidentally discovered a way to
manufacture it when he used a cotton apron to wipe up a nitric acid spill on his kitchen
table, then hung it up to dry next to his oven. The apron exploded. Being a chemist in the
1800s, Schönbein had immediate hopes that he could market guncotton as a firearm
explosive, but it proved to be too unstable. So little activation energy is needed to make
guncotton react with oxygen that it explodes spontaneously. The substitute?
Gunpowder, which has a higher activation energy for a reaction with oxygen.
Source: From STARR. Biology: The Unity and Diversity of Life 12e (p. 96–7). Copyright © 2009
Cengage Learning.

If this passage was difficult for you, what made it difficult?
7.
Restate the main idea using your own words.
8.
What is the overall pattern of organization of the passage? Why?
9.
How did you determine the major supporting details?
10.
9-6 Take Control of your Textbook by using Focused Notes
Textbook marking should not replace taking notes from your textbook, but it will make
the job of note taking more efficient and will save you time when studying. If you mark
your textbooks effectively, your textbook becomes a kind of study guide. The ideas will
be prioritized and highlighted in your text so they will stand out later as you take notes
from your textbook in preparation for studying. Taking notes from your textbook and
adding information and examples you already know will be a faster process because
your markings have transformed the author's message into an organized framework.
Ideas you add from your own experiences or class lectures can fit right into that
framework.
Focused notes (specific pieces of information, such as vocabulary words, processes, and
events, pulled from your classroom and textbook notes and placed in one chart for
focused review) is a study strategy that may save you hours of time when preparing for
exams. They are referred to as focused notes because you have already identified the

key points and new vocabulary. When you review your textbook markings and
classroom notes, you pull out key information (vocabulary, processes, or events) and
place the information in a chart. All of the information is in one spot, so you have
focused your notes for review. You will need to decide what needs your focus: what is
clear or unclear, what was repeated in a lecture or a lab, and what examples were
provided in class.
Use a page from a notebook, and fold it lengthwise in thirds, making three columns. As
you review your textbook material, section by section, go back to your highlights and
margin notes and use them to create your focused notes. Create a heading for each
column. The first column will be whatever you are trying to focus on. If you focus on all
of the new vocabulary words in a chapter, they would be listed in Column 1. Define the
words in Column 2. Column 3 is a little more flexible. Include drawings or pictures of
each new word, or create a question for each so that you know you understand it. See
Figure 9.2 for an example of focused notes created from passage 3 of Activity 9F. Keep in
mind, however, that this passage is only one section of the larger chapter the passage
came from. Focused notes would be completed after you have read the complete
assignment as a review.
Figure 9.2
Example of Focused Notes
Column 1
Column 2
Column 3
Vocabulary
Word
Deﬁnition
Question
exergonic
gives oﬀ energy
Why does a
campﬁre keep
burning?
activation
energy
minimum amount
of energy that
will get a
chemical reaction
started
What starts a
chemical
reaction?
endergonic
absorbs energy
Are chemical
reactions
prevented?

Activity 9G
Practice Using Focused Notes
Read the following passage on how the brain works, and follow the instructions
to create focused notes for the passage.
Learn as Much as Possible about how your Brain Works
1 This is the most important factor in getting smart and staying smart. In order to do this,
you don't have to become a neurologist or subscribe to scholarly journals on
neuroscience (the study of the brain at every operating level ranging from everyday
observable behavior to brain processes taking place at the level of chemicals and
molecules). Here is a useful summary of the facts you should know.
2 The adult human brain weighs about three pounds and consists of about 100 billion
nerve cells or neurons along with an even greater number of non-neuronal cells called
glia (in Greek, glia means “glue”) interspersed among the neurons. The neurons are
responsible for the communication of information throughout the brain. Especially
important is the brain's outer wrinkled mantle, the cerebral cortex, which gives the
brain the appearance of a gnarled walnut. The cerebral cortex contains about 30 billion
neurons linked to one another by means of a million billion neuronal connections called
synapses….
3 Any of the brain's 100 or so billion neurons can potentially communicate with any
other via one or more linkages [synapses]…Linkages, once formed, are strengthened by
repetition. At the behavioral level, this takes the form of habit. Each time you practice a
piano piece or a golf swing (presuming you are doing it correctly), your performance
improves. This corresponds at the neuronal level to the establishment and facilitation of
neuronal circuits.
Source: From MOZART'S BRAIN AND THE FIGHTER PILOT by Richard M. Restak, M.D.,
copyright © 2001 by Richard M. Restak, M.D. Used by permission of Harmony Books, a
division of Random House, Inc.
Complete focused notes for this passage based on vocabulary. In Column 1, write
all the bolded words and any others you don't understand. In Column 2, write a
definition or explanation of each vocabulary word. Use Column 3 to draw or
paste a picture, create a word map, or ask a question. The first word is modeled
for you here.
Column 1
Column 2
Column 3
Vocabulary
Word
Deﬁnition
Picture, Word Map, or
Question
neuroscience
the study of the brain at
every operating level
What is the study of the
brain called?

Column 1
Column 2
Column 3
ranging from everyday
observable behavior to
brain processes taking
place at the level of
chemicals and molecules
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Try to recall the vocabulary written in Column 1 by covering up Columns 2 and 3
and quizzing yourself. Now cover Column 1; looking at Columns 2 and 3, can you
recall the words? Were you able to define the words and recognize the pictures?
This is a great study technique to help you commit key terms to memory.
9-7 Chapter Review
9-7a Practice with a Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Based on the title, what do you expect the following passage to be about?
1.
What do you know about the topic already?
2.
Preview the passage, and list three questions that you developed about the
passage.
3.

After you preview, during the study-read step, apply the textbook marking
strategies you learned.
Highlight the main idea in green.
Highlight major supporting details in yellow.
Mark any new vocabulary words.
Write margin notes.
4.
How familiar are you with the peace symbol? Have you ever worn one?
Why or why not?
5.
A History of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament: The CND Logo
1 One of the most widely known symbols in the world, in Britain it is recognized as
standing for nuclear disarmament—and in particular as the logo of the Campaign for
Nuclear Disarmament (CND). In the United States and much of the rest of the world it is
known more broadly as the peace symbol. The peace symbol has a global history which
may surprise many Americans.
2 It was designed in 1958 by Gerald Holtom, a professional designer and artist and a
graduate of the Royal College of Arts. He showed his preliminary sketches to a small
group of people in the Peace News office in North London and to the Direct Action
Committee Against Nuclear War, one of several smaller organizations that came
together to set up CND.
Marilyn Volan/Shutterstock.com
First Public Appearance
3 The Direct Action Committee had already planned what was to be the first major
anti-nuclear march, from London to Aldermaston, where British nuclear weapons were
and still are manufactured. It was on that march over the 1958 Easter weekend that the
symbol first appeared in public. Five hundred cardboard lollipops on sticks were
produced. Half were black on white and half white on green. Just as the church's
liturgical
 colors change over Easter, so the colors were to change, “from Winter to
Spring, from Death to Life.” Black and white would be displayed on Good Friday and
Saturday, green and white on Easter Sunday and Monday.

4 The first badges were made by Eric Austin of Kensington CND using white clay with the
symbol painted black. Again there was a conscious symbolism. They were distributed
with a note explaining that in the event of a nuclear war, these fired pottery badges
would be among the few human artifacts
 to survive the nuclear inferno. (These
early ceramic badges can still be found and one, lent by CND, was included in the
Imperial War Museum's 1999/2000 exhibition “From the Bomb to the Beatles.”)
What does it Mean?
5 Gerald Holtom, a conscientious objector who had worked on a farm in Norfolk during
the Second World War, explained that the symbol incorporated the semaphore
letters N(uclear) and D(isarmament). He later wrote to Hugh Brock, editor of Peace News,
explaining the genesis
 of his idea in greater, more personal depth, ironically:
I was in despair. Deep despair. I drew myself: the representative of an individual in
despair, with hands palm outstretched outwards and downwards in the manner of
Goya's peasant before the firing squad. I formalized the drawing into a line and put a
circle round it.
6 Eric Austin added his own interpretation of the design: the gesture of despair had long
been associated with the death of Man and the circle with the unborn child.
7 Gerald Holtom had originally considered using the Christian cross symbol within a
circle as the motif for the march, but various priests he had approached with the
suggestion were not happy at the idea of using the cross on a protest march. Later,
ironically, Christian CND to use the symbol with the central stroke extended upwards to
form the upright of a cross.
8 This adaptation of the design was only one of many subsequently invented by various
groups within CND and for specific occasions—with a cross below as a women's symbol,
with a daffodil or a thistle incorporated by CND, with little legs for a sponsored walk, etc.
Whether Gerald Holtom would have approved of some of the more light-hearted
versions is open to doubt.
9 The symbol almost at once crossed the Atlantic. Bayard Rustin, a close associate of Dr.
Martin Luther King, had come over from the U.S. in order to take part in that first
Aldermaston March. He took the symbol back to the United States where it was used on
civil rights marches. Later it appeared on anti-Vietnam War demonstrations and was
even seen daubed in protest on their helmets by American GIs. Simpler to draw than the
Picasso peace dove, it became known, first in the U.S. and then round the world, as the
peace symbol. It appeared on the walls of Prague when the Soviet tanks invaded in 1968,
on the Berlin Wall, in Sarajevo and Belgrade, on the graves of the victims of military
dictators from the Greek Colonels to the Argentinian government led by military leaders,
and most recently in East Timor.
Misrepresentation and Misuse
10 There have been claims that the symbol has older, occult or anti-Christian
associations. In South Africa, under the apartheid regime, there was an official attempt
to ban it. Various far-right and fundamentalist American groups have also spread the
idea of Satanic associations or condemned it as a Communist sign. However the origins
and the ideas behind the symbol have been clearly described, both in letters and in
interviews, by Gerald Holtom. His original, first sketches are now on display as part of
the Commonweal Collection in Bradford.

7.
11 Although specifically designed for the anti-nuclear movement, it has quite
deliberately never been copyrighted. No one has to pay or to seek permission before they
use it. A symbol of freedom, it is free for all. This of course sometimes leads to its use, or
misuse, in circumstances that CND and the peace movement find distasteful. It is also
often exploited for commercial, advertising or generally fashion purposes. We can't stop
this happening and have no intention of copyrighting it. All we can do is to ask
commercial users if they would like to make a donation. Any money received is used for
CND's peace education and information work.
Source: Copyright © Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. Reprinted with permission.
Check Your Understanding
Use context clues and word part analysis to define the following words
used in the passage.
disarmament (paragraph 1): 
ironically (paragraph 5): 
semaphore (paragraph 5) (Note: The margin definition tells you what
the systems of flags is, but what is the meaning of the word semaphore
using word part analysis?):
6.
According to the passage, which of the following is not considered true?
The peace symbol was cherished by the South Africa government.
a.
It has been banned by some as it was connected to Communism.
b.
It is considered one of the best-known symbols around the world.
c.
One of the first buttons using the Peace Symbol was made of pottery
and would be among the few human artifacts that could survive a
nuclear inferno.
d.
To your knowledge, is there any other symbol that can be compared to the
peace symbol? Explain your response.
8.
Why do you think the peace symbol was at one time associated with the
occult?
9.

Why do you suppose the peace symbol became part of the anti-Vietnam
protests?
10.
Chapter Review
9-7b Chapter Summary
Textbook marking helps you distinguish important ideas from less important ones.
Before marking anything in your textbooks, develop the right mindset toward learning.
If what you read has meaning to you, you are more likely to remember it better. Try to
connect what you read with something meaningful in your life. Also, keep the task of
reading rewarding. Your brain is naturally satisfied when you figure things out or
accomplish something. Use this natural tendency to keep yourself engaged in your
reading.
As you begin to take control of your reading material, look at all the parts of the
textbook, like the table of contents, chapters, bibliographies, appendices, glossaries, and
indices. These features can be useful learning tools as they help you make sense of what
you read.
Textbook marking is one way that you can keep yourself engaged as you read. There are
four steps to textbook marking: 1) preview, 2) study-read, 3) highlight, and 4) write
margin notes. These steps help you prioritize the information you read. At a minimum,
you should aim to highlight the main ideas and major supporting details and underline
new vocabulary in your reading. When you mark anything beyond the main ideas, major
supporting details, or vocabulary, you should also include a margin note so that you
know why you marked what you did. It is helpful is keep track of your personal margin
notes so that you know what each note means when you return to the reading to review.
Good textbook marking shows the relationships between ideas and can help you create
efficient notes from your reading material. Focused notes is a chart strategy that you can
use to categorize the important information you marked from a reading to help you
study and remember the information.
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw the amount of dendrites you imagine that you have now about marking and
note taking. Compare your drawing of dendrites now with what you drew at the
beginning of this chapter. If the amounts are different, explain why.

textbook marking
1.
margin notes
2.
section
3.
focused notes
4.
words, phrases, abbreviations,
or symbols that you write in
the margin to remind or
explain to yourself why
something is important
a.
specific pieces of information,
such as vocabulary words,
processes, and events, pulled
from your classroom and
textbook notes and placed in
b.
Comprehension Check
List and explain each step of the textbook marking process.
Why is textbook marking an important part of the reading process?
Where in the chapter did you lose concentration or become confused?
If you could ask the authors a question about this chapter, what would
you ask?
Chapter Review
9-7c Post Test
Part 1. Objective Questions
Match the key terms from the chapter in Column A to their definitions in
Column B.
Column A Column B

one chart for focused review
a manageable chunk of
reading, typically beginning at
one major heading and ending
right before the next major
heading
c.
a systeeematic way of
highlighting and labeling ideas
in a textbook to show how they
are related
d.
Circle the best answer to the following multiple-choice questions.
Everyone's textbook markings should be the same.
True
False
5.
Whenev r I mark in a textbook, I should always write a margin note (other
than main ideas highlighted in green and major details highlighted in
yellow).
True
False
6.
Everyone should always get the same idea from a reading.
True
False
7.
If done well, a marked chapter can serve as a study guide.
True
False
8.
Short-Answer Questions
What are the four steps of textbook marking?
a.
b.
c.
d.
9.
What is the danger of marking too much?
10.
Popular Reading
Part 2. Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Based on the title, what do you expect the following passage to be about?
1.

Do you enjoy the topic of this passage? Explain your response.
2.
Have you taken a communications class at this point in your college
career?
3.
Have you ever thought about the hand gestures people make as they are
talking? Do you follow hand gestures to help you make meaning of a
speaker's words? Do you nod in agreement or disagreement? Explain your
response.
4.
Apply the four steps of textbook marking to this passage.
5.
What Happens When Two People Talk?
By Malcolm Gladwell
1 What happens when two people talk? That is really the basic question here, because
that's the basic context in which all persuasion takes place. We know that people talk
back and forth. They listen. They interrupt. They move their hands. In the case of my
meeting with Tom Gau, we were sitting in a modest-size-office. I was in a chair pulled up
in front of his desk. I had my legs crossed and a pad and pen on my lap. I was wearing a
blue shirt and black pants and a black jacket. He was sitting behind the desk in a
high-backed chair. He was wearing a pair of blue suit pants and a crisply pressed white
shirt and a red tie. Some of the time he leaned forward and planted his elbows in front of
him. Other times he sat back in his chair and waved his hands in the air. Between us, on
the blank surface of the desk, I placed my tape recorder. That's what you would have
seen, if I showed you a videotape of our meeting. But if you had taken that videotape and
slowed it down, until you were looking at our interaction in slices of a fraction of a
second, you would have seen something quite different. You would have seen the two of
us engaging in what can only be described as an elaborate and precise dance.
2 The pioneer of this kind of analysis—of what is called the study of cultural
microrhythms—is a man named William Condon. In one of his most famous research
projects in the 1960s he attempted to decode a four-and-a-half-second segment of film, in
which a woman says to a man and a child over dinner, “You all should come around
every night. We never have had a dinnertime like this in months.” Condon broke the film
into individual frames, each representing about 1/45 th of a second. Then he
watched—and watched. As he describes it:
To carefully study the organization and sequence of this, the approach must be
naturalistic or ethological.
 You just sit and look and look and look for thousands of
hours until the order in the material begins to emerge. It's like sculpturing…. Continued

study reveals further order. When I was looking at this film over and over again, I had an
erroneous view of the universe that communication takes place between people.
Somehow this was the model. You send the message, somebody sends the message back.
The messages go here and there and everywhere. But something was funny about this.
Condon spent a year and a half on that short segment of film, until, finally, in his
peripheral vision, he saw what he had always sensed was there: “the wife turning her
head exactly as the husband's hands came up.” From there he picked up other
micromovements, other patterns that occurred over and over again, until he realized
that in addition to talking and listening, the three people around the table were also
engaging in what he termed “interactional synchrony.”
 Their conversation had a
rhythmic physical dimension. Each person would, within the space of one or two or
three 1/45-th-of-a-second frames, move a shoulder or cheek or an eyebrow or a hand,
sustain that movement, stop it, change directions, and start again. And what's more,
those movements were perfectly in time to each person's own words—emphasizing and
underlining and elaborating on the process of articulations—
so that the speaker
was, in effect, dancing to his or her own speech. At the same time the other people
around the table were dancing along as well, moving their faces and shoulders and
hands and bodies to the same rhythm. It's not that everyone was moving the same way,
any more than people dancing to a song all dance the same way. It's that the timing of
stops and starts of each person's micromovements—the jump and shifts of body and
face—were perfectly in harmony.
3 Subsequent research has revealed that it isn't just gesture that is harmonized, but also
conversational rhythm. When two people talk, their volume and pitch fall into balance.
What linguists call speech rate—the number of speech sounds per second—equalizes. So
does what is known as latency, the period of time that lapses between the moment one
speaker stops talking and the moment the other speaker begins. Two people may arrive
at a conversation with very different conversational patterns. But almost instantly they
reach a common ground. We all do it, all the time. Babies as young as one or two days old
synchronize their head, elbow, shoulder, hip, and foot movements with the speech
patterns of adults. Synchrony has even been found in the interactions of humans and
apes. It's part of the way we are hardwired.
4 When Tom Gau and I sat across from each other in his office, then, we almost
immediately fell into physical and conversational harmony. We were dancing. Even
before he attempted to persuade me with his words, he had forged a bond with me with
his movements and his speech. So what made my encounter with him different, so much
more compelling than the conversational encounters I have every day? It isn't that Gau
was deliberately trying to harmonize himself with me. Some books on salesmanship
recommend that persuaders try to mirror the posture or talking styles of their clients in
order to establish rapport. But that's been shown not to work. It makes people more
uncomfortable, not less. It's too obviously phony.
5 What we are talking about is a kind of super-reflex, a fundamental physiological ability
of which we are barely aware. And like all specialized human traits, some people have
much more mastery over this reflex than others. Part of what it means to have a
powerful or persuasive personality, then, is that you can draw others into your own
rhythms and dictate the terms of the interactions. In some studies, students who have a
high degree of synchrony with their teachers are happier, more enthused, interested,
and easygoing. What I felt with Gau was that I was being seduced, not in the sexual sense,
of course, but in a global way, that our conversation was being conducted on his terms,
not mine. I felt I was becoming synchronized with him. “Skilled musicians know this, and

good speakers,” says Joseph Cappella, who teaches at the Annenberg School of
Communication at the University of Pennsylvania. “They know when the crowds are
with them, literally in synchrony with them, in movements and nods and stillness in
moments of attention.” It is a strange thing to admit, because I didn't want to be drawn
in. I was on guard against it. But the essence of Salesmen, that is, on some level, they
cannot be resisted. “Tom can build a level of trust and rapport
 in five to ten minutes
that most people will take half an hour to do,” Moine says of Gau.
6 When two people talk, they don't just fall into physical and aural
 harmony. They
also engage in what is called motor mimicry
 If you show people pictures of a smiling
face or a frowning face, they'll smile or frown back, although perhaps only in muscular
changes so fleeting that they can only be captured with electronic sensors. If I hit my
thumb with a hammer, most people watching will grimace: they'll mimic my emotional
state. This is what is meant, in the technical sense, by empathy. We imitate each other's
emotions as a way of expressing support and caring and, even more basically, as a way of
communicating with each other.
7 In their brilliant 1994 book Emotional Contagion, the psychologists Elaine Hatfield and
John Cacioppo and the historian Richard Rapson go one step further. Mimicry, they
argue, is also one of the means by which we infect each other with our emotions. In
other words, if I smile and you see me and smile in response—even a microsmile that
takes no more than several milliseconds—it's not just you imitating or empathizing with
me. It may also be a way that I can pass on my happiness to you. Emotion is contagious.
In a way, this is perfectly intuitive. All of us have had our spirits picked up by being
around somebody in a good mood. If you think about this closely, though, it's quite a
radical notion. We normally think of the expressions on our face as the reflection of an
inner state. I feel happy, so I smile. I feel sad, so I frown. Emotion goes inside-out.
Emotional contagion, though, suggests that the opposite is also true. If I can make you
smile, I can make you happy. If I can make you frown, I can make you sad. Emotion, in
this sense, goes outside-in.
8 If we think about emotion this way—as outside-in, not inside-out—it is possible to
understand how some people can have an enormous amount of influence over others.
Some of us, after all, are very good at expressing emotions and feelings, which means
that we are far more emotionally contagious than the rest of us. Psychologists call these
people “senders.” Senders have special personalities. They are also physiologically
different. Scientists who have studied faces, for example, report that there are huge
differences among people in the location of facial muscles, in their form, and
also—surprisingly—even in their prevalence.
 “It is a situation not unlike the
medicine,” says Cacioppo. “There are carriers, people who are very expressive, and there
are people who are especially susceptible. It's not that emotional contagion is a disease.
But the mechanism is the same.”
9 Howard Friedman, a psychologist at the University of California at Riverside, has
developed what he calls the Affective-Communication Test to measure this ability to
send emotion, to be contagious. The test is a self-administered survey, with thirteen
questions relating to things like whether you can keep still when you hear good dance
music, how loud your laugh is, whether you touch friends when you talk to them, how
good you are at sending seductive glances, whether you like to be the center of attention.
The highest possible score on the test is 117 points, with the average score, according to
Friedman, somewhere around 71.
10 What does it mean to be a high-scorer? To answer that, Friedman conducted a

fascinating experiment. He picked a few dozen people who scored very high on his
test—above 90—and a few dozen who scored very low—below 6—and asked them all to
fill out a questionnaire measuring how they felt “at this instant.” He then put all of the
high-scorers in separate rooms, and paired each of them with two low-scorers. They
were told to sit in the room together for two minutes. They could look at each other, but
not talk. Then, once the session was over, they were asked again to fill out a detailed
questionnaire on how they were feeling. Friedman found that in just two minutes,
without a word being spoken, the low-scorers ended up picking up the moods of the
high-scorers. If the charismatic person started out depressed, and the inexpressive
person started out happy, by the end of the two minutes the inexpressive person was
depressed as well. But it didn't work the other way. Only the charismatic person could
infect the other people in the room with his or her emotions.
11 Is this what Tom Gau did to me? The thing that strikes me most about my encounter
with him was his voice. He had the range of an opera singer. At times, he would sound
stern. (His favorite expression in that state: “Excuse me?”) At times, he would drawl,
lazily and easily. At other times, he would chuckle as he spoke, making his words sing
with laughter. In each of those modes his face would light up accordingly, moving, easily
and deftly, from one state to another. There was no ambiguity in his presentation.
Everything was written on his face. I could not see my own face, of course, but my guess
is that it was a close mirror of his. It is interesting, in this context, to think back on the
experiment with the nodding and the headphones. There was an example of someone
persuaded from the outside-in, of an external gesture affecting an internal decision. Was
I nodding when Tom Gau nodded? And shaking my head when Gau shook his head?
Later, I called Gau up and asked him to take Howard Friedman's charisma test. As we
went through the list, question by question, he started chuckling. By question 11—“I am
terrible at pantomime, as in games like charades”—he was laughing out loud. “I'm great
at that! I always win at charades!” Out of a possible 117 points, he scored 116.
Source: From THE TIPPING POINT by Malcolm Gladwell. Copyright © 2000 by Malcolm
Gladwell. Reprinted by permission of Little, Brown and Company. All rights reserved.
Check Your Understanding
Use context clues and word part analysis to define the following words
from this passage.
erroneous (paragraph 2): 
synchronized (paragraph 5): 
pantomime (paragraph 11): 
6.
The author presents three major supporting details regarding how two (or
more) people talk. Complete the graphic to show the three key points.
7.

Based on your understanding, explain what the author means by physical
and aural harmony.
8.
The author never clearly explains what type of person scores high or low
on Howard Friedman's Affective Communication Test. Based on what he
says about the people who took it, what do you infer a high score means?
9.
Based on your understanding of the Affective Communication Test, what do
you believe your score would be if you were to take the test? Explain why it
would be high or low.
10.
Chapter Review
9-7d 
 Brain Strength Options
Working individually or in groups of no more than three people, complete one of
the following options.
Create a PowerPoint presentation illustrating textbook marking and
1.

annotations. Select a brief reading of about the length used in the Practice
with a Reading. Make a copy of the reading, and using what you learned in
the chapter, mark it up. For example, highlight main ideas and major
supporting details and write margin notes. You might define vocabulary
terms or even add a picture that illustrates the meaning of new vocabulary.
Be sure to include all the steps to effective textbook marking. You will have
to make the sections small enough so that your audience can see a section
at a time on a PowerPoint slide. You can retype or use a camera or scanner
to capture the reading in sections. The more people involved in the project,
the more creative your use of PowerPoint should be. You will present your
PowerPoint to the class (or the instructor may have you post it online for
other students to use to review the chapter).
Working alone, create a poster. Apply the same guidelines as in Option 1
above.
2.
Working alone, take three articles from a magazine or the Internet.
Highlight the main idea and major supporting details. Because you are
highlighting what is actually printed, you will have to select material that
has stated, not implied main ideas and details. Mark the articles by writing
margin notes, using at least five symbols or notes per article.
3.
Using PowerPoint or the app of your choice, create flash cards that review
the material in this chapter in the form of question and response. For
example, on the prompt card, you may have a blank to be filled in or a
question to be answered. Create at least 30 prompts and responses. You will
present the flash cards to the class as a review.
4.

Chapter 10
Using Visuals to Increase your Understanding of Textbooks
Chapter Introduction
10-1 Reading and Creating Visuals Help your Brain to Learn
10-2 Specific Purposes of Textbook Visuals
10-3 Applying PSR to Understand Textbook Visuals
10-3a Stage One: Preview Visuals
10-3b Stage Two: Study-Read Visuals
10-3c Stage Three: Review Visuals
10-4 Types of Textbook Visuals
10-4a Tables
10-4b Diagrams
10-4c Illustrations
10-4d Graphs
10-4e Pie Charts
10-4f Pictographs
10-4g Photographs
10-4h Time Lines
10-4i Geographical Maps
10-4j Cartoons
10-5 Creating your Own Visuals
10-5a Selecting the Right Visual
10-6 Chapter Review
10-6a Practice with a Reading Passage
10-6b Chapter Summary
10-6c Post Test
10-6d  Brain Strength Options

© 2014 Wadsworth Publishing, Cengage Learning
Chapter Introduction
“There is nothing in the mind which was not first in the senses.”
— ARISTOTLE
Student to Student
Matt Cornett
A math major at Schoolcraft College
Courtesy of Matt Cornett
Before i came here (to college), visuals never played a part. One of my teachers in
my earlier math courses told me that if you are ever stuck, draw a picture; it will
jog your memory. And during the early math courses I was stuck a lot, especially
on the story problems. You just see a wall of words; you just get so confused and
befuddled. I learned that after I would stop and draw what I was reading, I was
able to interpret the picture more easily than the text. But after a while of
drawing pictures, I was able to look at the text and see the visuals in my head
without actually having to draw them out. It was like a gateway to understanding
the problems better.
Making Connections
What does the phrase show rather than tell mean?
1.
Imagine that you want an audience to understand the extent of the
effect of an oil spill on Biloxi, Mississippi. How could you get them to
understand without using words?
2.

Why do authors put visuals in textbooks?
3.
Do you look at the photographs, illustrations, figures, graphs, and other
visuals in a textbook? Why or why not?
4.
When and where have you seen a graph used? What do you think was
the purpose?
5.
Have any of your instructors used PowerPoint presentations? What
effect did the presentation have on your understanding of the
material? Did the presentation contain visuals or just text? What was
the purpose of the visuals?
6.

© Cengage Learning
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw on the brain cell how many dendrites you imagine you have for how
much you know about using visuals to understand your textbooks.
Have you thought about how drawing dendrites is a great way to make the
connection between your background knowledge and the new information
in the chapter? In order to draw the amount of dendrites, you have to stop
and think about what you know about the new information. Visuals,
including drawings of your dendrites, are powerful learning tools.
10-1 Reading and Creating Visuals Help your Brain to Learn
Visuals provide a quick, easily accessible format for information that shows you how
ideas connect or relate to each other. They can bring a book to life and help explain
difficult ideas.
Have you ever said, “I see what you mean”? If you see what someone means, you truly
understand his or her point. Or perhaps you have heard the old saying, “A picture is
worth a thousand words.” What does this mean? Pictures allow you to absorb lots of
information quickly; looking at a picture is like understanding a thousand words in a
moment. In fact, we process visuals 60,000 times faster than text! If you learn to read and
use visuals, you will enhance what you learn from your textbooks.
For example, suppose you read a textbook section about shapes. The author writes the
following definition:

One of the shapes is a curved line with every point an equal distance from the center.
Try picturing this: Draw a shape according to the author's description in the space here.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Did you know that if you receive information by reading or hearing it, after 72
hours you will recall only 10% of it (if there is no additional repetition of the
material)? That won't help you for the test. But if you add a visual to the
information, you will recall 65%—six and a half times more!
Compare your drawing with your classmates'. If done correctly, everyone's shape would
be the same! Perhaps larger or smaller, but the same! Why? Because the author provided
you with the geometric definition of a circle. If you drew a proper circle, every point on
the circle would be the same distance from the center. From the written definition, it
may be hard to instantly visualize the shape as a circle. However, if the author provided
a visual of a circle, you would instantly understand the description. It can be much
easier for the brain to understand something with a visual rather than a written
definition or detailed description. Imagine having both!
This chapter introduces you to two specific strategies for learning from visuals
—decoding visuals and encoding visuals. When you decode (to interpret into a language
that makes sense to a reader) visuals that are in your textbook, you interpret them. This
requires that you create meaning from an author's visuals in a way that makes sense
with the author's written words. When you encode (to convert text into a code (in this
case a visual)) visuals, you translate what you have read into some graphic form. This
requires that you understand what you have read.
Not only are visuals enjoyable, they help you to make connections with information and
remember. As you learned in Chapter 2, sensory input is the first step in the memory

process. People begin to learn by first taking information through their senses. Knowing
this, most textbooks provide many different types of visuals to help students speed up
comprehension and add to the meaning of the written content. Visuals increase your
comprehension, recollection, and retention of information and bring life to the text.
Think about the benefits of visuals the next time you think about skipping over them in a
textbook.
10-2 Speciﬁc Purposes of Textbook Visuals
It is important to know that authors use a variety of visuals for specific purposes. Each
visual an author selects is intended to emphasize a specific point in the text. What words
say in sentences, visuals can shout in one image or table. Authors carefully select their
visuals to support and reinforce ideas.
Read the following psychology passage, and then look at the photographs the author
selected to support his content. The author provides you with more than a definition.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Did you know that visuals are so important to the brain that there is a scientific
name for the importance? Scientists call it PSE: Pictorial Superiority Effect. What
does the name tell you about the relationship between your study skills and
pictures? A picture is superior to words—people remember pictures better than
words.
Cohort Eﬀects
Suppose you had been born in the 1940s. Your childhood and adolescence would have
been very different from today: no Internet, computers, iPods, cell phones, air
conditioners, automatic dishwashers, or appliances for washing and drying clothes. You
would have listened to radio instead of watching television. Long-distance telephone
calls were a luxury. Few women or minorities went to college, and those few had limited
job opportunities afterward. If you had lived then, how would you have been different?

Children of the 1940s and 1990s differed in their behavior because they grew up
in different historical eras, with different education, nutrition, and health care.
Differences based on such influences are called cohort effects.
© Bettmann/Corbis © Bill Bennett/Corbis
Source: From KALAT. Introduction to Psychology. Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
How is the author using the photographs? Do you believe that the two photographs help
readers answer the author's question, “If you had lived then, how would you have been
different?” The photographs provide the reader with two clearly different scenarios. If
you were having trouble trying to imagine the differences, the photographs would
provide you with connections to then and now. The photographs stimulate ideas and
create interest.
For another example, examine the cover of the following physics textbook. Although you
have not read anything from this text at this point, you can learn a little bit about the
content just from the photograph on the cover. The photograph intends to create a
connection with the reader. What is happening in the photograph? Is it interesting? Is it
current? What message does the photograph send in relation to the title of the textbook?
Think it through.
The skier is moving, which signals motion. She is moving quickly at a specific angle,
which signals speed and energy. The movement looks powerful, which signals force. She
is using equipment designed specifically to maximize speed and movement and most
likely to account for the wind and snow. Physics is the science that deals with matter,
energy, motion, and force. Do you believe that the cover is a good introduction to the
textbook's content?

© Chase Jarvis/Corbis
10-3 Applying PSR to Understand Textbook Visuals
Visuals clearly enhance learning, so as you read any text, be sure to carefully read any
visuals that accompany the text. You will use the same stages of PSR you used in Chapter
8—preview, study-read, and review.
10-3a Stage One: Preview Visuals
Do you already preview textbook visuals? Previewing visuals, just like previewing text,
gives you a better idea of what you will be learning. During the preview stage of your
reading:
Read the title and caption or whatever text accompanies the visual so that you will
know what idea in the text the visual illustrates.
1.
Predict what the author's purpose for the visual is.
2.
Preview this sociology passage and visual as an example.
Culture Shock
1 People who travel to other countries often experience culture shock—a sense of
confusion, uncertainty, disorientation, or anxiety that accompanies exposure to an
unfamiliar way of life or environment. Familiar cues about how to behave are missing or
have a different meaning. Culture shock affects people differently, but the most stressful
changes involve the type of food eaten, the type of clothes worn, punctuality, ideas about
what offends people, the language spoken, differences in personal hygiene, the general
pace of life, a lack of privacy, and concern about finances (Spradley and Phillips 1972;
Pedersen 1995).
2 To some degree, everyone is culture bound because they've internalized cultural
norms and values. For example, an American journalist who works in Mexico City says
that perpetual lateness is common: A child's birthday party may start 2 or 3 hours late, a
wedding may begin an hour after the announced time, and interviews with top Mexico
City officials may be up to 2 hours late or the official never arrives. These norms are
changing because of the growth of Mexico's global economy, but the more relaxed
attitude of time in Mexico City (and elsewhere) can be a culture shock to someone from
the United States who has grown up in a “clock-obsessed” culture (Ellingwood 2009).

3 American students who have studied abroad often experience culture shock when
they return, such as in readjusting to traffic jams, the pace of daily life, and the emphasis
on work above personal life. For example, a student who studied in Ecuador said that she
missed the sense of community she had felt: “Back in the United States, I noticed how
separate and selfish people can be at times” (Goodkin 2005).
4 A major component of culture is popular culture. Popular culture has an enormous
impact on many contemporary societies.
Source: From BENOKRAITIS. SOC 2e (pp. 52-3). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
The title of the passage gives you a good idea about the content of the reading—culture
shock. What do you already know about culture shock? Have you experienced it
yourself? When? What question did you develop from the title?
About 75 percent of the world's people consume insects, which are high in
protein, vitamins, and fiber and usually low in fat. More than two out of every
three American adults are overweight or obese, the highest percentage on the
planet (Flegal et al. 2010). Would we be healthier if we ate insects instead of
gulping down hamburgers and French fries?
AP Photo/Dario Lopez-Mills
Now focus on the visual. You have read the caption so you can predict the content of the
visual. What do you think the author's purpose for this visual is? Unless you eat insects,
you are probably shocked by the visual. The author's purpose is to convince you, the
reader, that culture shock exists.
10-3b Stage Two: Study-Read Visuals
As you study-read text, stop at the visuals and study-read them, too. When you
study-read visuals, use the following steps:
Decide if your prediction from the previewing step is correct by analyzing the
content of the visual.
1.

Mark the visual with a symbol or note in the margin so you remember why the
visual is important when you are studying.
2.
Go back to the culture shock passage and study-read it and the visual. In the previewing
step, you may have read the title of the passage and asked, “What is culture shock?” Read
the passage carefully, and look for the answer to that question. You should treat the
whole passage as one section. Highlight the main idea in green and supporting details in
yellow. You may want to underline important vocabulary that is not in boldfaced type or
examples that help you remember main points. Write margin notes. Remember that if
you mark something in the text, you should add a margin note that tells you why, unless
specific highlighter colors already indicate why. Also, analyze the visual. Confirm what
the author's purpose was for including it, and write a margin note next to it.
What margin note did you write? What symbol or word best captures the main point of
the visual? You want to pick a word that tells you, at a glance, why the visual is
important. What about the work yuck? It shows shock at eating insects and demonstrates
the first supporting idea from the passage: To some degree, everyone is culture bound
because they've internalized cultural norms and values.
10-3c Stage Three: Review Visuals
In the review stage of PSR, you go back to the main idea statement to begin reviewing and
then organize your material for recall. Later in this chapter, you will learn how outlines
and other visuals you create can help you organize textbook material for recall. Use
these steps to review textbook visuals:
Recall the main idea of the reading.
1.
Mentally associate the visuals that you find particularly meaningful to textbook
ideas you want to remember.
2.
If you go back to the culture shock passage, you recall that the main idea is People who
travel to other countries often experience culture shock. What part of the visual from this
passage best shows shock? Most people would say the insects on a plate.
Most of your textbook reading assignments will be longer than the culture shock
passage, but the process for understanding visuals is the same—preview, study-read, and
review. (See Figure 10.1.) With practice, this process can be automatic and quick.
Figure 10.1
Applying PSR to Understand Textbook Visuals

Activity 10A
Apply PSR to Understand Visuals
Preview the following passage and visual from a psychology textbook.
Predict what the passage and visual will be about.
1.
Now study-read by highlighting the main idea in green and the supporting
details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not already in
boldfaced type and other ideas you think may help you remember new
information. Write margin notes.
2.
Scientific Method
1 The methods of psychology rely primarily on observation, on information gathered by
the senses. Because psychologists depend on observation, they typically use the
scientific method as the main tool for investigating behavior and mind. To understand
the effect of subliminal messages, then, we must first employ the scientific method.
Reduced to its barest essentials, the scientific method contains four important steps:
Observe. The scientific method always begins, appropriately, with observation. In
psychology, we choose the behavior of interest and begin recording its
characteristics as well as the conditions under which the behavior occurs.
1.
Detect regularities. Next the researcher looks for regularities in the observations.
Are there certain consistent features or conditions under which the behaviors
commonly appear?
2.
Generate a hypothesis. In step three, the researcher forms a hypothesis, which is
essentially a prediction about the characteristics of the behavior under study.
Hypotheses are normally expressed in the form of testable if-then statements: If
some set of conditions is present and observed, then a certain kind of behavior will
occur.
3.
Observe. Finally, the predictions of the hypothesis are checked for accuracy once
again through observation. If new data are consistent with the prediction of the
hypothesis, the hypothesis is supported.
4.

2 Notice that the scientific method is anchored on both ends by observation: Observation
always begins and ends the scientific process. This means that psychological terms must
be defined in a way that allows for observation. To make certain that terms and concepts
meet this criterion, psychologists often use operational definitions, which define
concepts specifically in terms of how those concepts can be measured (Levine &
Parkinson, 1994; Stevens, 1939). For example, intelligence might be defined operationally
as performance on a psychological test, and memory might be defined as the number of
words correctly recalled on a retention test.
Source: From NAIRNE. Psychology 5e (pp. 27-8). Copyright © 2009 Cengage Learning.
How does Figure 10.2 help explain the passage? What meaning does it add
or emphasize?
Figure 10.2
The Scientiﬁc Method: Four Major Steps
Observe. The rat jumps toward the checkerboard panel on the
left.
1.
Detect regularities in behavior. The researcher notes that the
rat, over repeated trials, consistently jumps to the checkerboard
on the left.
2.
Generate a hypothesis: If I move the checkerboard to the right,
the rat will jump to the right.
3.
Observe to test the hypothesis. Here the hypothesis turns out to
be wrong. The rat jumps left again instead of following the
checkerboard.
4.
3.

What is the author's purpose for Figure 10.2?
4.
What part or parts of Figure 10.2 could you picture in your mind to help
you remember what you read?
5.
Comprehension Check
List the key points made in this chapter so far.
Up to this point in the chapter, what is unclear?
10-4 Types of Textbook Visuals
The type of visual an author uses is determined by the author's purpose for writing the
text and by the content of the text. The most common types of visuals found in textbooks
include:
tables
diagrams
pictographs
photographs
illustrations
graphs
pie charts
time lines
geographical maps
cartoons

10-4a Tables
Tables, also known as charts or matrices, are visuals where large amounts of
information are condensed into a format, usually using categories, that make it easy to
see how different items of information relate to each other. Tables (visual where large
amounts of text are condensed into a format, usually using categories, that make it easy
to see how different items of information relate to each other) work especially well for
information from history, economics, and psychology textbooks because many chapters
in these books are organized by using comparison and contrast format. Tables are also
used in biology, pharmacy, and nursing textbooks to show hierarchy (a ranking order of
persons or things, one above the other) .
Activity 10B
Read a Table
Preview the following passage and visual from a world history textbook.
Predict what the passage and visual are going to be about.
1.
Study-read the passage and visual. Highlight the main idea in green and the
supporting details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not
already in boldfaced type and other ideas you think may help you
remember new information. Write margin notes.
2.
The Phoenicians
1 A Semitic-speaking people, the Phoenicians lived in the area of Palestine along the
Mediterranean coast on a narrow band of land 120 miles long. Their newfound political
independence after the demise of Hittite and Egyptian power helped the Phoenicians
expand the trade that was already the foundation of their prosperity. The chief cities of
Phoenicia (Byblos, Tyre, and Sidon) were ports on the eastern Mediterranean, but they
also served as distribution centers for the lands to the east in Mesopotamia. The
Phoenicians themselves produced a number of goods for foreign markets, including
purple dye, glass, wine, and lumber from the famous cedars of Lebanon. In addition, the
Phoenicians improved their ships and became great international sea traders. They
charted new routes, not only in the Mediterranean but also in the Atlantic Ocean, where
they reached Britain and sailed south along the west coast of Africa. The Phoenicians
established a number of colonies in the western Mediterranean, including settlements in
southern Spain, Sicily, and Sardinia. Carthage, the Phoenicians most famous colony, was
located on the north coast of Africa.
2 Culturally, the Phoenicians are best known as transmitters. Instead of using
pictographs or signs to represent whole words and syllables as the Mesopotamians and

Egyptians did, the Phoenicians simplified their writing by using twenty-two different
signs to represent the sounds of their speech. These twenty-two characters or letters
could be used to spell out all the words in the Phoenician language. Although the
Phoenicians were not the only people to invent an alphabet, theirs would have special
significance because it was eventually passed on to the Greeks. From the Greek alphabet
was derived the Roman alphabet that we still use today (Table 10.1 shows the derivation
of the letters A to F). The Phoenicians achieved much while independent, but they
ultimately fell subject to the Assyrians and Persians.
Table 10.1
The Phoenician, Greek, and Roman Alphabets
Source: Andrew Robinson, The Story of Writing (London, 1995), p. 170
Source: From DUIKER/SPIELVOGEL. World History 5e (pp. 24-5). Copyright © 2007 Cengage
Learning.
How does Table 10.1 help explain the passage? What meaning does it add or
emphasize?
3.
What is the author's purpose for Table 10.1?
4.
What part of Table 10.1 could you picture in your mind to help you
remember what you have read?
5.

10-4b Diagrams
A diagram (drawing with markings to show how something is put together or works)
Shows the connections between related pieces of information using drawings and labels.
The sections or parts of something (for example, a body, machine, plant, or building) can
be emphasized clearly through the use of a diagram because the parts are labeled. Many
science books use detailed, labeled diagrams of the topics they discuss.
Activity 10C
Read a Diagram
Preview the following passage and visual from a biology textbook. Predict
what the passage and visual are going to be about.
1.
Study-read the passage and visual. Highlight the main idea in green and the
supporting details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not
already in boldfaced type and any other ideas you think may help you
remember new information. Write margin notes.
2.
Energy Flows through Ecosystems
1 Like individual organisms, ecosystems depend on a continuous input of energy. A
self-sufficient ecosystem contains three types of organisms—producers, consumers, and
decomposers—and has a physical environment appropriate for their survival. These
organisms depend on each other and on the environment for nutrients, energy, oxygen,
and carbon dioxide. However, there is a one-way flow of energy through ecosystems.
Organisms can neither create energy nor use it with complete efficiency. During every
energy transaction, some energy disperses into the environment as heat and is no longer
available to the organism (Figure 10.3).
2 Producers, or autotrophs, are plants, algae, and certain bacteria that produce their
own food from simple raw materials. Most of these organisms use sunlight as an energy
source and carry out photosynthesis, the process in which producers synthesize
complex molecules from carbon dioxide and water. The light energy is transformed into
chemical energy, which is stored within the chemical bonds of the food molecules
produced. Oxygen, which is required not only by plant cells but also by the cells of most
other organisms, is produced as a by-product of photosynthesis:
Animals are consumers, or heterotrophs— that is, organisms that depend on producers
for food, energy, and oxygen. Consumers obtain energy by breaking down sugars and
other food molecules originally produced during photosynthesis. When chemical bonds
are broken during this process of cellular respiration, their stored energy is made
available for life processes:

Consumers contribute to the balance of the ecosystem. For example, consumers
produce carbon dioxide needed by producers. (Note that producers also carry on cellular
respiration.) The metabolism of consumers and producers helps maintain the
life-sustaining mixture of gases in the atmosphere.
3 Bacteria and fungi are decomposers, heterotrophs that obtain nutrients by breaking
down nonliving organic material such as wastes, dead leaves and branches, and the
bodies of dead organisms. In their process of obtaining energy, decomposers make the
components of these materials available for reuse. If decomposers did not exist,
nutrients would remain locked up in dead bodies, and the supply of elements required
by living systems would soon be exhausted.
Source: From SOLOMON/BERG/MARTIN. Biology 7e (pp. 13-14). Copyright © 2005 Cengage
Learning.
How does Figure 10.3 help explain the passage? What meaning does it add
or emphasize?
Figure 10.3
Energy Flow
Continuous energy input from the sun operates the biosphere.
During photosynthesis, producers use the energy from sunlight to
make complex molecules from carbon dioxide and water.
Consumers, such as the caterpillar and robin shown here, obtain
energy, carbon, and other needed materials when they eat producers
or consumers that have eaten producers. Wastes and dead organic
material supply decomposers with energy and carbon. During every
energy transaction, some energy is lost to biological systems,
dispersing into the environment as heat.
3.

What is the author's purpose for Figure 10.3?
4.
What part of Figure 10.3 could you picture in your mind to help you
remember what you have read?
5.
10-4c Illustrations
An illustration (a drawing) Is a drawing that allows an author to show you what he or she
is writing about. For example, if an author were writing about a rose, an illustration of a
rose would bring additional meaning to the text. It would show the bush it comes from, a
stem, thorns, leaves, and petals. It might even show some decay on a leaf or a bee flying
around the flower. All of these details help readers see the idea of a rose more clearly.
Activity 10D
Read an Illustration
Preview the following passage and visual from a world history textbook.
Predict what the passage and visual are going to be about.
1.
Study-read the passage and visual. Highlight the main idea in green and the
supporting details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not
already in boldfaced type and any other ideas you think may help you
remember new information. Write margin notes.
2.
1 A single instance underscores how differently people of diverse cultures view the
world and how various ways of seeing can cause sharp differences in how artists depict
the world. Illustrated here are two contemporaneous portraits of a 19th-century Maori
chieftain (Figure 10.4)—one by an Englishman, John Sylvester (active early 19th century),

and the other by the New Zealand chieftain himself, Te Pehi Kupe (d. 1829). Both
reproduce the chieftain's facial tattooing. The European artist (Figure 10.4) included the
head and shoulders and underplayed the tattooing. The tattoo pattern is one aspect of
the likeness among many, no more or less important than the chieftain's European
attire. Sylvester also recorded his subject's momentary glance toward the right and the
play of light on his hair, fleeting aspects that have nothing to do with the figure's identity.
2 In contrast, Te Pehi Kupe's self-portrait (Figure 10.4)—made during a trip to Liverpool,
England, to obtain European arms to take back to New Zealand—is not a picture of a man
situated in space and bathed in light. Rather, it is the chieftain's statement of the
supreme importance of the tattoo design that symbolizes his rank among his people.
Remarkably, Te Pehi Kupe created the tattoo patterns from memory, without the aid of a
mirror. The splendidly composed insignia, presented as a flat design separated from the
body and even from the head, is Te Pehi Kupe's image of himself. Only by understanding
the cultural context of each portrait can viewers hope to understand why either
representation appears as it does.
Figure 10.4
Left: John Henry Sylvester, Portrait of Te Pehi Kupe, 1826, Watercolor, 8¼” ×
6¼”. National Library of Australia, Canberra (Rex Nan Kivell Collection). Right:
Te Pehi Kupe, Self-Portrait, 1826. From Leo Frobenius, The Childhood of Man
(New York: J. B. Lippincott, 1909).
These strikingly different portraits of the same Maori chief reveal how differently
Western and non-Western artists “see” a subject. Understanding the cultural
context of artworks is vital to art history.
John Sylvester/The Bridgeman Art Library/Getty Image Te Pehi Kupe Self-portrait, 1826.
Source: Horatio Gordon Robley's Moko; or Maori Tattooing, 1896
Source: From KLEINER. Gardner's Art through the Ages: A Global History, Volume I, 13e (p.
13). Copyright © 2009 Cengage Learning.
How does Figure 10.4 help explain the passage? What meaning does it add
or emphasize?
3.

What is the author's purpose for Figure 10.4?
4.
What part of Figure 10.4 could you picture in your mind to help you
remember what you have read?
5.
10-4d Graphs
Graphs (visual that shows changes in quantities, usually with a horizontal and vertical
axis) are used to make large amounts of information easily accessible so that you can see
at a glance the similarities or differences between the items being discussed or recognize
trends over time, such as consumer preferences for different brands of food or clothing.
It is important to read the labels on the horizontal and vertical axes so that you can
correctly interpret the information provided. There are several types of graphs, each of
which is used for different purposes, including bar graphs (graph that illustrates
information by using parallel rectangular bars of varying length to contrast information)
and line graphs (graph that displays information as a series of data points connected by
straight line segments) .
Figure 10.5 is a graph that shows how working memory capacity changes over a person's
lifetime. You may recall from Chapter 2 that working memory is the system by which
you can hold a certain amount of information in your brain for a fairly brief period of
time so that you can work with it, such as remembering a phone number long enough to
dial it. According to Figure 10.5, a person's working memory capacity (shown by the
vertical axis) changes over his or her lifetime (shown by the horizontal axis). At first it
gets better and then begins a decline. You see a line that gradually goes up, peaks, and
then starts going down. Generally speaking, through life your memory gradually gets
better and then begins to decline. On average a person can remember from four to seven
bits of information at a time. However, the number of items remembered can be
affected by age. Where do you stand in this graph?
Figure 10.5
Changes in Working Memory During a Person's Life (from Swanson, 1999).

Source: H.L. “Swanson, What Develops in Working Memory? A Life Span Perspective,” Developmental Psychology 35
(pp. 986–1000). Copyright © 1999 American Psychological Association. Reprinted by permission
Activity 10E
Read a Graph
Preview the following passage and visual from a sociology textbook. Predict
what the passage and visual are going to be about.
1.
Study-read the passage and visual. Highlight the main idea in green and the
supporting details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not
already in boldfaced type and any other ideas you think may help you
remember new information. Write margin notes.
2.
Race
Racial subordination may be a factor in some suicides. Figure 10.6 displays U.S. suicides
in terms of race and sex.) This fact is most glaringly reflected in the extremely high rate
of suicide among Native Americans, who constitute about 1 percent of the U.S.
population. The rate of suicide among young Native American males on
government-owned reservations is especially high, and almost 60 percent of Native
American suicides involve firearms (National Center for Injury Prevention and Control,
2009). Most research has focused on individualistic reasons why young Native
Americans commit suicide; however, analysts using a race-and-ethnic framework focus
on the effect of social inequalities and racial discrimination on suicidal behavior.
Figure 10.6
Suicide Rates by Race and Sex
Rates are for U.S. suicides and indicate the number of deaths by suicide for every
100,000 people in each category for 2006.

Source: National Center for Health Statistics, 2008.
Source: From KENDALL. Sociology in Our Times: The Essentials (p. 20). Copyright © 2012
Cengage Learning.
How does Figure 10.6 help explain the passage? What meaning does it add
or emphasize?
3.
What is the author's purpose for Figure 10.6?
4.
What part of Figure 10.6 could you picture in your mind to help you
remember what you have read?
5.
10-4e Pie Charts
Pie Charts are a specific type of chart that is presented in a circle format. Pie charts
(circular visual that is divided into sections like a pie illustrating proportion) show how
pieces of data relate to the whole and usually look like sliced pies. They represent data
by using a circle to show the whole and slices or wedges to show how the whole is
divided up. The wedges are usually in different colors and represent each component
being measured.
Activity 10F
Read a Pie Chart
Preview the following passage and visual from a sociology textbook. Predict
what the passage and visual are going to be about.
1.

Study-read the passage and visual. Highlight the main idea in green and the
supporting details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not
already in boldfaced type and any other ideas you think may help you
remember new information. Write margin notes.
2.
Parenting Roles
1 Like workplace roles, parenting does not come naturally. Most first-time parents
muddle through by trial and error. Family sociologists often point out that we get more
training for driving a car than for marriage and parenting. For example, most couples
don't realize that raising children is expensive. Middle-income couples, with an average
income of $ 77,000 a year, spend about 16 percent of their earnings on a child during the
first 2 years (see Figure 10.7). Child-rearing costs are much higher for single parents and
especially for lowincome families if a child is disabled, chronically ill, or needs
specialized care that welfare benefits don't cover (Lukemeyer et al. 2000; Lino and
Carlson 2009).
2 Arguments over finances and child-rearing strategies are two of the major reasons for
divorce. All in all, adjusting to marital and parental roles during adulthood requires
considerable patience, effort, and work.
Source: From BENOKRAITIS. SOC 2e (p. 78). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
How does Figure 10.7 help explain the passage? What meaning does it add
or emphasize?
Figure 10.7
Yearly Cost of Raising Children, 2008
In 2008, middle-income families—those earning $56,870 to $98,470 a
year—spent almost $12,000 per year for a child under 2. This amount
does not include the costs of prenatal care or delivery.
3.

© Don Farrall/Photodisc/Getty Images/Creatas/Jupiter Images Creatas/Jupiterimages
What is the author's purpose for Figure 10.7?
4.
What part of Figure 10.7 could you picture in your mind to help you
remember what you have read?
5.
10-4f Pictographs
Pictographs (visual representing data through the use of pictures) represent data
through the use of pictures. They rely on information in the text to explain the pictures
presented in the visual.
Activity 10G
Read a Pictograph
Preview the following passage and visual from a sociology textbook. Predict
what the passage and visual are going to be about.
1.
Study-read the passage and visual. Highlight the main idea in green and the
supporting details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not
already in boldfaced type and any other ideas you think may help you
remember new information. Write margin notes.
2.
Diffusion
1 A culture may change because of diffusion, the process through which components of
culture spread from one society to another. Such borrowing may have occurred so long
ago that the members of a society consider their culture to be entirely their own
creation. However, anthropologist Ralph Linton (1964) has estimated that 90 percent of
the elements of any culture are a result of diffusion (see Figure 10.8).

Figure 10.8
The 100-Percent American
Ryan McVay/Photodisc/Getty Images Zedcor Wholly Owned/Jupiter Images Andersen Ross/Jupiter Images
Stockbyte/Getty Images C Squared Studios/Photodisc/Getty Images Ryan McVay/Jupiter Images
2 Diffusion can be direct and conscious, occurring through trade, tourism, immigration,
intermarriage, or the invasion of one country by another. Diffusion can also be indirect
and largely unconscious, as in the Internet transmissions that zip around the world.
Source: From BENOKRAITIS. SOC 2e (p. 56). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
How does Figure 10.8 help explain the passage? What meaning does it add
or emphasize?
3.
What is the author's purpose for Figure 10.8?
4.
What part of Figure 10.8 could you picture in your mind to help you
remember what you have read?
5.

10-4g Photographs
Photographs help you make associations with information in the text. They help the
reader see what's being discussed, which makes the information clearer, more real, and
easier to understand. Photographs (a picture made from light passing through a camera
onto film or in digital form) can also provide more subtle information to the reader.
They can hint at any bias the author may have because they highlight something from
only one viewpoint. Consider the following example: Lindsay Lohan is an actress,
recording artist, and model who has also found herself in legal trouble involving drugs
and alcohol. When newspapers report on her success, they typically use accompanying
photos of Lohan that highlight her beauty. When journalists report Lohan's legal
struggles, they usually include pictures that are less flattering.
These are two very different photographs of the same person. The tone of the first
picture is glamorous and happy. The tone of the second photograph is markedly
different. Lohan does not look glamorous at all. If someone only vaguely knew of
Lindsay Lohan and happened upon an article about her, that person might quickly make
a judgment based—either positive or negative—just from the picture alone. Photographs
convey loads of information before text even gets the chance.
A photograph has a lot to say, and an author's choice of photographs tells something
about the author. Look for the tone as well as the subject matter when examining a
photograph. All photographs show a point of view. What a photographer chooses to leave
out of a photograph can be just as important as what he or she chooses to put in. Authors
choose their photographs for a reason. Does the photograph color the way you read the
text?
Featureflash/Shutterstock.com Pool/Getty Images
Activity 10H
Read a Photograph
Preview the following passage and visual from a culinary arts textbook.
1.

Predict what the passage and visual are going to be about.
Study-read the passage and visual. Highlight the main idea in green and the
supporting details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not
already in boldfaced type and any other ideas you think may help you
remember new information. Write margin notes.
2.
Knife Grip and Positioning
1 There are different acceptable methods for gripping a knife, but there is a common
method used by culinary professionals that provides control and stability. To begin, the
knife is held by the handle while resting the side of the index finger against one side of
the blade and placing the thumb on the other side of the blade. The hand not holding the
knife is referred to as the guiding hand. The guiding hand is responsible for guiding the
item to be cut into the knife. To correctly position the fingers of the guiding hand, imitate
the shape of a spider on the table. The fingertips should all be slightly tucked, yet touch
the surface of the table. This guiding hand position is used to safely hold the food next to
the blade of the knife.
2 Using the proper knife grip, the tip of the knife is placed on the cutting board. The
guiding hand is placed next to the knife blade in the proper position, with fingertips
slightly tucked under near the back half of the blade. The side of the blade should rest
against the knuckle of the middle finger of the guiding hand. This position reduces the
chances of cutting fingers. See Figure 10.9.
Figure 10.9
Knife Grip and Positioning
Using the proper knife grip with the knife hand, and with fingertips slightly tucked
under with the guiding hand, the side of the blade should rest against the knuckle
of the middle finger of the guiding hand.
Stockphoto.com/rudisill
Source: Mcgreal, Culinary Arts Principals and Applications, American Technical Publishers,
Inc., 2012, p. 74.

How does Figure 10.9 help explain the passage? What meaning does it add
or emphasize?
3.
What is the author's purpose for Figure 10.9?
4.
What part of Figure 10.9 could you picture in your mind to help you
remember what you have read?
5.
10-4h Time Lines
Time lines are visuals that are labeled marks on a line to show the time sequence or
chronology of a series of events. Time lines (visual way of displaying events in
chronological order) are often used in history books to provide summaries of events that
occurred over a period of time.
Activity 10I
Read a Time Line
Preview the following passage and visual from a western civilization
textbook. Predict what the passage and visual are going to be about.
1.
Study-read the passage and visual. Highlight the main idea in green and the
supporting details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not
already in boldfaced type and any other ideas you think may help you
remember new information. Write margin notes.
2.
1 As the heirs of Western civilization have become aware that the problems humans face
are global, not just national, they have responded to this challenge in different ways. One
approach has been to develop grassroots social movements, including those devoted to

the environment, women's and men's liberation, human potential, appropriate
technologies, and nonviolence. “Think globally, act locally” is one slogan these groups
use. Related to the emergence of these social movements is the growth of
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). According to one analyst, NGOs are an
important instrument in the cultivation of global perspectives: “Since NGOs by definition
are identified with interests that transcend national boundaries, we expect all NGOs to
define problems in global terms, to take account of human interests and needs as they
are found in all parts of the planet.” NGOs are often represented at the United Nations
and include professional, business, and cooperative organizations; foundations;
religious, peace, and disarmament groups; youth and women's organizations;
environmental and human rights groups; and research institutes. The number of
international NGOs increased from 176 in 1910 to 29,000 in 1995.
2 Yet hopes for global approaches to global problems have also been hindered by
political, ethnic, and religious disputes. Pollution of the Rhine River by factories along its
banks provokes angry disputes among European nations, and the United States and
Canada have argued about the effects of acid rain on Canadian forests. The collapse of
the Soviet Union and its satellite system between 1989 and 1991 seemed to provide an
enormous boost to the potential for international cooperation on global issues, but it has
had almost the opposite effect. The bloody conflict in the former Yugoslavia indicates
the dangers in the rise of nationalist sentiment among various ethnic and religious
groups in Eastern Europe. The widening gap between the wealthy nations in the
Northern Hemisphere and the poor, developing nations in the Southern Hemisphere
threatens global economic stability. Many conflicts begin with regional issues and then
develop into international concerns. International terrorist groups seek to wreak havoc
around the world.
3 Thus even as the world becomes more global in culture and interdependent in its
mutual relations, centrifugal forces are still at work attempting to redefine the political,
cultural, and ethnic ways in which the world is divided. Such efforts are often disruptive

and can sometimes work against measures to enhance our human destiny
4 Many lessons can be learned from the history of Western civilization, but one of them
is especially clear. Lack of involvement in the affairs of one's society can lead to a sense
of powerlessness. In an age that is often crisis-laden and chaotic, an understanding of
our Western heritage and its lessons can be instrumental in helping us create new
models for the future. For we are all creators of history, and the future of Western and
indeed world civilization depends on us.
Source: From SPIELVOGEL. Western Civilization: A Brief History 4e (pp. 582-2). Copyright ©
2008 Cengage Learning.
Using context clues, or perhaps your own background knowledge, explain
what you think the definition of the phrase centrifugal forces from
paragraph 3 is.
3.
How does the time line help explain the passage? What meaning does it add
or emphasize?
4.
What is the author's purpose for the time line?
5.
What part of the time line could you picture in your mind to help you
remember what you have read?
6.
10-4i Geographical Maps
Geographical maps are visual representations of geographical areas. Authors use
geographical maps (visual representation of a geographical area) to give perspective on
an area they discuss. For example, an author may describe global trade and include a
world map as a visual so that readers see which countries are participating against the
background of the entire world. Maps are frequently used in history, political science,

and anthropology textbooks.
Activity 10J
Read a Geographical Map
Preview the following passage and visual from a world history textbook.
Predict what the passage and visual are going to be about.
1.
Study-read the passage and visual. Highlight the main idea in green and the
supporting details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not
already in boldfaced type and any other ideas you think may help you
remember new information. Write margin notes.
2.
The Scramble for Africa
1 At the beginning of the 1880s, most of Africa was still independent. European rule was
still limited to the fringes of the continent, and a few areas, such as Egypt, lower Nigeria,
Senegal, and Mozambique, were under various forms of loose protectorate. But the
trends were ominous, as the pace of European penetration was accelerating and the
constraints that had limited European rapaciousness were fast disappearing.
2 The scramble began in the mid-1880s, when several European states engaged in what
today would be called a feeding frenzy. All sought to seize a piece of African territory
before the carcass had been picked clean. By 1900, virtually the entire continent had
been placed under one form or another of European rule (see Figure 10.10). The British
had consolidated their authority over the Nile valley and seized additional territories in
East Africa. The French retaliated by advancing eastward from Senegal into the central
Sahara, where they eventually came eyeball to eyeball with the British in the Nile valley.
They also occupied the island of Madagascar and other coastal territories in West and
Central Africa. In between, the Germans claimed the hinterland opposite Zanzibar, as
well as coastal strips in West and Southwest Africa north of the Cape, and King Leopold II
of Belgium claimed the Congo.
Figure 10.10
Africa in 1914.
By the beginning of 1900, virtually all of Africa was under some form of European
rule. The territorial divisions established by colonial powers on the continent of
Africa on the eve of World War I are shown here.

The Motives
3 What had happened to spark the sudden imperialist hysteria that brought an end to
African independence? Economic interests in the narrow sense were not at stake as they
had been in South and Southeast Asia: the level of trade between Europe and Africa was
simply not sufficient to justify the risks and the expense of conquest. Clearly, one factor
was the growing rivalry among imperialist powers. European leaders might be provoked
into an imperialist takeover not by economic considerations but by the fear that another
state might do so, leaving them at a disadvantage.
Source: From DUIKER. Contemporary World History (40-42). Copyright © 2010 Cengage
Learning.
This passage has some difficult vocabulary. Use contexts clues and word
part analysis to define the following words from the passage.
protectorate (paragraph 1): 
ominous (paragraph 1): 
rapaciousness (paragraph 1): 
imperialist (paragraph 3): 
3.
How does Figure 10.10 help explain the passage? What meaning does it add
or emphasize?
4.

What is the author's purpose for Figure 10.10?
5.
What part of Figure 10.10 could you picture in your mind to help you
remember what you have read?
6.
10-4j Cartoons
Cartoons are illustrations that are meant to entertain. Cartoons (illustration that is
meant to entertain) usually exaggerate or poke fun at one aspect of a complicated issue.
The exaggeration of one aspect or oversimplification of the entire issue is usually where
the humor is. Authors include cartoons as visuals to make points in funny ways. More
and more textbooks are using cartoons to lighten the mood while still making a point.
Activity 10K
Read a Cartoon
Preview the following passage and visual from a world history textbook.
Predict what the passage and visual are going to be about.
1.
Study-read the passage and visual. Highlight the main idea in green and the
supporting details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not
already in boldfaced type and any other ideas you think may help you
remember new information. Write margin notes.
2.
Grade Inflation
1 In 1973, only 20 percent of high-school students earned an A average, compared with
47 percent in 2003. However, standardized tests show that, between 1992 and 2007, the
percentage of twelfth-graders who performed at or above a basic level in reading
decreased from 80 to 73 percent, whereas the percentage performing at or above a

proficient level declined from 40 to 35 percent (Ewers 2004; Lee et al. 2007; Planty et al.
2008). Such data suggest that grades are rising, but learning is lagging.
2 A professor who tracks GPAs says that grade inflation “has gone wild: When students
walk into a classroom knowing that they can go through the motions and get a B+ or
better, that's what they tend to do, give minimal effort. Our college classrooms are filled
with students who do not prepare for class” (Rojstaczer 2009: 9).
3 According to one critic, “The demanding professor is close to being extinct” because
“professors are under pressure to accommodate students” (Murray 2008: 32). Grade
inflation, especially in college, is due to a number of factors, both institutional and
individual. Many faculty members give high grades because it decreases student
complaints, involves less time and thought in grading exams and papers, and reduces the
chances of students' challenging a grade. Some faculty also believe that they can get
favorable course evaluations from students by handing out high grades, and others
accept students' view of high grades as a reward for simply showing up in class.
Moreover, administrators want to keep enrollment up. If students are unhappy with
their grades, admission application rates may decrease. Thus, inflating grades satisfies
administrators and makes them look good, especially where state legislators base
funding on graduation rates (Carroll 2002; Kamber and Biggs 2002; Halfond 2004; Bartlett
and Wasley 2008).
4 Among other problems, grade inflation gives students an exaggerated and unrealistic
sense of their ability and accomplishments. Sometimes, for example, students don't
understand why their job searches are unsuccessful because “I'm an A student.” In fact,
many students' incorrect usage of grammar on job application forms and résumés, as
well as during interviews, turns off prospective employers (Halfond 2004).
© 2008 The New Yorker Collection from Cartoonbank.com. All rights reserved.
Source: From BENOKRAITIS. SOC 2e (pp. 270-71). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.

How does the cartoon help explain the passage? What meaning does it add
or emphasize?
3.
What is the author's purpose for the cartoon?
4.
What part of the cartoon could you picture in your mind to help you
remember what you have read?
5.
10-5 Creating your Own Visuals
In addition to learning how to understand visuals in your textbooks, you can also create
your own visuals. If you are able to create visuals of what you read, then you really
understand the material, which leads to better memory retention. Creating a visual can
be as useful as several intense study sessions because it requires that you organize the
information in a way that is meaningful to you. Your primary goal is to illustrate the
relationships between the ideas in your textbook. When creating visuals, do not be
concerned about how artistic you are. Just create something based on the information
you are studying. Here are some general guidelines for creating visuals:
Always label your visual. Do not assume that you will remember what the visual
means two or three weeks later.
Avoid too much detail. Focus on one task, like comparing ideas, showing
cause/effect, describing a process, or labeling parts.
Use color if you can to add interest and meaning. Just like the highlighter colors
you have been using throughout this book, colors can also be used to indicate
important vocabulary, minor details, and helpful examples or to trigger personal
recall. For example, if you were to color a visual about blood circulating in the
human body, you might pick red for the arteries that leave the heart (which have
lots of oxygen) and blue for the veins returning to the heart (which have less
oxygen). These colors illustrate the function the arteries and veins serve. What
colors might you use to draw photosynthesis? Green for the leaf? Yellow for the

sun? What about drawing a time line? What colors would you use to represent
1776? Why?
Before you begin to learn more about creating your own visuals, keep in mind what you
learned in Chapter 2 regarding your memory—you cannot remember what you do not
understand. The same idea is true for visuals. You cannot create a visual if you do not
understand the text.
Activity 10L
Draw a Visual from Reading
Read the following passage, and use the space to create your own visual or
interpretation of it. Do not worry about being a great artist; stick figures are fine
as long as the visual makes sense to you.
If the balloons popped, the sound wouldn't be able to carry since everything would be
too far away from the concrete floor. A closed window would also not work. Since the
whole operation depends on the steady flow of electricity, a break in the middle of the
wire would also cause problems. Of course, the fellow could shout, but the human voice
is not loud enough to carry that far. An additional problem is that a string could break on
the instrument. Then there would be no accompaniment to the message. It is clear that
the best situation would involve less distance. Then there would be fewer potential
problems. With face-to-face contact, the least number of things could go wrong.
Source: J. D. Bransford and M. K. Johnson, “Contextual Prerequisites for Understanding
Some Investigations of Comprehension and Recall.” Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 11, 1972, P. 718.

Reprinted from Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, Volume 11, Issue 6, John D. Bransford,
Marcia K. Johnson, Pages 717–726, © December 1972, with permission of Elsevier.
Was drawing a visual easy or difficult? Why? Most people find this very difficult.
You cannot remember what you do not understand, and you will not be able to
create a visual if you do not understand the information. Most likely, you will not
have readings that are intentionally difficult and confusing like this one was. It
was created to show you:
Using visuals with text assists the reader's understanding of the text.
1.
You cannot draw what you do not understand.
2.
Your instructor will share the drawing for this reading with you that may help
you understand the text more clearly.
Comprehension Check
What are two things Activity 10L taught you about visuals?
If you are able to share your drawing with other students, discuss each
others' interpretations.
10-5a Selecting the Right Visual
The most commonly used visuals students create include diagrams, free- form drawings,
mind maps, outlines, and tables. The type of visual you choose to create will depend on
the material you are trying to learn and remember.
It may also depend on the author's pattern of organization. Recall from Chapter 7 that
some visuals effectively represent textbook information based on authors' specific
patterns of organization. Some of the more common types of visuals for
comparison/contrast, cause/effect, and sequence are shown in Figure 10.11. Remember
that organizational word clues can help you to decide which type of visual to use. If a
history chapter author uses words like then and now, it would be useful to organize the
information using a comparison/contrast table.
Figure 10.11
Common Visual Organizations Based on Patterns

When creating visuals from your textbook, it is important to include what you already
know about a topic whenever possible. Attaching new information to what you know
allows you to add what you have just learned to your prior knowledge where it will make
it easier for you to recall. For example, if you draw a diagram to help you to remember
the details of the digestive system, it will help to include parts of the body you are
already familiar with, such as the head and neck, as well as showing the esophagus,
stomach, and large intestine.
All of the visuals introduced here can be used for any subject, but some are better suited
to specific disciplines. If you are not sure what visual might be best, refer to Table 10.3.
Table 10.3
Guide for Selecting a Visual
Type of
Visual
Information Visual Best Captures
Example
table
depicts many kinds of
information, can be made using
any list of facts
organizes large amounts of
information, stating diﬀerent
characteristic of a person, place,
or thing, so that a number of
items and their characteristics
can be viewed simultaneously
compares and contrasts items
easily
demonstrates cause/eﬀect
useful in history, psychology,
biology, nursing, pharmacy,
English, literature, and
economics
how something
looks, where it is
located, its function
mammals versus
amphibians the
eﬀect of gravity on
objects
See Read a Table and
Tables.
diagram
represents things, places, parts,
where everything is labeled
photosynthesis or
the steps in creating
a commercial

Type of
Visual
Information Visual Best Captures
Example
illustrates sequences and
processes
useful in all sciences,
automotive, and culinary arts
product
See Create Your Own
Diagram.
free-form
drawing
makes concepts concrete by
creating a visual representation
of text information—and for
interpretation, problem solving,
and reading between the lines
of written material
visually represents a thinking
process—some people make
connections using meaningful
doodles connected to note
taking
provides personal
representation and
understanding of written
material
useful in geology, biology,
literature, technology, and
sciences
See Free-Form Drawings.
mind map
shows organization of
information in a nonlinear way
demonstrates relationships
between topic, main ideas, and
supporting details in written
material
useful in most all disciplines
Create Your Own Mind
Map.
outline
shows linear organization of
information
demonstrates order or hierarchy
of information
useful in most all disciplines
progression of
historical events
feudal relationship
between monarch
and subjects
See Outlines.

Tables
If you recall, a table is made up of large amounts of text information, condensed into a
format that makes it easy to see how different items of information relate to each other.
Table 10.2 shows a way that one student decided to remember Chinese numbers. He put
the English numbers in column 1, Chinese characters in column 2, and Chinese Pinyin in
column 3 as a way to help him organize and remember the information. He frequently
got the characters and their pronunciation and meaning confused before he organized
them this way. The table allowed him to see the connections. He continues to use tables
to help him learn and remember the Chinese language. This type of table could be used
with any course content. For example, if you had a table about diseases, you could list
the diseases in column 1, ways the different diseases are spread in column 2, and cures
for the diseases in column 3.
Table 10.2
Student-Created Table
Source: Courtesy of Joseph Wafer.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Images that you imagine can be just as important to the brain as images that you
see with your eyes because we actually see with our brain! The eyes transport the
information to the brain, but we see what the brain tells us we see. Sometimes
we do not see what is actually there, as in optical illusions. Therefore, sometimes
instead of actually drawing something or seeing a picture of it, you can try to
clearly and vividly imagine what it looks like as you read the description. This
image will help you recall the information just as if you saw a real picture.
Images are powerful to the brain, whether they come from the imagination or
through the eyes.

Activity 10M
Create your Own Table
Preview the following passage from a biology textbook. Predict what the
passage is going to be about.
1.
Study-read the passage. Highlight the main idea text in green and the
supporting details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not
already in boldfaced type and any other ideas you think may help you
remember new information. Write margin notes.
2.
Science Requires Systematic thought Processes
1 Two types of systematic thought processes scientists use are deduction and induction.
With deductive reasoning, we begin with supplied information, called premises, and
draw conclusions on the basis of that information. Deduction proceeds from general
principles to specific conclusions. For example, if you accept the premise that all birds
have wings and the second premise that sparrows are birds, you can conclude
deductively that sparrows have wings. Deduction helps us discover relationships among
known facts.
2 Inductive reasoning is the opposite of deduction. We begin with specific observations
and draw a conclusion or discover a general principle. For example, if you know
sparrows have wings and are birds, and you know robins, eagles, pigeons, and hawks
have wings and are birds, you might induce that all birds have wings. In this way, you can
use the inductive method to organize raw data into manageable categories by answering
the question, What do all these facts have in common?
Source: From SOLOMON/BERG/MARTIN. Biology 7e (p. 15). Copyright © 2005 Cengage
Learning.
Review the information that you highlighted and your margin notes. Using
that information, create a table based on this passage.
3.
Diagrams
If you recall, a diagram is a drawing with markings to show how something is put
together or works. Look closely at the student-created diagram in Figure 10.12, which
was created by a nursing student trying to learn the muscles of the upper body. What
details do you notice about the content of the diagram? The muscles are symmetrical

(same set of muscles on each side of the body), the muscles seem to complement one
another in function, muscles overlap, muscles seem bigger in the middle of the body, and
there are a lot of muscles in the arms. Based on how this student drew this diagram, it is
obvious she was trying to learn and remember the muscle names and their locations.
Figure 10.12
Student-Created Diagram
Source: Courtesy of Elise Guido.
While reviewing, some students find it useful to use onion skin—a type of thin,
translucent paper—to trace diagrams from their textbooks. After you trace the diagram,
close the book and label the parts of the diagram on the onion skin. Then open the
textbook to check your work. Tracing works well for most science courses where you are
required to learn a lot of parts or processes and is an excellent way to test yourself.
Activity 10N
Create your own Diagram
Preview the following passage from a medical terminology textbook.
Predict what the passage is going to be about.
1.
Study-read the passage. Highlight the main idea text in green and the
supporting details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not
already in boldfaced type and any other ideas you think may help you
remember new information. Write margin notes.
2.
Cells
Human cells vary in size, shape, and function. The study of cells is called cytology (sigh-
TALL-oh-jee). The cell membrane is the cell's outer covering. The membrane allows
material to pass in and out of the cell so that the cell can receive oxygen and nutrients
and release waste products. The cell's structures are housed in a gel-like substance
called cytoplasm (SIGH-toh-plazm). The nucleus (NOO-klee-us) controls cellular
functions and is made up of threadlike strands called chromosomes (KROH-moh-sohms).

Chromosomes contain deoxyribonucleic (dee-ocks-ee-righ-boh-noo-KLAY-ik) acid
(DNA), which transmits genetic information. The chromosomes also have thousands of
segments called genes, which are responsible for hereditary characteristics.
Source: From MOISIO. Medical Terminology for Insurance and Coding (p. 19). Copyright ©
2010 Cengage Learning.
Review the information that you highlighted and your margin notes. Using
that information, create a diagram based on this passage.
3.
Free-Form Drawings
Free-form drawings (drawing based on your personal interpretation) are drawings
based on your interpretation of what you have read. As previously stated, you do not
need to be a professional artist; the drawing only needs to make sense to you. Figure
10.13 represents a comparison of the pull of gravity of a 6-pound iron ball on Earth to
that on the moon. The pull of gravity on the moon is only one-sixth of what it is on the
surface of the Earth. What would weigh 6 pounds on Earth weighs 1 pound on the moon.
Figure 10.13
Student-Created Free-Form Drawing
Source: Courtesy of Brent Jacobsen.
Activity 10O
Create your own Free-Form Drawing
Preview the following passage from a biology textbook. Predict what the
passage is going to be about.
1.

Study-read the passage. Highlight the main idea text in green and the
supporting details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not
already in boldfaced type and any other ideas you think may help you
remember new information. Write margin notes.
2.
Organisms Respond to Stimuli
1 All forms of life respond to stimuli, physical or chemical changes in their internal or
external environment. Stimuli that evoke a response in most organisms are changes in
the color, intensity, or direction of light; changes in temperature, pressure, or sound; and
changes in the chemical composition of the surrounding soil, air, or water. Responding
to stimuli involves movement, though not always locomotion (moving from one place to
another).
2 In simple organisms, the entire individual may be sensitive to stimuli. Certain
unicellular organisms, for example, respond to bright light by retreating. In some
organisms, locomotion is achieved by the slow oozing of the cell, the process of
amoeboid movement. Other organisms move by beating tiny, hairlike extensions of the
cell called cilia or longer structures known as flagella. Some bacteria move by means of
rotating flagella.
3 Most animals move very obviously. They wiggle, crawl, swim, run, or fly by contracting
muscles. Sponges, corals, and oysters have free-swimming larval stages but do not move
from place to place as adults. Even though these adults are sessile, meaning they remain
firmly attached to a surface, they may have cilia or flagella. These structures beat
rhythmically, moving the surrounding water, which contains needed food and oxygen. In
complex animals such as polar bears and humans, certain highly specialized cells of the
body respond to specific types of stimuli. For example, cells in the retina of the eye
respond to light.
Source: From SOLOMON/BERG/MARTIN. Biology 7e (pp. 3-4). Copyright © 2005 Cengage
Learning.
Review the information that you highlighted and your margin notes. Using
that information, create a free-form drawing based on this passage.
3.
Mind Maps
Mind maps (visual that uses shapes and lines to show the relative importance of ideas
and relationships between ideas) , also known as concept maps, are visuals that use
shapes and lines to show the relative importance of ideas and relationships between
ideas. You first read about mind maps in Chapter 4, and every chapter in this book begins
with a mind map of the chapter's contents. Because they are free form in style, you
decide how to organize the information. The process of determining where to place
items lets you know if you understand the information you are mapping.
In order to start a map, you need to know the main idea and supporting details of what

you are reading. You usually place the topic in the center, which becomes the core of
your map with main ideas and supporting details then branching out. Figure 10.14
represents an introduction to Plato's Cave analogy. The circles directly connected to the
center—Plato's Cave—are major supporting details. Those connected to the major
supporting details are minor supporting details the student wants to remember.
Figure 10.14
Student-Created Mind Map
Source: Courtesy of Kalthoum Bayz.

Activity 10P
Create your own Mind Map
Preview the following passage from a sociology textbook. Predict what the
passage is going to be about.
1.
Study-read the passage. Highlight the main idea text in green and the
supporting details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not
already in boldfaced type and any other ideas you think may help you
remember new information. Write margin notes.
2.
Primary Groups and Secondary Groups
1 Suppose your car's battery died this morning, your sociology professor gave a pop quiz
for which you hadn't studied, your computer's hard drive crashed, and your microwave
stopped working. Whom might you call to vent? Your answer reflects the difference
between primary and secondary groups.
Primary Groups
2 A primary group is a relatively small group of people who engage in intimate
face-to-face interaction over an extended period. For sociologist Charles Horton Cooley
(1909/1983: 24), the most significant primary groups were “the family, the play-group of
children, and the neighborhood or community of elders” because they are first and
central in shaping a person's social and moral development.
3 Primary groups are our emotional glue. We call members of our primary group to
share good news or to gripe. Primary group members are typically understanding,
supportive, and tolerant even when we're in a bad mood or selfish. They have a powerful
influence on our social identity because we interact with them on a regular and intimate
basis over many years, usually throughout our lives. Because primary group members
genuinely care about each other, they contribute to one another's personal
development, security, and well-being. Our family and close friends, for example, stick
with us through good and bad, and we feel comfortable in being ourselves in their
presence.
Secondary Groups
4 A secondary group is a large, usually formal, impersonal, and temporary collection of
people who pursue a specific goal or activity. Your sociology class is a good example of a
secondary group. You might have a few friends in class, but students typically interact
infrequently and formally. When the semester (or quarter) is over and you've
accomplished your goal of passing the course, you may not see each other again
(especially if you're attending a large college or university). And you certainly wouldn't
call your professor if you needed a sympathetic ear at the end of a bad day. Other
examples of secondary groups include political parties, labor unions, and employees of a
company.

Unlike primary groups, secondary groups are usually highly structured: There are many
rules and regulations, people know (or care) little about each other personally,
relationships are formal, and members are expected to fulfill particular functions.
Whereas primary groups meet our expressive (emotional) needs, secondary groups
fulfill instrumental (task-oriented) needs. Once a task or activity is completed—whether
it's earning a grade, turning in a committee report, or building a bridge—secondary
groups usually split up and go on to become a member of other secondary groups.
Source: From BENOKRAITIS. SOC 2e (p. 100). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
Review the information that you highlighted and your margin notes. Using
that information, create a mind map based on this passage.
1.
Comprehension Check
Explain the differences between mind maps and free-form drawings.
Explain why and when you would use one over the other.
Outlines
Outlines (general plan of material that shows the order of various topics and their
relationship with each other) are one of the most popular visuals students create.
Outlines provide you with an overview or summary of information. For example, the
table of contents found at the beginning of textbooks is a type of outline. It provides you
with an overview of the book. Through chapter titles, headings, and subheadings, the
outline serves as a guide to the framework of a text. Here is a general outline format:
Topic (Roman Numeral)
Main idea (capital letter)
Major supporting detail (number)
More specific detail (letter)
a.
More specific detail
b.
1.
Major supporting detail
2.
A.
Main Idea
B.
I.
Topic
Main Idea
A.
Main Idea
B.
II.

Major supporting detail
1.
Major supporting detail
More specific detail
a.
2.
You will discover that outlines are very similar to mind maps. Mind maps use shapes and
can be placed around the page, and their content is usually in no special order, except
that the topic is usually in the center. What makes an outline different is that
information is presented in a linear way, exact order, top to bottom. Read the following
passage, and see the example of an outline that was created from it.
Enzymes
In this guide to health conditions, I describe specific problems along with the enzymes
and other supplements used to treat them. Conditions are illustrated by patient success
stories from my many years of clinical practice as an enzyme therapist. All patient
histories are documented and, of course, patient names have been changed to protect
privacy.
Source: The Enzyme Cure: How Plant Enzymes Can Help You Relieve 36 Health Problems,
Lita Lee, InnoVision Health Media, Inc., 1998, p. 60.
Topic (Roman Numeral): guide to health conditions and how to treat them
Main idea (capital letter): Enzyme therapy and other supplements can treat
certain conditions.
Major supporting detail (number): Patient success stories illustrate the
success of this therapy.
More specific detail (letter): All patient histories are documented.
a.
More specific detail (letter): I've had many years of clinical
practice.
b.
More specific detail (letter): Patient names have been changed for
privacy.
c.
1.
A.
I.
Activity 10Q
Create your own Outline
Preview the following passage from a public speaking textbook. Predict
what the passage is going to be about.
1.
Study-read the passage. Highlight the main idea text in green and the
supporting details in yellow. Underline unfamiliar vocabulary that is not
already in boldfaced type and any other ideas you think may help you
2.

remember new information. Write margin notes.
An Effective Speech is Well Structured
1 The structure of a speech is the framework that organizes the content. Clear structure
helps your listeners follow your ideas so they can understand the points you are making.
Clear structure includes both macrostructure and microstructure.
2 Macrostructure is the overall framework you use to organize your speech content. It
has four elements: the introduction, body, conclusion, and transitions. The introduction
is the beginning segment of the speech and should be structured so that you build
audience interest in your topic and preview what you are going to say (you tell them
what you are going to tell them). The speech body contains the main ideas and
supporting material you have decided to present; it is organized into a pattern that
makes the ideas easy for the audience to understand and remember (you tell them). The
conclusion ends the speech, reminds the audience of your main ideas, and motivates
them to remember or act upon what you have said (you tell them what you told them).
The macro-structure of your speech also includes transitions, which are the phrases you
use to move from one main point to the next.
3 You have studied macrostructure throughout your education as you learned to write.
Now, however, you will be learning how to adapt it to oral messages. You'll see that
careful attention to macrostructure is more important when you craft a speech than
when you write an essay. A reader can easily reread a poorly written essay to try to
understand your intent, but an audience does not usually have the opportunity to rehear
your speech. So, as you prepare each of your speeches, you will need to develop an
organizational framework that enables your audience to quickly understand and easily
remember the ideas you present.
4 Whereas macrostructure is the overall framework you design for your speech,
microstructure is the specific language and style choices you use as you frame your
ideas and verbalize them to your audience. Pay careful attention to microstructure
while practicing and delivering your speech so that you can present your ideas with
words that are instantly intelligible and guide your audience to thoughts that are
consistent with your own. Practicing and using words that are appropriate, accurate,
clear and vivid will help you accomplish your speaking goal.
Source: From VERDERBER/SELLNOW/VERDERBER. The Challenge of Effective Speaking, 15e
(p. 12). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
Review the information that you highlighted and your margin notes. Using
that information, create an outline based on this passage.
a.
1.
A.
I.
3.

b.
c.
d.
2.
10-6 Chapter Review
10-6a Practice with a Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Preview the reading passage and visual. What do you predict is the purpose
of the visual?
1.
What do you know about hypnosis? Have you ever been hypnotized?
2.
Is Hypnosis an Altered State of Consciousness?
By James Kalat
1 If a hypnotist tells you, “Your hand is rising, you can do nothing to stop it,” your hand
might indeed rise. If you were later asked why, you might reply that you lost control of
your own behavior. Still, you were not a puppet. Was the act voluntary, involuntary, or
something in between? To put the question differently, is hypnosis really different from
normal wakefulness?
2 At some extreme, some psychologists regard hypnosis as a special state of
consciousness characterized by increased suggestibility. At the other extreme, some
psychologists emphasize the similarities between hypnosis and normal wakeful
consciousness, including the fact that people who respond well to hypnosis also respond
strongly to suggestions without hypnosis. Most psychologists take intermediate
positions, noting that hypnotized people are neither “pretending to be hypnotized” nor
under a hypnotist's control. That is, hypnosis is a special state in some ways but not
others (Kirch and Lynn, 1998).
3 One way to determine whether hypnosis is a special state of consciousness is to find

out whether nonhypnotized people can do everything that hypnotized people can do.
How convincingly could you act like a hypnotized person?
How Well Can Someone Pretend to Be Hypnotized?
4 In several experiments, some college students were hypnotized. An experienced
hypnotist then examined them and tried to determine which ones were really
hypnotized.
5 Fooling the hypnotist turned out to be easier than expected. The pretenders tolerated
sharp pain without flinching and pretended to recall old memories. They made their
bodies as stiff as a board and lay rigid between two chairs. When standing people were
told to sit down, they did not did so immediately (as hypnotized people do) without first
checking to make sure they had a chair behind them (Orne, 1959, 1979). When told to
experience anger or another emotion, they exhibited physiological changes such as
increased heart rate and sweating, just as hypnotized people do (Damaser, Shor and
Orne, 1963). Even experienced hypnotists could not identify the pretenders.
6 Only a few differences between the hypnotized people and pretenders emerged (Orne,
1979). The pretenders failed to match some of the behaviors of hypnotized people,
simply because they did not know how a hypnotized subject would act. For instance,
when the hypnotist suggested, “You see Professor Schmaltz sitting in that chair,” people
in both groups reported seeing the professor. Some of the hypnotized subjects, however,
asked with puzzlement, “How is it that I see the professor there, but I also see the chair?”
Pretenders never reported seeing this double reality. At that point in the experiment,
Professor Schmaltz walked into the room. “Who is that entering the room?” asked the
hypnotist. The pretenders would either say they say no one, or they would identify
Schmaltz as someone else. The hypnotized subjects would say, “That's Professor
Schmaltz.” Some then said that they were confused about seeing the same person in two
places. For some of them, the hallucinated professor faded at that moment. Others
continued to accept the double image.
7 One study reported a way to distinguish hypnotized people from pretenders more than
90% of the time. But it might not be the way you would expect. Simply ask people how
deeply hypnotized they thought they were, how relaxed they were, and whether they
were aware of their surroundings while hypnotized. People who rate themselves as
“extremely” hypnotized, “extremely” relaxed, and “totally unaware” of their
surroundings are almost always pretenders. Those who were really hypnotized rate
themselves as only mildly influenced (Martin and Lynn, 1996).
8 So, what is our conclusion? Apparently, people pretending to be hypnotized can mimic
almost any effect of hypnosis that they know about. However, hypnosis is ordinarily not
just role-playing. The effects that role players learn to imitate happen spontaneously for
the hypnotized people.
Will hypnotized people do anything that they would otherwise refuse to do? The
problem is that nonhypnotized people will sometimes perform some strange and
dangerous acts, either because an experimenter asked them to or on their own.

© Michael Schwarz/The Image Works
Source: From KALAT. Introduction to Psychology (p. 369). Copyright © 2011 Cengage
Learning.
Check Your Understanding
Use context clues and word part analysis to define the following words
used in the passage.
suggestibility (paragraph 2): 
distinguish (paragraph 7): 
spontaneously (paragraph 8): 
3.
After reading the passage and photograph, what was the purpose of the
photograph?
4.
Did the photograph add to the passage? Why or why not?
5.
What is the main idea of the photograph?
6.
What is the main idea of the passage?
7.
List the major supporting details.
8.

Did you enjoy the reading? Why or why not?
9.
Create a visual (your choice—refer to Table 10.3 if you are unsure which
type of visual would be effective) based on this passage that helps you to
learn and remember the information.
10.
Chapter Review
10-6b Chapter Summary
When you examine visuals in your textbooks and create ones of your own, you increase
your comprehension. Visuals help you literally see what an author means, add even
more to your understanding, and can be an excellent study tool.
Approach each textbook visual in a systematic way so you can get the most from it:
preview, study-read, review. Some common types of textbook visuals are: tables,
diagrams, illustrations, graphs, pie charts, pictographs, photographs, time lines,
geographical maps, and cartoons.
As you attempt to create your own visuals, determine the main idea of what you have
read. If you cannot understand what you have read, you cannot create a useful visual.
Selecting the right visual depends on what you are reading and sometimes on how the
textbook chapter is organized. Common visuals that students create are: tables,
diagrams, free-form drawing, mind maps, and outlines. Remember that you do not have
to be an expert artist to benefit from creating your own visuals. You just have to show
that you can see what your textbook authors mean.

decode
1.
encode
2.
table
3.
general plan of material that
shows the order of various
topics and their relationship
with each other
a.
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw the amount of dendrites you imagine that you have now about using
visuals to understand your textbooks. Compare your drawing of dendrites now
with what you drew at the beginning of this chapter. If the amounts are different,
explain why.
Comprehension Check
How does creating a visual help you learn and remember new
information?
If you could ask the authors a question about this chapter, what would
you ask?
Chapter Review
10-6c Post Test
Part 1: Objective Questions
Match the key terms from the chapter in Column A to their definitions in
Column B.
Column A Column B

hierarchy
4.
diagram
5.
illustration
6.
graph
7.
bar graph
8.
line graph
9.
pie chart
10.
pictograph
11.
photograph
12.
time line
13.
geographical map
14.
cartoon
15.
free-form drawing
16.
mind map
17.
outline
18.
visual way of displaying events
in chronological order
b.
circular visual that is divided
into sections like a pie,
illustrating proportion
c.
to convert text into a code (in
this case a visuaaal)
d.
a ranking order of persons or
things, one above the other
e.
to inteeerpret into a language
that makes sense to a reader
f.
drawing based on your
personal interpretation
g.
visual representing data
through the use of pictures
h.
graph that illustrates
information by using parallel
rectangular bars of varying
length to contrast information
i.
drawing with markings to
show how something is put
together or works
j.
visual where large amounts of
text are condensed into a
format, usually using
categories, that make it easy to
see how different items of
information relate to each
other
k.
a drawing
l.
a picture made from light
passing through a camera onto
film or in digital form
m.
graph that displays
information as a series of data
points connected by straight
line segments
n.
Circle the best answer to the following multiple-choice questions.
Outlining can be used to:
show the relationship between ideas.
a.
effectively show topics but not the details.
b.
demonstrate the main idea by representing inform tion in a linear
(top-down) way.
c.
All of the given answers.
d.
19.
Which of the following statements accurately d scribes charts?
They can be used to organize large amounts of information.
a.
They are useful for comparing and contrasting information.
b.
Completing them lets you know how well you have learned new
information.
c.
All of the given answers.
d.
20.
In order to design a successful visual, you have to:
become an accomplished artist.
a.
fully understand the information you have read.
b.
use different colors.
c.
memorize all of the information in an assignment before you can
create one.
d.
21.
Short-Answer Questions
Why are visuals such an important piece of the reading process?
22.
If you want to represent chronology of events that occurred over a specific
period, what visual should you use?
23.
If you want to compare data on a specific topic over time (city population
growth over the past 10 years), what visual should you use?
24.

visual that shooows channnges in
quantities, usually with a
horizontal and vertical axis
o.
visual representation of a
geographical area
p.
illustration meant to entertain
q.
visual that uses shapes and
lines to show the relative
importance of ideas and
relationships between ideas
r.
(a)
(b)
What type of inf rmatio  would you expect a pie chart to represent?
25.
Academic Reading
Part 2. Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Based on the title and headings, what do you expect the following passage
to be about?
1.
Create questions to ask yourself using the title and headings. Look for the
answers to your questions as you read.
2.
What do you already know about the topic?
3.
Chapter 1 Light and Life
Peter Russell
Why It Matters
1 Claude Monet (1840–1926), a French painter, is considered by many to be the master of
the impressionist form that rose to prominence in the late nineteenth century. Other
well-known impressionists include Edgar Degas and Paul Cézanne. Impressionism as an
art movement was characterized by the use of small visible brush strokes that
emphasized light and color, rather than lines, to define an object. The artists used pure,
unmixed color, not smoothly blended, as was the custom at the time. For example,
instead of physically mixing yellow and blue paint, they placed unmixed yellow paint on
the canvas next to unmixed blue paint so that the colors would mingle in the eye of the
viewer to create the “impression” of green. The Impressionists found that they could
capture the momentary and transient effects of sunlight and changing color of a scene
by painting en plein air, in the open air, outside of the studio, where they could more
accurately paint the reflected light of an immediate scene.
Paintings by Claude Monet (1840-1926). Compared to his early works including
The water-lily pond
his laser paintings including the japanese footbridge
bordered on the abstract with almost complete loss of light-blue.
Monet suffered from vision degenerative disease cataracts which was diagnosed
in 1912.

© The Art Gallery Collection/Alamy
The Japanese Bridge at Giverny, 1918-24 (oil on canvas), Monet, Claude (1840-1926)/Musee Marmottan Monet, Paris,
France/Giraudon/The Bridgeman Art Library
2 Interestingly, compared with his early works, which included the “Water Lily Pond”
(1899), Monet's later paintings verge on the abstract, with colors bleeding into each other
and a lack of rational shape and perspective. For example, “The Japanese Footbridge” is
an explosion of orange, yellow, and red hues, with heavy, broad brush strokes, leaving
the viewer barely able to discern the vague shape of the arched bridge. In many of
Monet's later works, the colors in his paintings became more muted, far less vibrant and
bright, with a pronounced color shift from blue-green to red-yellow and an almost total
absence of light blues. The sense of atmosphere and light that he was famous for in his
earlier works disappeared.
3 Although the change in Monet's paintings could easily be explained by an intentional
change in style or perhaps an age-related change in manual dexterity, Monet himself
realized that it was not his style or dexterity that had changed but, rather, it was his
ability to see. Monet suffered from cataracts, the vision-deteriorating disease that was
diagnosed in both eyes by a Parisian ophthalmologist in 1912 when Monet was 72. A
cataract is a change in the lens of the eye, making it more opaque.
 The underlying
cause is a progressive denaturation
 of one of the proteins that make up the lens. The
increased opaqueness of the lens absorbs certain wavelengths of light, decreasing the
transmittance of blue light. Thus, to a cataract sufferer such as Monet, the world appears
more yellow.
1.1 The Physical Nature of Light
4 Light serves two important functions for life on Earth: First, it is a source of energy that
sustains all life. Second, light provides organisms with information about the physical
world. An excellent example of an organism that uses light for both energy and
information is the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (Figure 10.15). C. reinhardtii is a
single-celled photosynthetic eukaryote that is commonly found in ponds and lakes. Each
cell contains a single large chloroplast that harvests light energy and uses it to make
energy-rich molecules through the process of photosynthesis. In addition, each cell
contains a light sensor called an eyespot that allows it to sense both light direction and
light intensity.
Figure 10.15
Chlamydomonas Reinhardtii
A drawing of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a green alga. Each cell contains a single
chloroplast used for photosynthesis as well as an eyespot for sensing light in the

environment.
5 Regardless of whether the light is used as a source of energy or information about the
environment, both rely on the same fundamental properties of light and require the
light energy to be captured by the organism.
1.1a What Is Light?
6 The reason there is life on Earth and, as far as we know, nowhere else in our solar
system has to do with distance—specifically, the distance of 150,000,000 km separating
Earth from the Sun (Figure 10.16). By converting hydrogen into helium at the staggering
rate of some 3.41038 hydrogen nuclei per second, the Sun converts over 4 million tonnes
of matter into energy every second. This energy is given off as electromagnetic radiation,
which travels at the speed of light (1,079,252,848 km/h) and reaches the Earth in just over
8 minutes. Electromagnetic radiation moves in the form of two waves, one electrical and
one magnetic, which are oriented at 90° to each other (Figure 10.17). Scientists often
distinguish electromagnetic radiation by its wavelength, the distance between two
successive peaks. The wavelength of electromagnetic radiation ranges from less than
one picometre (1012 m) for cosmic rays to more than a kilometre (106 m) for radio
waves.
Figure 10.16
The Sun
The sun is a star with a surface temperature of approximately 5000°C It generates
electromagnetic radiation by the nuclear fusion of hydrogen nuclei into helium.
Note the superimposed image of the Earth used to illustrate the relative size.

SOHO/EIT Consortium/ESA/NASA
Figure 10.17
Electromagnetic Radiation
Electromagnetic radiation can be considered as self-propagating waves which
consist of both electrical and magnetic waves which are oriented at 90° to each
other. A wave consists of discrete packets of energy called photons.
7 Okay, but what is light? Light can be defined as the portion of the electromagnetic
spectrum (Figure 10.18) that humans can detect with their eyes. Light or visible
radiation, is a narrow band of the electromagnetic spectrum spanning the wavelengths
in nanometres (1 nm 109 m) from 400 nm (blue light) to about 700 nm (red light). To
avoid confusion, wavelengths just outside this range should not be referred to as light
but rather as ultraviolet and infrared radiation.
8 One reason that light is a bit of an enigma
 and hard to characterize is that,
although it can be described as a wave, it also behaves as a stream of energy particles.
These discrete particles or packets of energy are referred to as photons. Unlike atoms,
photons have no mass, but each contains a precise amount of energy. The amount of
energy in a photon is inversely related
 to its wavelength. Looking just at visible light
(see Figure 10.18), this means that blue light, with a shorter wavelength, consists of
photons that have higher energy than longer wavelength red light. It is important to
realize that although one photon contains a very small amount of energy (red light: 3.01
10 19 joules/photon; blue light: 4.56 10 19 joules/photon), on a clear summer's day,
approximately 1021 photons hit each square metre of Earth each second.
Figure 10.18
The Electromagnetic Spectrum
The grouping of all types of electromagnetic radiation according to wavelength. It
ranges from very short wavelengths characteristic of gamma rays to the long
wavelengths associated with radio waves. The shorter the wavelength of the
electromagnetic radiation the higher the energy of each photon it contains. Light
represents only a small portion of the total electromagnetic spectrum.

Source: From RUSSELL. Biology, Exploring the Diversity of Life, Volume 1, 1e (pp. 1-3).
Copyright © 2010 Cengage Learning.
Check Your Understanding
List any technical vocabulary that you would need to know if this passage
were an actual textbook you were studying. What strategy would you use to
learn this technical vocabulary?
4.
This passage is a from a biology textbook. Why did the author begin this
passage with a story about Claude Monet?
5.
Look at Figure 10.15. What part of the green alga makes energy? Which part
gathers information?
6.
What can you learn from Figure 10.16?
7.
Describe Figure 10.17. Where does this wave come from? What does it give
to the Earth?
8.
What was the most difficult part of this passage? If this were your textbook,
what would you do to understand this difficult part better?
9.

Draw a visual that captures the main idea of the passage.
10.
Chapter Review
10-6d 
 Brain Strength Options
Below is an article with information that can be presented in a multitude of
ways. The author has chosen to present it in paragraph form. Working in groups
of no more than four, select five different visuals to present this information
using what you learned in this chapter. You may present your project in a poster,
PowerPoint, or Web page as determined by your group and your instructor. You
will be graded on these guidelines:
Effectiveness of the visuals selected: Do your visuals get the information
across clearly and accurately?
Clarity of information as presented: Are your visuals easy to read and
clear to understand?
Hint: A quick read-through makes something jump out as an easy way to present
this information. Do you see it? Clue: Notice that all but one item contain dates.
Revolutions in technology continue to cause rapid, almost unpredictable changes
in career demand. Changes in technology can obsolete your job causing you to be
laid off, downsized, right sized, and just plain inconvenienced.
1.
Here are a few examples of jobs which were once “Hot Jobs” with high demand but
are now declining or totally extinct, at least in North America and Europe:
Typesetting—Has been replaced by the first Apple computers and the advent
of desktop publishing. Typesetting began in the 1400's with the first printing
presses. The trend away from typesetting to desktop publishing started in the
early 1980s and was completed by the mid-1990s. Thousands of people had
their careers upset by this trend.
2.

Secretarial Dictation—Has been replaced by individuals doing their own
word processing, starting in the late 1980s as the cost of personal computers
came down.
IBM Punch Card Operator—Was obsolete along with IBM punch cards by
~1985. Prior to that, punch card data entry employed tens of thousands.
Telex (TWX) Operator—Was obsolete by the advent of the fax machine, ~1980
Fax Machine Operator—When the cost of fax machines came down, most
people handled their own faxes rather than having an assistant do it. Finally,
most but not all faxes gave way to email. 1980 to 1995.
Telephone Operators—Once a premier job, demand was reduced
significantly by touch tone systems and then later by voice recognition
technology.
Drafting Technician—Manual drafting using pencil and ruler was replaced by
Computer Aided Drafting (CAD) in the 1980s.
Source: Robinson, Michael T., CareerPlanner.comhttp://www.careerplanner.com/career-
articles/hot_jobs.cfm

Chapter 11
Understanding and Creating Arguments
Chapter Introduction
11-1 Understanding Argument
11-2 Readying Your Mind for Argument
11-3 Parts of an Argument
11-3a Conclusion
11-3b Reasons
11-4 Looking for Arguments in what You Read
11-4a Words that Signal Arguments
11-4b See the Argument without Word Clues
11-5 Distinguishing Facts from Opinions
11-5a Facts
11-5b Opinions
11-6 Hidden Assumptions
11-7 Making Sense of Visual Arguments
11-8 Argumentation Maps
11-9 Chapter Review
11-9a Practice with a Reading Passage
11-9b Chapter Summary
11-9c Post Test
11-9d  Brain Strength Options
Chapter Introduction

“The moment we want to believe something, we suddenly see all the arguments for it,
and become blind to the arguments against it.”
— George Bernard Shaw
Student to Student
Suzanne Lenhardt
A nursing major at Schoolcraft College
Courtesy of Suzanne Lendhardt
Everything that i read or heard before college, I took “as is” and nothing more.
Today, during lecture or while reading for a class, when I stumble upon
something that interests me or strikes me as being untrue or arguable, I look into
it further. The Internet, videos, and other outside resources have helped me
tremendously to learn and understand more. During my second year of college, I
have learned more and understand more about thinking. Most importantly, I
have learned that everyone has different viewpoints and that there isn't just one
way to think about something. An important lesson I have learned (and I will take
with me) is to keep an open mind and do what works for me.

Making Connections
What is the meaning of the quotation
at the beginning of this chapter? Give
an example of when that situation
has happened to you.
1.
What is the purpose of an argument?
What is the desired outcome?
2.
What makes a “good” argument?
3.
How can a piece of writing be an
“argument” if there is only one
person writing it?
4.
© Cengage Learning
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw on the brain cell how many dendrites you imagine you have for how
much you know about arguments.
11-1 Understanding Argument
Before you begin reading this chapter, see how much you already know about
argumentation. Let's say you deserve a raise. Write down three reasons why you deserve
a raise here:
Three Reasons You Deserve a Raise
1.
2.
3.

(1)
(2)
Congratulations! You just wrote an argument. Based on this activity, what do you think
defines an argument? Write your definition here.
After you learn more about argumentation, come back and check this response to see if
you were correct.
When most people think of arguments, they think of a loud and angry shouting match
that ends up in a fight. This can sometimes be true. However, arguments do not need to
be heated, loud, or angry.
Photofest/Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corporation
A more important way of thinking about arguments is that they are logical structures
people use when they write and speak in order to persuade others to support their ideas.
The logical structure of this kind of argument consists of statements including a
conclusion and at least one reason. For example, if a classmate tells you that Avatar was
the best movie ever made, she is stating a conclusion. If she continues by saying that
Avatar had great 3-D technology and creative characters and other beasts, she is
providing reasons for her conclusion. You do not have to agree with her argument.
Suppose you say, “I hated Avatar!” That statement alone is an opinion but not really an
argument. Perhaps then you add, “The story line was predictable, and the movie was way
too long!” Now you have an argument. Your conclusion is Avatar was not the best movie,
which you implied when you said you hated it. Your reasons are
that it was predictable and
that it was too long.
So an argument (two or more statements that include one conclusion and at least one
reason that support it) can be defined as a conclusion backed up with one or more
reasons.
This chapter introduces you to the concept of argumentation. By no means is this, or the
next chapter, intended to cover all aspects of argument. Whole courses are designed
around the concept of argumentation. Instead, this chapter will help you realize what

arguments are and will show you where to look to find them in textbooks. Once you
locate the arguments, you can begin to evaluate them and then decide if you accept them
as true and worthwhile. Critical readers approach all reading with a healthy skepticism.
They do not just accept everything in print as necessarily true. Good readers judge based
on the strength of an argument.
Knowing the basic structure of an argument, its reasons and conclusion, and being able
to see these argument parts in what you read encourages you to develop your own
arguments, your own reasons and conclusion, about the subject matter. When you
develop your own arguments, you are thinking critically and not just accepting another
person's thoughts and opinions.
Illustration © Pam England, from Birthing From Within, 1998
11-2 Readying Your Mind for Argument
A great asian saying captures good advice to students: “Learn how to empty your cup
each time that you come to learn.” This simply means to come to every class as though
you are learning something for the first time. Approach everything with an open mind.
One of the major dispositions—habit, state of mind, or state of readiness—of critical
thinking and good argumentation is keeping an open mind. No matter how much you
think you know about a subject, someone else can always bring something new to your
understanding of a concept, perhaps through a different viewpoint, additional facts, or
personal experiences. If you have your mind made up that you already know enough
about a topic—or you believe that there is nothing more or different you want to learn
about a topic—you may miss a wonderful learning opportunity. You limit yourself by
getting or keeping only pieces of the picture. This is not to say that everyone is always
equally right, and that there is no truth. Everyone has some truth but no one has it all.
Careful consideration of other people's ideas can lead you to a greater overall
understanding.

Activity 11
Describe what You See
What do you see in this picture? It is more interesting if you are able to share this
picture with another person. Did you both see the same thing? You may be
surprised by what the other person sees.
Created by “R.H.”, The Strand Magazine, December 1899
The picture in Activity 11A is a metaphor for seeing more than one view, and not
assuming that you have all of the information. The point of looking at this image is to
make a point. Very often students come to class assuming that they know what will be
discussed, so they do not pay attention to new information or to reasons for a conclusion
different from their own. When arguments are presented, these students focus only on
their own viewpoints, reasons, and conclusions. They ignore or dismiss others' reasons
and conclusions, tending to see things only one way—their own way. Then when they are
tested on what they should have learned (for example, that two different pictures can be
seen in one picture), they find that they are missing important pieces of information.
They are not prepared because they missed key points. Critical thinking requires that
you examine all parts of an argument before making your final conclusion. It is
necessary to keep an open mind.
11-3 Parts of an Argument
An argument has two parts: a conclusion and reasons. A simple way to imagine the
structure of an argument is to picture a stick house. A conclusion is like the roof and the
reasons are the walls that hold it up. A solid argument is like a house with strong walls

Conclusion: Sociology is important.
Reason 1: It offers explanations for
how people act in groups.
Conclusion: Democratic governments
have the happiest citizens.
Reason 1: Citizens can choose their
leaders.
Reason 2: Citizens can pick careers that
best suit their talents and interests.
and a roof that fits properly. A weak argument has thin walls or an ill-fitting roof—or
sometimes both. In this chapter, you will learn how to find an author's arguments in
your textbooks. (In Chapter 12, you will begin to evaluate arguments.)
For now, let's look at basic arguments. An
argument consists of two or more statements that
include one conclusion (judgment or decision
based on at least one reason) and at least one
reason (statement that explains, justifies, or
otherwise supports the conclusion) that supports
the conclusion.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
After puberty, there is a tendency for the brain to want to make what is external
conform to what is internal. This means that you want to make what you see and
hear conform to the way you already view the world. Instead of the environment
shaping the brain as it does before puberty, the brain wants to shape the
environment. That is not to say we become closed-minded; it just means that
sometimes we hear and see what we want to hear and see. This is a slight
tendency, but becoming aware of this can help you keep an open mind.
11-3a Conclusion

Conclusion: Mark Zuckerberg is an
effective businessman.
Reason: Mark Zuckerberg started
Facebook. (This supports the
conclusion that he is an effective
businessman. Facebook is well-known
and very popular.)
Reason: He has earned an estimated
$6.9 billion. (If he has earned this
much, he must be doing something
right in his business, which must be
successful, so he is effective.)
Conclusion: There are several reasons
why consistent study is more effective
than cramming.
Reason: If you study regularly every
day, you will find it easier to remember
what you learned.
Reason: By studying regularly, you will
see the connections within course
material.
Reason: The brain takes time to process
information. The more you study, the
more deeply you will learn new
information, which means better test
results.
A conclusion is the judgment, decision, or opinion that someone reaches after thinking
about or investigating an issue. For example, one might conclude that the San Francisco
Giants are the best baseball team. Another person might conclude that eating eggs from
vegetarian-fed chickens is healthier than eating other eggs. Both of these are
conclusions. To qualify as full arguments, though, each conclusion requires at least one
reason.
11-3b Reasons
A reason is a statement that explains, justifies, or otherwise supports the conclusion.
Reasons can be facts, opinions, beliefs, or examples that support the conclusion. Good
reasons support a conclusion well and contribute to the success of an argument.
One could offer as a reason The Giants won the World Series in 2012 for the conclusion The
San Francisco Giants are the best baseball team. Or one could use the reason that
Vegetarian-fed chicken eggs do not contain the hormones found in other types of eggs to
support the conclusion Vegetarian-fed chickens provide healthier eggs.
Consider the following arguments:
Do
the

three reasons support the conclusion that consistent study is more effective than
cramming? Yes, they are all relevant. Say, however, that one of the reasons states that
Joe's diner provides excellent food. This is not a reason that supports the conclusion. It may
be true, or someone's worthy opinion, but it is not a reason that directly supports the
conclusion. It has nothing to do with the argument Consistent study is more effective than
cramming. The reason(s) must support the conclusion in order for the statements to be
considered an argument.
Activity 11B
Identify Conclusions and Reasons
Read the following sentences, and determine which sentence in each group is a
conclusion and which sentences in each group are reasons. One is modeled for
you here.
Example:
 It follows that I will graduate on time.
 I need 15 credits a semester to graduate on time.
 I have earned 15 credits every semester for 3 ½ years.
 Therefore, legislation needs to address the flu
issue.
 It is estimated that 1 to 2 million Americans are
infected with the virus that causes the flu.
 In 2014, more children and women will continue
to get the flu.
1.
 The truth is, I am not happy.
 I cry a lot.
 Also, I want to be left alone.
 For example, I sleep all day.
2.
 Exercise allows you a better, more restful sleep.
 Third, exercise lowers the risk of heart attack.
 Second, moderate exercise improves the immune
system.
 In conclusion, there are several benefits of
exercising.
3.
 Additionally, critical thinking should be taught to
students throughout their educational experiences (from kindergarten
4.

through college), using course content.
 For one thing, critical thinking is not a natural
ability.
 It should be clear that critical thinking requires
deliberate, continuing instruction, guidance, and practice in order to
develop to its full potential.
 Also, critical thinking is a composite of skills,
standards, and dispositions.
 The acting was horrible.
 In my opinion, Intruders was the worst movie I
have ever seen.
 The special effects were low budget.
 The plot did not have enough believable stuff in it
to keep the audience interested.
5.
Activity 11C
Supply Missing Parts of the Argument
Read the following statements, some of which are reasons and some of which are
conclusions. Supply the missing parts of the argument. One is modeled for you
here.
Example:
Conclusion: Brian took property that was not his.
Reason 1: 
Reason 2: Brian had the stolen property in his possession when he was
stopped by the police.
Conclusion: Rap music is actually a form of poetry.
Reason 1: It involves creative word combinations.
Reason 2: 
1.
Conclusion: We, the human race, need to share the food the world produces.
Reason 1:
Reason 2: Some countries throw away extra food and are very well-fed and
healthy.
2.

Conclusion:
Reason 1: Reality television has lots of viewers.
Reason 2: Reality television earns good ratings.
3.
Conclusion: Therefore, the government should outlaw the sale of guns.
Reason 1:
Reason 2:
4.
Conclusion:
Reason 1: There are no snow-related accidents.
Reason 2: You can swim year-round.
5.
11-4 Looking for Arguments in what You Read
Authors present arguments in what they Write, and you have already had ample practice
identifying these arguments, even if you did not know it. When you identified an
author's main idea and major supporting details in a reading, you identified the main
argument. An author's main idea is a conclusion, and the major supporting details are
the reasons. Sometimes the conclusion (main idea) is right up front in the reading.
Sometimes it is at the end. Other times, it is implied and you have to infer the meaning.
Many times authors have one main argument with other smaller arguments within it.
For the purposes of this chapter, we will focus on the main argument.
Activity 11D
Identify the Argument
Read the following commencement speech given by Miles Levin, a valedictorian
from a suburban Detroit high school. His speech is unique because of his
perspective. He comes from what might be called, in the language of the Occupy
Wall Street movement, the 1%. His family is privileged; his high school is
prestigious. As you read, ask yourself: What are his arguments?
Preview and study-read the speech. While previewing the speech, you will notice
that there are no headings, so skim the speech and access your background

knowledge. What do you know about commencement speeches? What is their
purpose? As you study-read, highlight the main idea/conclusion in green and the
major supporting details/reasons in yellow. Make marginal notes as needed.
When you are done previewing and study-reading, answer the questions
following the speech.
Graduation Speech, Cranbrook Upper School, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan
Miles Levin
1 We are here on this earth having been thrust into a random situation we did nothing to
deserve, surrounded by circumstances we cannot control. Sometimes chance is kind to
us; sometimes we get the short end of the stick. I think the hardest pill we'll ever have to
swallow is getting less than we deserve. It stems from accepting that life isn't fair. We
want it to be fair. We want so badly for it to be fair. It should be. It deserves to be. On a
very deep level, we need it to be. But it's not. And whenever we fume over some injustice
that has befallen us and then a wise friend reminds us, “life isn't fair,” we have to admit
with a certain existential resignation
 that they have a point; but somehow that
doesn't really help at all.
2 How can I support the very existence of the universe I live in? I can't. I can only shake
my head, and rather without clout. I can fulminate;
 I can vociferate;
 I can raise
my banner in protest of everything that isn't as it should be in the world, but the
universe is as the universe does. A pregnant woman will die in a car accident today, and I
cannot change that.
3 What feels so deeply wrong about an unfair world such as ours is that it is unfair in a
way that, almost by definition, doesn't make any sense. At least not to me. Some people
own private jets, others don't have access to fresh water. I don't get it. So what I ask you
is this: If you are born rich with blessings beyond your control, if good luck should catch
you a taxi while an old man stands in the rain, if you are given the seldom talked about
long end of the stick, do you have an inherent obligation to use your gifts, resources, and
abilities, in a sharing and philanthropic manner? Does having good fortune come with
the uninvited responsibility that we give some of it back to the less fortunate? The
comfortable answer is: Yes. Feed the hungry children, absolutely. Support music and the
fine arts in our school systems, absolutely. But really, no one can be blamed for what
they have. You didn't choose your lot any more than a hungry person chose theirs; how
can you be held accountable for chance? And I'm not just talking about money. If you are
intelligent and have access to an education, can you be a janitor? If you are brilliantly
intelligent, and could, if you applied yourself, cure a disease and save thousands or even
millions of lives, can you be the CEO of Marlboro? Your initial reaction to my question
about giving back was probably yes, we should. Our consciences are pretty clear in
identifying the more generous path, but the top position at Marlboro reveals the
complexity of the issue. It involves the question, “to what extent is your life your life,
and to what extent must it be lived for others?”
4 On the one hand, our parents here in the audience are a perfect example of the duty to
sacrifice. For the past eighteen years they have sacrificed for us, and I'm gladdened to
see the pleasure they take in witnessing the fruit of that sacrifice today. On the other
hand who's to say you can't be a janitor if that's what you want to do with your life. It's
not hurting anybody. In fact, it's helping people, and I mean no disrespect to janitors, but
it might not be helping others as much as you could be, and is that hurting them
indirectly? Put your good where it will do the most, goes the old adage. It's not, “do what

you enjoy the most,” and with that comes a certain submission to the greater good. Being
an operative for the greater good is rarely fun or easy, but always gratifying.
6 We cannot be blamed for the things we cannot control, but that does not excuse us
from taking charge of the things we can. And while we cannot be blamed for the
blessings we cannot control, that does not excuse us from at the very least appreciating
them. Often, people who have been in peril but escaped unscathed while others weren't
so lucky, look around and experience something called “survivor guilt.” “Why do they
still get to live when others must die?” they wonder. I've never liked the term. I much
prefer “survivor responsibility.”
7 Survivor responsibility carries no guilt, although you are enlisted to a certain moral
duty by the default blessedness of your life. I suppose you could argue this is an onus
forced upon you without your asking, without consideration that you might not want it,
and you'd be right, but Paris Hilton could say pretty much the same thing about getting
stuck with a few billion dollars. You'll have to look inward to see exactly what this
responsibility means to you. I can't tell you the answer, and even if I could, I hope I'd be
wise enough not to. I will say that all of us here could have been born into poverty or
orphanage or oppression… yet we weren't. And I haven't the faintest clue why. As far as I
can tell, it was not merit's hand that rolled the dice. I don't think of myself as a better
person than he who goes hungry, and I don't think of you as better people than she who
gets sick. But for some reason, we have been plopped into a world of comfort and
opportunity while others starve and die. In the end, how much responsibility this puts
on you to make something of yourself and level the playing field is a matter of opinion. I
can tell you no absolute truth; only ask with all my heart that you consider a) what an
advantage we have all been given as recipients of a Cranbrook education, and all the
other blessings you couldn't even begin to count, and then b) what duties, if any, come
with privilege as you head off to your colleges and onward into your futures. Would you
be doing a dishonor to those without opportunity if you do not take full advantage of
yours? I'm sure you're all a little nervous about college, so I apologize for the extra
pressure, but please do think about it. Thank you.
Source: Reprinted by permission of Nancy Levin.
What point does the author make about life in paragraph 1?
1.
What two examples does the author give in paragraph 2 that support the
point made about life in paragraph 1?
2.
Who is the author talking about in paragraph 3 when he says those who are
“given the seldom talked about long end of the stick …”? What
3.

responsibility do these people have?
What important question does the author ask at the end of paragraph 3?
Why is it important?
4.
How is paragraph 4 organized (pattern of organization)? How does
paragraph 4 answer the important question posed at the end of paragraph
3?
5.
The main idea of this speech is implied, but paragraph 5 offers a big clue.
What sentence in paragraph 5 helps you to infer the main idea of the
speech? What is the implied main idea?
6.
Give the reasons that the author provides to support his conclusion.
7.
At the end of the speech, the author talks about survivor guilt and survivor
responsibility. He says he prefers the term “survivor responsibility.” What
does “survivor responsibility” mean? Create your own argument to support
or refute the author's idea. (You may have more than one reason.)
8.
What you may not know is that Miles Levin, the author, was diagnosed with
a rare form of cancer. His goal was to be well enough to walk across the
stage at graduation. He made his goal, but he died shortly after, on August
19, 2007. Does this additional knowledge change your understanding
regarding the arguments he presents? Explain your answer.
9.
Did you enjoy the speech? Why or why not? Did the additional information
regarding Miles have an impact on how you reacted to the speech
10.

emotionally?
11-4a Words that Signal Arguments
In addition to questioning yourself to uncover argument parts, you can also look for
words clues. Remember that a word clue is a word or phrase that signals something to a
reader. In Chapter 5, you learned that word clues signal major supporting details. Since
major supporting details are reasons in an argument, words that signal major supporting
details also signal reasons. Table 11.1 shows some words and phrases that authors might
use to signal to their readers that reasons are being listed or explained. For example, to
support the conclusion that smoking should be banned on college campuses, an author
might say, “First of all, second-hand smoke can cause cancer.” The next reason could
begin: “Secondly, cigarettes are a fire hazard in dormitories.”
Table 11.1
Reason Word Clues
for example
if
may be
deduced
from
as shown by
since
with it
because
may be
inferred
from
in the ﬁrst
place
ﬁnally
it is
reasonable
that
in view of
the fact
for the
reason that
ﬁrst of all
ﬁrst,
second,
third
as indicated
by
In Chapter 4, you learned that some word clues help readers identify and follow an
author's main idea. Because main ideas are conclusions in an argument, words that
signal main ideas also signal conclusions. Table 11.2 shows some words and phrases that
authors might use to signal to their readers that a conclusion is coming. For example, to
signal a conclusion about smoking, an author may say, “Therefore, smoking should be
banned on college campuses” or “The point I am making is that smoking should be banned

on college campuses.”
Table 11.2
Conclusion Word Clues
therefore
thereby showing
it follows that
the only answer
can be
then
leads me to
believe that
in conclusion
consequently
as a result
the truth is
implies that
so
the point I am
making is
in my opinion
thus
demonstrates
that
proves that
it should be clear
that
hence
points to
in short
as shown by the
fact
from this it
follows
I conclude that
is based on
for these reasons
justiﬁes that
the
data/research
suggest(s)
can be argued
the truth is
can lead to
in fact
additionally
Consider the following passage from a communications textbook. Circle any words that
give you a clue that an idea is a reason or a conclusion.
Causes of Public Speaking Apprehension
1 Public speaking apprehension is most commonly caused by negative self-talk. Self-talk
is defined as intrapersonal communication regarding perceived success or failure in a
particular situation. Negative self-talk about giving a speech increases anxiety. Negative
self-talk generally focuses on a fear of being stared at, a fear of the unknown, a fear of
failure, or a fear of becoming fearful. Where do these negative thoughts come from?
Research suggests three common roots: biologically based temperament, previous
experience, and level of skills.
Biologically Based Temperament

2 First, some public speaking apprehension may be inborn. This “communibiological”
explanation proposes that for a few of us public speaking apprehension stems from our
biologically based temperament. According to this theory, people who are extroverted
tend to experience lower levels of public speaking apprehension than people who are
introverted. Similarly, people who naturally experience elevated levels of general
anxiety and shyness tend to experience higher levels of public speaking anxiety than
people who do not. Does this mean that, if you are temperamentally predisposed toward
high public speaking apprehension, you are doomed to be ineffective in your speaking
efforts? Of course not. Many successful celebrities are introverted and generally anxious
and shy, yet all of them enjoy a great deal of public speaking success.
Previous Experience
3 Second, our level of apprehension may also result from our experiences with public
speaking while growing up. In other words, some of us actually learned to fear public
speaking! Research tells us that most public speaking apprehension stems from such
socialization. We are socialized in two main ways: through modeling and reinforcement.
Modeling is learning by observing and then imitating those you admire or are close to.
Reinforcement is learning from personal experiences so that past responses to our
behavior shape our expectations about how our future behavior will be received.
4 Consider your past. How did modeling affect your current communication behavior?
What was oral communication like in your home when you were a child? What was it
like in your community? Did your parents talk freely with each other in your presence?
Did family or community members talk with each other a great deal, or were they quiet
and reserved? What was it like around the dinner table or at community events? Did any
of your family members do much public speaking? What were their experiences? Did
they avoid public speaking if they could? If your family tended to be quiet and reserved
and avoided speaking in public or showed fear about it, your own preferences and fears
may stem from modeling. Modeling an aversion to speaking freely in public influenced
noted Boston Globe columnist Diana White, who remarked, “In my family, looking for
attention was one of the worst sins a child could commit. ‘Don't make a spectacle of
yourself' was a familiar phrase around our house.”
5 How you have been reinforced by others in your speaking efforts also influences how
well you believe you performed in the past and affects how apprehensive you feel about
future speaking occasions. We have all had many “public speaking” experiences, from
reading aloud during second grade, to giving an oral report in science class, to accepting
a sports award at a banquet. If the responses to your speaking in the past were generally
positive, you probably learned to feel confident of your ability. If, on the other hand, the
responses were negative, you probably learned to feel fearful of public speaking. So, if
your second-grade teacher humiliated you when you read aloud, if you flubbed that
science report, or if friends laughed at your acceptance speech, you will probably be
more apprehensive about speaking in public than if you had been praised for your
efforts. The public speaking apprehension you feel because of negative past experiences,
though uncomfortable, does not have to influence your future performances. There are
strategies you can use as you prepare to speak that will help you reduce your
apprehension and be more effective.
Level of Skills
6 An important source of public speaking apprehension comes from having
underdeveloped speaking skills. This “skill deficit” theory was the earliest explanation
for apprehension and continues to receive the attention of researchers. It suggests that

most of us become apprehensive because we don't know how to (or choose not to) plan
or prepare effectively for a public presentation.
7 Effective speech planning is an orderly process based on a set of skills. If you do not
know or apply these skills, you are likely to have higher anticipation reaction levels. On
the other hand, as you become skilled at using the six-step speech-planning process,
your preparation will give you confidence and your anticipation reaction will be lower
than if you were ill prepared. The goal of this course is to help you become skilled and, in
so doing, help you become a more confident public speaker.
Source: From VERDERBER/SELLNOW/VERDERBER. The Challenge of Eﬀective Speaking, 15e (pp. 22–4). Copyright ©
2012 Cengage Learning.
Did you circle first and second as word clues? Those words signal two of the reasons to
support the conclusion. What is the conclusion of this argument? It follows the signal
words research suggests:
Research suggests three common roots: biologically based temperament, previous
experience, and level of skills.
The author does not signal the third reason, but you can tell by the conclusion what the
third reason is: level of skills. When authors use word clues, take note and use them to
reconstruct the author's argument.
Activity 11E
Identify Word Clues
Read the following passage from a sociology textbook. Use the heading to develop
a question to ask yourself before you read the passage. Use what you have
learned so far in this book about main idea, details, inference, and argument to
analyze the passage. Circle any word clues. Highlight and annotate the passage.
Can you figure out the conclusion? What are the reasons? To determine the
conclusion, look at the big picture. What is the overall point the author argues?
Multiculturalism
2 Until recent decades, the American educational system stressed the common elements
of American culture, history, and society. Students learned the story of how European
settlers overcame great odds, prospered, and forged a united nation from diverse ethnic
and racial elements. School curricula typically neglected the contributions of nonwhites
and non-Europeans to America's historical, literary, artistic, and scientific development.
Moreover, students learned little about the less savory aspects of American history,
many of which involved the use of force to create a racial hierarchy that persists to this
day, albeit in modified form.
3 History books did not deny that African Americans were enslaved and that force was

used to wrest territory from Native Americans and Mexicans. They did, however, make it
seem as if these unfortunate events were part of the American past, with few
implications for the present. The history of the United States was presented as a history
of progress involving the elimination of racial privilege.
4 In contrast, for the past several decades, advocates of multiculturalism have argued
that school and college curricula should present a more balanced picture of American
history, culture, and society—one that better reflects the country's ethnic and racial
diversity in the past and its growing ethnic and racial diversity today (Nash, Crabtree, and
Dunn, 1997). A multicultural approach to education highlights the achievements of
nonwhites and non-Europeans in American society. It gives more recognition to the way
European settlers came to dominate nonwhite and non-European communities. It
stresses how racial domination resulted in persistent social inequalities, and it
encourages Spanish-language, elementary-level instruction in the states of California,
Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and Florida, where a substantial minority of people speak
Spanish at home. (About one in seven Americans older than age 5 speaks a language
other than English at home. Of these people, more than half speak Spanish. Most Spanish
speakers live in the states just listed.)
5 Most critics of multiculturalism do not argue against teaching cultural diversity. What
they fear is that multiculturalism is being taken too far (Glazer, 1997; Schlesinger, 1991).
They believe that multiculturalism has three negative consequences:
Multiculturalism distracts students from essential subjects. Critics believe that
multi-cultural education hurts minority students by forcing them to spend too
much time on noncore subjects. To get ahead in the world, they say, one needs to
be skilled in English and math. By taking time away from these subjects,
multicultural education impedes the success of minority-group members in the
work world. (Multiculturalists counter that minority students develop pride and
self-esteem from a curriculum that stresses cultural diversity. They argue that
pride and self-esteem help minority students get ahead in the work world.)
1.
Multiculturalism encourages conflict. Critics also believe that multicultural
education causes political disunity and results in more interethnic and interracial
conflict. Therefore, they want schools and colleges to stress the common elements
of the national experience and highlight Europe's contribution to American
culture. (Multiculturalists reply that political unity and interethnic and interracial
harmony maintain inequality in American society. Conflict, they say, although
unfortunate, is often necessary to achieve equality between majority and minority
groups.)
2.
Multiculturalism encourages cultural relativism. Cultural relativism is the
opposite of ethnocentrism. It is the belief that all cultures and all cultural practices
have equal value. The trouble with this view is that some cultures oppose the most
deeply held values of most Americans. Other cultures promote practices that most
Americans consider inhumane. Should we respect racist and antidemocratic
cultures, such as the apartheid regime that existed in South Africa from 1948 until
1992? How about the Australian aboriginal practice of driving spears through the
limbs of criminals (Garkawe, 1995)? Or female circumcision, which is still widely
practiced in Somalia, Sudan, and Egypt? Critics argue that by promoting cultural
3.

relativism, multiculturalism encourages respect for practices that are abhorrent to
most Americans. (Multiculturalists reply that cultural relativism need not be taken
to an extreme. Moderate cultural relativism encourages tolerance and should be
promoted.)
Source: From BRYM/LIE. Sociology: Your Compass to a New World Brief Edition 2e (p. 83).
Copyright © 2010 Cengage Learning.
The author's topic is multiculturalism. You may have heard the word, but do you
really understand what it means? Multi = many/more than one.
Culture = behaviors and beliefs characteristic of a particular group, but its
original meaning was “tilling the land.” The meaning expanded over time,
metaphorically, to mean tilling the intellectual mind. It now also means
behaviors and beliefs characteristic of a particular group, but because of the
origin of the word, it is implied that these behaviors and characteristics are
deeply rooted, “tilled minds.” So the behaviors are probably protected and
justified by the group that holds them. It also is implied that these behaviors are
not easily changed. What is the author saying about many or diverse cultures?
What is the conclusion in the first paragraph?
1.
In paragraphs 2, 3, and 4, what kind of clue words stand out?
2.
Paragraphs 5 shows a numbered list. What is the author listing?
3.
What is the overall pattern of organization? Hint: It is not a list. How do you
know?
4.
Comprehension Check
Up to this point in the chapter, what is unclear?
Using your own words, define argument.

Activity 11F
Identify Arguments and Word Clues
Read the following passage, and answer the questions that follow. The first
passage is modeled for you.
Example:
In fact,  the discovery of America sparked a revolution of food and cuisine that has not
yet shown any signs of abating. For example, tomatoes, chilies, and green peppers
formed the first wave of American flavorings to circle the globe. Additionally, the Indian
garden still grows a host of plants that the world may yet learn to use and enjoy. These
plants may have practical uses such as providing food in otherwise unusable land or
producing more food in underused land. They also vary the daily diets of people
throughout the world and thereby  increase nutrition.
Source: Adapted from Weatherford, J. Indian Givers: How the Indians of the America
Transformed the World. Fawcett Columbine: New York. p. 115.
Circle any conclusion word clues.
Underline any reason word clues.
What is the conclusion?
The discovery of America sparked a revolution in food and cuisine that is
still going strong.
List the reasons that support the conclusion.
Tomatoes, chilies, and green peppers formed the first wave for American
flavorings; America still grows a host of plants the world may yet learn to
use and enjoy; they vary the diets of people.
Create a visual showing the passage's structure. Select one of the visuals
you learned about in Chapter 7 (authors' patterns of organization) or in
Chapter 10 (visuals in general). This example uses a cause and effect visual.

1. One such example is when a lion approaches an ostrich that is incubating eggs or
guarding nestlings; the adult bird will run some distance from the nest and flop down as
if injured. It then staggers around with one wing hanging down in what is described as a
“broken wing display.” The lion, intrigued by the behavior and anticipating an easy meal,
gives chase. Imagine its surprise when the ostrich leaps up and makes off across the
savannah at high speed, propelled by its enormously powerful legs. Consider a second
example. A nervous male vervet spotted an unknown vervet watching his troop from a
short distance away. The resident's troop was feeding below a stand of acacia trees and
the intruder had to cross a piece of open grassland between one stand of trees and
another to reach them. The resident male was nervous that the new arrival might pick a
fight and displace him as the troop's dominate male. So, as the stranger set out across the
open ground, he gave the leopard alarm call and the intruding male raced back to the
nearest tree and climbed to the topmost branches. How do animals know? The only
answer can be that some animals deceive to stay alive.
Source: Readers Digest. (1994). The Earth, Its Wonders, Its Secrets: Intelligence in Animals.
Reader's Digest: Pleasantville, New York. P. 91.
Circle any conclusion word clues.
Underline any reason word clues.
What is the conclusion?
List the reasons that support the conclusion.
On a separate sheet of paper, create a visual showing the passage's
structure. Select one of the visuals you learned about in Chapter 7 (authors'
patterns of organization) or in Chapter 10 (visuals in general).
2. You must rely on your reason rather than your senses, your untested opinions, or your
feeling, since reason will not deceive you. With it, you will be able to distinguish what is
real from what is not. In the Republic, Plato has Socrates describe a situation in which a
person might desire something on the level of the senses but refuse it, using truer
knowledge provided by reason. The truth is that there is only one way to know reality,
and that is through reason.

Source: From MITCHELL. Roots of Wisdom (p. 35). Copyright © 2008 Cengage Learning.
Circle any conclusion word clues.
Underline any reason word clues.
What is the conclusion?
List the reasons that support the conclusion.
On a separate sheet of paper, create a visual showing the passage's
structure. Select one of the visuals you learned about in Chapter 7 (authors'
patterns of organization) or in Chapter 10 (visuals in general).
3. Hence, alertness and arousal represent the most basic levels of attention; without
them a person is unable to extract information from the environment or to select a
particular response. For example, alertness and arousal are low when you are tired or
sleepy, which is why at these times you may miss important information or have trouble
choosing the correct action. In some extreme cases, such as coma, alertness and arousal
are so disrupted that the person is almost totally unresponsive to the outside world and
has no control over his or her responses.
Adapted: From BANICH/COMPTON. Cognitive Neuroscience (p. 303). Copyright © 2011
Cengage Learning.
Circle any conclusion word clues.
Underline any reason word clues.
What is the conclusion?
List the reasons that support the conclusion.
On a separate sheet of paper, create a visual showing the passage's
structure. Select one of the visuals you learned about in Chapter 7 (authors'
patterns of organization) or in Chapter 10 (visuals in general).

11-4b See the Argument without Word Clues
When readings do not offer word clues to help you identify the main argument, use
other reading strategies to figure out the main argument. Just like when a main idea is
not directly stated or no word clues are provided, you will use other strategies to help
you find the main argument. Some of the strategies you have learned include asking
questions, looking in the usual spots, and categorizing the author's points (general vs.
specific). Revisit Chapter 4 to review these strategies, if necessary.
Activity 11G
Identify an Argument without Word Clues
Read the following passage from a radio and television textbook, and use the
strategies you have learned to identify the main argument. Begin by reading the
title and turning it into a question. Skim the passage, and then read the passage
carefully, looking for the answer to your question.
Technique
1 Endowing a story with human interest is a key to good feature or documentary writing.
Even if you want to present only facts, and even if the facts seem stilted and dry, you can
make them dramatic. Develop them by embodying traits of the people they represent.
Even if the subject is inanimate, such as a new mousetrap, toxic waste, a current fad, or a
nuclear warhead, endow it with live attributes. Haven't we all run across machines that
seem more alive than some people we have known?
2 Develop the script according to the same basic principles you use for writing the play
and the commercial. Get attention. What is the problem or situation that requires the
program to be made? For the documentary, especially, the conflict is important. Explore
the people or characters involved with the subject. Develop the theme by revealing more
information; in the documentary, build the conflict through the complications until it
reaches a crisis point. Although major happenings create dramatic action, the little
things, the human elements, are important in establishing empathy and holding the
audience's interest.
3 A narrator almost always is used. But too much narration distracts. Don't let the
program look or sound like a series of educational interviews or lectures. A narrator
frequently can summarize information that is not obtainable through actualities. Make
the points clear and concise, and even if you are propounding one point of view, be
certain to include all sides of the issue as the evidence presumably builds to support
your position.
Source: From HILLIARD. Writing for Television, Radio and New Media (p. 213). Copyright ©
2011 Cengage Learning.

What question did you create from the title?
1.
What main point is made in paragraph 1?
2.
What main point is made in paragraph 2?
3.
What main point is made in paragraph 3?
4.
The main idea of the passage is implied. To identify it, answer the question
you asked yourself about the title. Infer the idea that the three main points
from each paragraph support.
5.
11-5 Distinguishing Facts from Opinions
As you examine an argument, it is necessary for you to be able to tell the difference
between facts and opinions. If the reasons of an argument are verifiable facts, then the
arguments they are a part of are usually stronger. If the reasons are opinions that are
questionable, then the arguments are usually weaker.
In 2010, writer Kitty Kelley wrote a biography of Oprah Winfrey. The biography was
unauthorized, meaning that it was written without the cooperation or permission of
Oprah Winfrey. In the forward of the book, Kelley reveals Oprah's uneasiness with the
biography with the following quote from Oprah: “I live in a world where people write
things that are not true all the time. Somebody's working on a biography of me now,
unauthorized. So I know it's going to be lots of things in there that are not true” (pp.
xii-xiii). Biographers are supposed to report accurate information about their subjects or
they risk being sued. Kelley's book does contain accurate facts, but what else does it
contain? Why would Oprah be concerned?

Read the following passage from Kelley's Oprah: A Biography, which does contain facts,
but also opinions. Notic how the opinions create a picture of Oprah for the reader. The
opinions are in bold in this text (not the original) for easy detection.
1 Winfrey blew into Chicago from Baltimore in December 1983 when a dangerous cold
wave plunged the Windy City temperatures to twenty-three degrees below zero.
2 She had arrived to host a local daytime talk show and, on January 2, 1984, introduced
all 233 pounds of herself to the city by marching in her very own parade, arranged by
WLS-TV. She wore one of her five fur coats, a Jheri curl, and what she called her “big
mama earrings.” Waving to people along State Street, she yelled, “Hi, I'm Oprah Winfrey.
I'm the new host of A.M. Chicago …. Miss Negro on the air.”
3 She was a big one-woman carnival full of yeow, whoopee, and hallelujah.
Source: Kelley, Kitty. Oprah: A Biography. Crown Publishers, 2010, p. 1.
What do you infer about Oprah after reading this passage? Is she humble? Brash?
Grateful? Shy? Polite? Loud? One might infer from the passage that Oprah is proud,
perhaps arrogant. These inferences come mostly from the opinions Kelley has included,
not the facts. Facts (statements that can be proven and verified) are statements that can
be proven and verified. The day Oprah arrived, her weight, what she was wearing, and
what she called her earrings are all facts that can be researched and proven. Opinions
(personal views and beliefs that cannot be proven as truth) are personal views and
beliefs that cannot be proven as truth. Opinions vary from person to person and are
frequently based on emotions and personal perception or bias. Did Oprah literally blow
into Chicago? March in her own parade? Is she actually a big one-woman carnival full of
yeow, whoopee, and hallelujah? These opinions reflect Kelley's perception of Oprah.
Readers need to be able to separate facts and opinions as they read. When distinguishing
facts from opinions, ask yourself the following questions:
Can the information be verified as true? (fact)
Is the information reliable? (likely a fact)
Is the information an expression of someone's feelings and not able to be
proven? (opinion)
Is the information presented using emotive or persuasive language? (likely
an opinion)
11-5a Facts
You should be able to research a fact in other books or sources to confirm it. A fact does
not reflect personal feelings or attitudes; it is a truth. If you want to find out when the
first shuttle went into space, you can confirm the date: April 12, 1981. Or if you want to

know who the first President of our country was, you would find two possible answers.
Both are facts: John Hanson was considered our President before the Constitution, and
George Washington was the first President after.
The following are examples of some facts. They are not opinions, feelings, or beliefs.
Even though they are interesting, they are verifiable truths intended to inform you:
Roosters cannot crow if they cannot fully extend their necks.
The underside of a horse's hoof is called the frog. The frog peels off several times a
year with new growth.
A group of geese on the ground is called a gaggle. A group of geese in the air is called a
skein.
These facts are based on either scientific research or examination of historical
documents.
In the following passage from a biology textbook, the author uses facts to support his
conclusion. The conclusion is highlighted in green and the reasons are highlighted in
yellow:
Source: From RUSSELL/HERTZ/MCMILLAM. Biology (p. 22). Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
The conclusion is supported by facts of biology and chemistry. Facts such as In minute
amounts it is necessary for the normal growth and survival of humans and many other
animals, but in high concentrations selenium is toxic are not based on perception or bias.
Facts are proven to be true and make an argument stronger.
11-5b Opinions
Opinions can be argued and, with proper explanation, can serve as good reasons in an
argument. Authors use opinions to persuade. When you identify an opinion, try to find

F
O
F
O
F
O
out what the author bases his or her opinions on. Here are some examples of opinions:
The driving age should be raised to 18.
Gas is too expensive.
21 Jump Street is the funniest movie ever.
In the following passage from a history textbook, the conclusion is based on opinions.
The conclusion is highlighted in green and the reasons are highlighted in yellow.
Source: From FELLOW. American Media History 2e (p. 22). Copyright © 2010 Cengage Learning.
The New-England Courant may have proven over time to be the first American
newspaper of quality, but the reasons presented in the passage—It was in the hands of
James Franklin, an excellent printer and the press had its first real writer—are not as strong
as facts. This does not mean the argument is necessarily bad. It just means that the
argument is not as strong as one built on facts. If you were reading this textbook for one
of your classes, you might purposefully hunt for facts to see what the author's opinions
are based on. Examples of facts that could be included in this argument that would make
the argument stronger are: statistics on sales of the paper, quotes of customer reviews of
the paper, and evidence that the paper was used as a model for other papers. If in the
end of your reading you found no facts or logical explanation to back up the opinions the
author gives, you might judge the author's argument as weak.
Activity 11H
Recognize Facts and Opinions
Read the following statements. Identify each as a fact (F) or an opinion (O).
Remember that a fact is something that can be proven or verified—to be either
true or false. You do not personally have to know whether it is true. An opinion is
a personal belief that cannot necessarily be proven right or wrong.
The pupil of an octopus's eye is rectangular.
1.
A horse cannot vomit; neither can a rabbit.
2.
Anyone, even a monkey, can paint like Jackson Pollock.
3.

F
O
F
O
F
O
F
O
F
O
No wars are worth the casualties.
4.
Camel's milk does not curdle.
5.
The most fascinating birth of any animal is that of the kangaroo.
6.
It is a misdemeanor to kill or threaten a butterfly—so says City Ordinance
No. 352 in Pacific Grove, California.
7.
Sugar is better tasting than salt or garlic.
8.
Activity 11I
Identify Reasons of Facts and Opinions
Read the following passages, and decide whether they are based on facts or
opinions. Provide explanations for your decision.
1. The amount of light a telescope can collect increases with the square of the aperture.
A telescope with a mirror that is 4 meters in diameter can collect 16 times as much light
as a telescope that is 1 meter in diameter.
Source: From FRAKNOI/MORRISON/WOLFF. Voyages to the Stars and Galaxies 3e (p. 111).
Copyright © 2006 Cengage Learning.
Based on fact or opinion?
Reason 1:
Reason 2:
2. Dinosaur bones have been firing our imagination for hundreds of years. People in the
Middle Ages found huge bones that were probably fossils of dinosaurs and large aquatic
reptiles, which may have inspired the legends of dragons and giants.

Source: Dodson, P. The Age Dinosaurs, Lincolnwood, IL: Publications International, 1993.
Based on fact or opinion?
Reason 1:
Reason 2:
3. Trace elements are vital for normal biological functions. For example, iodine makes
up only about 0.0004% of a human's weight. However, a lack of iodine in the human diet
severely impairs the function of the thyroid gland, which produces hormones that
regulate metabolism and growth. Symptoms of iodine deficiency include lethargy,
apathy, and sensitivity to cold temperatures. Prolonged iodine deficiency causes a goiter,
a condition in which the thyroid gland enlarges so much that the front of the neck swells
significantly. Once a common condition, goiter has almost been eliminated by adding
iodine to table salt, especially in regions where soils are iodine-deficient.
Source: From RUSSELL/HERTZ/MCMILLAM. Biology (pp. 23-4). Copyright © 2011 Cengage
Learning.
Based on fact or opinion?
Reason 1:
Reason 2:
4. Temporal regions of the brain are associated with four main functions: memory, visual
item recognition, auditory processing, and emotion. The hippocampus in the temporal
lobes was clearly linked to memory by the famous case of H.M. In early adulthood, he
underwent bilateral removal of anterior portions of the temporal lobe for the relief of
intractable epilepsy. Although the surgery was successful in reducing his seizures, he
became unable to learn almost all types of new information even though most of his
memories from the years before the operation were intact.
Source: From BANICH/COMPTON. Cognitive Neuroscience (p. 28). Copyright © 2011
Cengage Learning.

Based on fact or opinion?
Reason 1:
Reason 2:
5. This week, Snyder did the right thing. He signed a bill allowing the sale of louder, more
powerful fireworks within Michigan borders. Detractors, killjoys and nanny-staters have
taken to the airwaves, using the mainstream Michigan media to whine about the dangers
these devices pose. If they're to be believed, next summer our state is going to look like a
snapshot of WWI trench warfare—only louder and more colorful.
Source: Friday, Robert Laurie. The Detroit News, 2011, December 16, p. 22A.
Based on fact or opinion?
Reason 1:
Reason 2:
Activity 11J
Identify Argument and Facts
The following passage discusses mental training. Richard Davidson is a
neuroscientist who studies the brains of Buddhist monks who are experts at
meditating to see how they are different from the brains of people who do not
meditate. Determine the argument made in this passage and what facts support
it.
Transforming the Emotional Mind
1 Davidson has been on a quest that much of modern neuroscience suggested was, to put
it politely, quixotic:
 to discover whether states such as happiness, compassion,
enthusiasm, joy, and other positive emotions are trainable. That is, do there exist
techniques of mental training that can alter the brain in a way that raises the intensity of

these emotions, makes them last longer, or makes them easier to trigger?
2 Take two data points. In the research that sealed his reputation for rigorous
neuroscience, Davidson and colleagues discovered, in the 1970s, striking differences in
the patterns of brain activity that characterize people at opposite ends of the
“eudaemonic scale”—that is, along the spectrum of baseline happiness. That's fact one:
there are specific brain states that correlate with happiness, as I'll discuss in greater
detail below.
3 Second, brain-activation patterns can change as a result of therapy—specifically, as a
result of cognitive-behavior therapy and mindfulness meditation, in which people learn
to think differently about their thoughts. Jeffrey Schwartz showed that to be the case
with patients beset by obsessive compulsive disorder; Zindel Segal and Helen Mayberg
showed it with patients suffering from depression. Thus, fact two: mental training
practice, and effort can bring about changes in the function of the brain.
4 From those facts, Davidson built his hypothesis:
 that meditation or other forms of
mental training can, by exploiting the brain's neuroplasticity,
 produce
changes—most likely in patterns of neuronal activation but perhaps even in the
structure of neural circuitry in the sense of what connected to what and how strong
those connections are—that underlie enduring happiness and other positive emotions. If
that is so, then by exploiting the brain's potential to change its wiring, therapists or even
individuals might restore the brain and hence the mind to emotional health.
5 Just to be clear, the goal is not merely the absence of mental illness which seems to be
all that psychiatric and psychological therapies strive for these days, but the enduring
presence of robust mental and emotion health.
6 “That's the hypothesis: that we can think of emotions, moods, and states such as
compassion as trainable mental skills,” Davidson told the Dalai Lama.
Source: From Begley, S. Train Your Mind, Change Your Brain. Ballantine Books, New York,
2007, pp. 220-221.
What is Davidson's conclusion?
1.
What are two facts that he presents as reasons?
Reason 1:
Reason 2:
2.
11-6 Hidden Assumptions

In every argument, there are missing pieces that can be inferred (arrived at a conclusion
based on evidence (see Chapter 7)) from the context of the argument. You should make
these inferences so you can examine the complete argument. People know when they
create an argument that they cannot list every reason why, for example, the Cardinals are
a good baseball team or vegetarian chickens produce better eggs. Many times, reasons
are left out of arguments because authors assume some basic ideas are true for most
people, so stating them explicitly is unnecessary. The World Series as a competition is
considered a fair contest for most people. The games, most believe, are not fixed.
Therefore, one arguing that the Cardinals are the best because they won the World Series
assumes that everyone believes that the World Series is fair, individual players are not
taking steroids, and legitimate teams in both leagues are not omitted from the
competition. If these missing or hidden assumptions (ideas or beliefs that are not stated
explicitly) are true, then winning the World Series is a fact that would lead one to believe
that the Cardinals are the best team. If these hidden assumptions are not true, however,
then the conclusion is faulty.
Make sure you see whole arguments as you read your textbooks. Hidden assumptions
need to be seen clearly, using inference skills, and judged as closely as stated reasons.
(Refer to Chapter 7 for more information on inference.) Look at the following passage
from a sociology textbook. Pay attention to the underlined text, which uncover the
hidden assumptions the author has implied. Are these assumptions generally accepted
as true?
Quantity and Quality of Schooling
1 When Gallup pollsters ask Americans about their dissatisfactions, public education is
typically on the list of top problems every year. Is such concern warranted? Yes. Fifteen-
year-olds in 22 countries out perform their U.S. counterparts in science and those in 35
countries have much higher scores in math, surpassing even the students in the highest
achieving states in the Northeast.
2 Why are many U.S. students doing so poorly? Some believe that the typical curriculum
in the United States covers “too many topics too superficially” unlike the curricula in
many other countries. One reason for the superficiality of coverage may be short school
hours. For example, Asian students have longer and more school days than their
American counterparts. From grades one through twelve, this equated to 610 extra
hours in school per year or 7.4 more years of schooling in Asia than in the United States.
3 Not all Americans endorse the idea of longer school days, even if the extra hours offer
social studies, art, music or creative projects like building model houses (to teach
fractions). Instead, many parents feel that kids need some time to relax and play, and
administrators worry about the additional costs of materials and teachers' salaries.
Many Americans complain that the United States is falling behind other nations in
academic achievement, but 44 percent feel that colleges and universities should not
require students to take more math and science courses.
4 Unlike the United States, many countries identify young children with high innate
ability in mathematical problem solving and then provide them with the resources (such
as highly qualified teachers and specialized programs) to excel. A number of policy
analysts maintain that many U.S. students are performing poorly, in mathematics and
other areas, mainly because of school funding.
Source: From BENOKRAITIS. SOC 1e (p. 267). Copyright © 2010 Cengage Learning.

See if you can figure out the following about this passage.
Conclusion: Reason/Hidden Assumption:
Reason:
Hidden Assumption:
Reason:
Reason:
Hidden Assumption:
Reason:
Hidden Assumption:
Reason:
Hidden Assumption:
Now check your answers here to see how well you figured it out.
What is the conclusion? American students are academically falling behind other
countries.
Reason: 22 countries outperform U.S. students.
Hidden Assumption: The process and measures comparing student achievement are
the same.
Reason: Students are doing poorly.
Reason: One of the reasons may be short school hours.

Hidden Assumption: Increasing hours on school work will increase test scores.
Reason: Parents and administrators do not endorse longer hours.
Hidden Assumption: Again, increasing hours will fix the school systems.
Reason: Students are performing poorly because of inadequate school funding.
Hidden Assumption: Money will fix the problems in our school systems.
The hidden assumptions are not universally agreed upon; however, the author assumes
you accept the hidden assumptions as true. Do you? This is not to say that just because
assumptions are hidden that they are automatically wrong. They might not be. It is just
that these particular hidden assumptions are conclusions themselves without
explanations or facts to back them up. If you ignore these important hidden
assumptions, you run the risk of accepting an author's argument without completely
understanding it. Aim to reserve judgment until you completely understand what an
author proposes. Unpack arguments in their entirety. If you do, you will see exactly what
kind of reasons an author's conclusions are based on.
Activity 11K
Identify the Hidden Assumption
Read the following statements. Identify one hidden assumption for each stated
conclusion.
Conclusion: We should enforce the death penalty. We need to stop crime.
Hidden Assumption:
1.
Conclusion: Of course Loki is a great dog. Loki is a black Labrador.
Hidden Assumption:
2.
Conclusion: Buying cheaper ingredients for our lemon drop cookies is the
plan. We will save the company lots of money.
Hidden Assumption:
3.
Conclusion: There is nothing wrong with staying out all night. I am just
having fun. My other friends do it all the time.
Hidden Assumption:
4.

Conclusion: This bread is not good for you. It is full of carbohydrates.
Hidden Assumption:
5.
Read the following passage, and identify the hidden assumption.
The problem is more complex than keeping fuel in your car's gas tank. When the fuel
gauge shows that the tank is running low, you fill it with gas. By contrast, your stomach
and intestines are not the only places where you store fuel. Fuel is present throughout
your body, especially in the fat cells and liver cells, and more circulates in your blood.
Furthermore, each meal has a different density of nutrients from any other. Fortunately,
you don't have to know how much to eat.
Source: From KALAT. Introduction to Psychology 9e (p. 381). Copyright © 2011 Cengage
Learning.
Hidden Assumption:
6.
11-7 Making Sense of Visual Arguments
Visual arguments may be presented through many different types of media such as
cartoons, photographs, drawings, posters, or graphics. Through visuals, the author's goal
is to share his or her point of view. The author intends to convey meaning and influence
the reader by persuading, inspiring, or evoking emotions and reactions. A reader needs
to uncover and discover the author's implied main idea, or argument. In order to
determine what the author's purpose and argument are, you will do what you do for
textual arguments and determine the argument, conclusion, and reasons that support
the conclusion.
Activity 11L
Determine the Visual Argument
Read the following, and answer the questions that follow each.
1.

Daryl Lang/Shutterstock.com
Predict what you think this visual is about.
What is the purpose of the visual?
What is the conclusion that you inferred from the visual?
What reasons can you infer from the visual?
© Kim Kulish/Corbi
Predict what you think this visual is about.
What is the purpose of the visual?
What is the conclusion that you inferred from the visual?
2.

4.
What reasons can you infer from the visual?
Read the following passage and the photograph that accompanies it.
3.
I have very strong opinions regarding tattoos. I think that the body is a glorious canvas.
Tattoos represent our inner thoughts and energy. They are beautiful. And after asking
over a hundred people with tattoos if they were still happy that they got them, I was
pleased to find that most people were. Not only did they love them, but said that they
would be getting more soon. The truth is, most people find tattoos very attractive.
M Baumann/Blickwinkel/age fotostock
Predict what you think this visual is about.
Read the passage and then determine what the purpose of the visual is.
What is the conclusion of the reading passage?
What reasons are provided for the conclusion?

© Edgar Argo. Reproduction rights obtainable from www.CartoonStock.com
Predict what you think this visual is about.
What is the purpose of the visual?
What is the conclusion that you inferred from the visual?
What reasons can you infer from the visual?
5.

Predict what you think this visual is about.
What is the purpose of the visual?
What is the conclusion that you inferred from the visual?
What reasons can you infer from the visual?
11-8 Argumentation Maps
Uncovering an author's main argument is the first step toward evaluating it and deciding
whether you accept it. More will be said about evaluating arguments in Chapter 12. For
now, you will find the argument and prepare it for analysis. Isolating an argument from
the rest of the text helps you not get distracted as you analyze it. Without doing so, you
may find yourself getting lost in a creative introduction or interesting example and not
truly analyzing the argument by itself. In Chapter 1, you were introduced to the idea of
selective attention Managing Your Attention, which is purposefully managing your
concentration and focus. Before you analyze the worth of an author's argument, you
need to purposefully focus on it alone, so you can clearly see its parts and the logic
between the conclusion and reasons. A practical way to bring an argument to focus is to
create an argumentation map.
An argumentation map (a mind map that focuses only on the argument) is a mind map
that focuses only on the argument. It includes the conclusion (main idea) and reasons
(major supporting details) only—no extra information. It is like a skinny mind map that

does not include minor supporting details or information you already know on the
subject. The purpose of an argumentation map is to make an author's argument clear
and obvious.
To create an argumentation map, use the following guidelines:
Use separate boxes for the conclusion and reasons, and connect them with lines
like as in Figure 11.1. Keep in mind that authors sometimes present the reasons
first and the conclusion last.
Figure 11.1
Argumentation Map Structure
1.
Use complete sentences, not words or phrases, for the conclusion and reasons
(major supporting details). If you use only single words in an argumentation map,
you risk not seeing the entire argument. See Figure 11.2 for a complete
argumentation map.
Figure 11.2
Example of a Completed Argumentation Map
2.
Read the following passage from a humanities textbook, and see how Figure 11.3
portrays the argument the passage makes.
Figure 11.3
Argumentation Map Built from The Importance of Rome Passage

The Importance of Rome
1 If the origins of our intellectual heritage go back to the Greeks and, less directly, to the
peoples of Egypt and the Near East, the contribution of Rome to the wider spreading of
Western civilization was tremendous. In fields such as language, law, politics, religion,
and art, Roman culture continues to affect our lives. The road network of modern
Europe is based on one planned and built by the Romans some two thousand years ago;
the alphabet we use is the Roman alphabet; and the division of the year into twelve
months of unequal length is a modified form of the calendar introduced by Julius Caesar
in 45 BCE. Even after the fall of the Roman Empire, the city of Rome stood for centuries
as the symbol of civilization; later empires deliberately shaped themselves on the
Roman model.
2 The enormous impact of Rome on our culture is partly the result of the industrious
and determined character of the Romans, who early in their history saw themselves as
the divinely appointed rulers of the world. In the course of fulfilling their mission, they
spread Roman culture from the north of England to Africa, from Spain to India. This
Romanization of the entire known world permitted the Romans to disseminate ideas
drawn from other peoples. Greek art and literature were handed down and incorporated
into the Western tradition through the Romans, not from the Greeks. The rapid spread of
Christianity in the fourth century CE was a result of the decision by the Roman emperors
to adopt it as the official religion of the Roman Empire. In these and in other respects,
the legacy that Rome was to pass on to Western civilization had been inherited from its
predecessors.
3 The Romans were in fact surprisingly modest about their own cultural achievements,
believing that their strengths lay in good government and military prowess rather than
in artistic and intellectual attainments. It was their view that Rome should get on with
the job of ruling the world and leave luxuries like sculpture and astronomy to others.
Source: From CUNNINGHAM/REICH. Culture and Values, Volume I: A Survey of the Humanities with Readings (pp.
83-4). Copyright © 2010 Cengage Learning.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Remember that the brain likes visuals. Mapping out an argument causes you to
visualize it, and this visual, both in your head and on paper, helps you
understand the information and recall it.

Activity 11M
Map an Argument
Create your own argumentation map using the following passage. Remember to
write the conclusion and reasons in complete sentences.
Scientific Argument
Why is Earth a planet and not a dwarf planet?
This question calls for an argument based on a scientific classification. If it is to be
useful, a classification must be based on real characteristics, so you need to think about
the definition of the dwarf planets. According to the International Astronomical Union, a
dwarf planet must orbit the sun, not be a satellite of a planet, and be spherical. A dwarf
planet must not have cleared out most of the smaller objects near its orbit. As Earth
grew in the solar nebula, it absorbed the small bodies that orbited the sun in similar
orbits. That is, Earth cleared its traffic lane around the sun. Pluto never became massive
enough to clear its lane, so Pluto is a dwarf planet. Because Earth grew large enough to
sweep its traffic lane clear, it is a planet.
The dwarf planets are interesting for what they can reveal about the origin of the solar
system. How do the orbital resonances between the plutinos and Neptune confirm a
theory for the formation of the Jovian planets?
Source: From SEEDS/BACKMAN. Foundations of Astronomy, 11e (p. 548). Copyright © 2001
Cengage Learning.
Activity 11N
Create Your Own Argument
Using one of the prompts provided here, create an argument in support of or
against it. You do not need to write a paper; just write the argument and
conclusion and provide at least two reasons.
Is the death penalty effective?
Is torture ever acceptable?
Should men get paternity leave from work?

Should animals be used for research?
Are we too dependent on computers?
You must use at least one conclusion word clue. Include at least two reasons
using one reason word clue for each. Create an argumentation map to help you
build an argument.
Activity 11O
Create Your Own Argument from a Visual
Read Figure 11.4. (Remember that you learned about bar graphs in Chapter 10.)
Look at the types of data that are being shared. Using your interpretation of the
data, create your own argument and argumentation map.
Figure 11.4
Negative Eﬀect of Employment on Grades among Full-Time College
Students who Work, United States
Source: From BRYM/LIE. Sociology: Your Compass to a New World Brief Edition 2e (p. 83). Copyright © 2010
Cengage Learning.
11-9 Chapter Review
11-9a Practice with a Reading Passage
Prepare to Read

Based on the title, what do you predict the following passage will be about?
1.
What do you know about the topic already?
2.
Before you read the passage, develop a question from its title. As you read,
try to answer that question.
3.
Are Universities Worth it?
By by Paul Johnson
1 A new academic year is about to start. At this time every year I find myself asking these
questions: What ought universities to be doing? And are they doing it? After all, to take
four years out of a young adult's life is a major investment, and we ought to be clear
whether or not it's bringing in a worthwhile return. However, our societies seldom
produce clear replies to these fundamental questions. The universal assumption is that
higher education is valuable, and all governments are pledged to ensure that more and
more people receive it.
2 Plato founded the first center of higher studies in a suburb of Athens in the early 4
century B.C. He called it the Academy, and its object was the pursuit of wisdom, to which
he had been introduced by his mentor, Socrates. But remember that Socrates was
sentenced to death by a jury of 501 Athenian citizens because he had been teaching
young people that wisdom was best obtained by learning to think clearly for oneself.
3 Aristotle, Plato's pupil, founded a second college in Athens, called the Lyceum, and
taught there for 12 years. But he left it to go into voluntary exile, lest, as he put it, the
Athenians should “sin twice against philosophy”—that is, order his execution.
4 These facts are worth recalling, as they show that the most civilized city of the ancient
world was also confused about what higher education was supposed to achieve.
5 Universities, as such, were first created in the Middle Ages to train the clergy, and they
began assuming their modern form in 18
-century Germany. For two centuries
Germany was home to the best universities in the world, leading the field in philosophy,
theology, philology and most of the sciences. But this was the same Germany that under
Otto von Bismarck became a militaristic state and under Adolf Hitler a totalitarian one.
Germany led the world into the two most destructive wars in history. Hitler always
received higher ratings from [German] students than from any other group in society,
his views being strongly supported by a majority of German academics, with the world-
famous philosopher Martin Heidegger setting the pattern.
6 So universities, and the education they provide, do not necessarily impart wisdom.
What they do convey, in general terms, is not so easily defined. Prime Minister Vladimir
Putin of Russia received a routine dose of higher education in the twilight of the Soviet
Union as a prelude to entering the U.S.S.R.'s secret police community, an intellectual
th
th

culture in which he still remains.
7 President Barack Obama found Harvard Law School to be invaluable in providing
patrons and a fast-track entry into politics. There he absorbed the left-liberal culture
that is Harvard's hallmark, which he is now applying to governing the U.S. and leading
the Western World.
8 Prime Minister David Cameron had three years at England's oldest and most
prestigious university, Oxford. Cameron's sojourn there was notable for his belonging
(along with other members of his cabinet) to the Bullingdon, a club with a vague
connection to horses and a more specific activity of consuming large quantities of
champagne.
9 Such frivolities are not unknown in the U.S. The greatest disappointment in the life of
Franklin Delano Roosevelt was his failure to get elected to the Porcellian, the club
occupying the same position at Harvard as the Bullingdon at Oxford. FDR went on to win
four terms in the White House to general but by no means universal applause.
More Than One Path to Success
10 The quality of higher education received seems to bear no relation to the success or
failure of most Presidents. The two greatest, George Washington and Abraham Lincoln,
had to learn the hard way. On the other hand, another distinguished President, Woodrow
Wilson, first attracted notice as president of Princeton.
11 It is striking how much or how little great inventors and scientists learned at
university. Thomas Edison never attended one, discovering his genius instead while
working as a teenage telegraph operator. Charles Darwin went to Cambridge to study for
the church but derived the greatest benefit to his career during long rambles with J.S.
Henslow, a professor of botany. Darwin was known in his student days as “the man who
walks with Henslow.” What Cambridge did give Darwin was the opportunity to reinforce
his capacity to work hard and systematically and to expand the range of his enquiring
mind.
12 Indeed, the study of universities and the great men and women who have attended
them leads me to think that the best of these schools are characterized not so much by
what they teach and how they teach it but by the extent they provide opportunities and
encouragement for students to teach themselves. The best also help to instill certain
intellectual virtues in young minds, including respect for the indispensable foundation
of democracy, the rule of law; the need to back up opinions with clear arguments,
empirical evidence and hard work; the varying importance of resolute conviction and
friendly compromise, when appropriate; open-mindedness at all times; and the
perpetual need for courage in the pursuit of truth.
13 These are essentially moral qualities, which must form the basis of any university
education. College presidents and trustees must satisfy themselves that this is precisely
what their institutions are providing, as must corporate and individual benefactors. In
the long run this is the only way we can ensure that universities justify the resources
and time they consume.
Source: From Paul Johnson, “Are Universities Worth It?” Forbes, September 13, 2010 (p.15). Copyright © 2010 Forbes.
Reprinted with permission.
Check Your Understanding

What is the conclusion of this reading? (Hint: It should answer the question
you created before you started reading.)
4.
Reread paragraph 7 about President Barack Obama. Is it fact or opinion?
Positive or negative? Why? Share words in the reading that help you
understand what the author is saying about President Obama.
5.
What does the author imply about Germany, Hitler, and universities? What
hidden assumption does the author make?
6.
Write your own argument in response to the following question: What
makes a college education worthwhile?
Conclusion:
Reason:
Reason:
Reason:
7.
Why, as the author argues, should university students learn the intellectual
virtue of “courage in the pursuit of truth”?
8.
Read the following sentence from the passage, and use context clues and
word part analysis to define the bolded words.
“The best also help to instill certain intellectual virtues in young minds,
including respect for the indispensable foundation of democracy, the
rule of law; the need to back up opinions with clear arguments,
empirical evidence and hard work; the varying importance of resolute
conviction and friendly compromise, when appropriate;
open-mindedness at all times; and the perpetual need for courage in the
pursuit of truth.”
virtues 
indispensable 
9.

empirical 
resolute 
perpetual 
In your opinion, why would a university that encourages students to teach
themselves be worth it?
10.
Chapter Review
11-9b Chapter Summary
Arguments are logical structures that people create when they speak or write. When
reading an argument, first ready your mind and “empty your cup.” Entertain the fact that
the argument could be true. Carefully read it. Then seek out the argument parts—
conclusions and reasons. An author's conclusion is his or her main idea. The reasons are
the major supporting details. One strategy for locating arguments is to look for word
clues that signal conclusions and reasons. When there are no word clues, rely on the
other main idea strategies you know—asking questions, looking in the usual spots, and
categorizing an author's points.
You need to decide whether you accept arguments when you are presented with them.
Determine if the reasons in the argument are facts or opinions. Identify if the author
makes any hidden assumptions by using your inference skills to uncover the complete
argument. When you have discovered all the argument parts, you can make an
argumentation map, which is a visual depicting exactly what the argument contains. It
helps you see the argument for what it really is before you begin to evaluate it.
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw the amount of dendrites you imagine that you have now about
arguments. Compare your drawing of dendrites now with what you

argument
1.
reason
2.
conclusion
3.
facts
4.
opinions
5.
hidden assumptions
6.
inferred
7.
argumentation map
8.
judgment or decision based on
at least one reason
a.
statement that explains,
justifies, or otherwise supports
the conclusion
b.
two or more statements that
include one conclusion and at
least one reason that support it
c.
personal views and beliefs that
cannot be proven as truth
d.
statements that can be proven
and verified
e.
drew at the beginning of this chapter. If the amounts are different,
explain why.
Comprehension Check
What is one question you have about arguments?
Explain why learning about arguments is considered a skill that expert
readers need.
Chapter Review
11-9c Post Test
Part 1: Objective Questions
Match the key terms from the chapter in Column A to their definitions in
Column B.
Column A Column B

a mind map that focuses only
on the argument
f.
ideas or beliefs that are not
stated explicitly
g.
arrived at a conclusion based
on evidence
h.
F
O
F
O
F
O
F
O
F
O
R
C
R
C
R
C
R
C
R
C
Identify each of the following statements as fact or opinion by circling F or
O.
Spiders are ugly.
9.
The king of hearts is the only king without a moustache on a standard
playing card.
10.
Intelligent people have more zinc and copper in their hair.
11.
A child's hyperactivity is all in the mind of the parent.
12.
Antarctica is the only continent without reptiles or snakes.
13.
Using what you have learned regarding argument word clues, identify the
following statements by circling either R for a Reason or C for a Conclusion
and by underlining the clue words.
For example, the medicine must be taken three times per day.
14.
Hence, people need to be sensitive to the needs of the elderly.
15.
I conclude that education is the key to success.
16.
First of all, most students prefer staying up late anyway.
17.
As a result, the purple plants are the most beneficial.
18.
Academic Reading
Part 2. Reading Passage
Prepare to Read

Based on the title, what do you predict the following passage will be about?
1.
What do you already know about the subject?
2.
Develop a question from the title. As you read the passage, try to answer
that question.
3.
Language
By By A. C. Krizan, Patricia Merrier, Joyce P. Logan, and Karen Schneiter Williams
1 Language can be a barrier to communication. Interactions between persons who have
different native languages present communication challenges. Languages other than
English can be heard in public places almost everywhere in the United States, as well as
in other countries. In addition, most product directions are printed in more than one
language, and universal symbols are commonly used as road and other directional signs.
Although English has become the international language of business, a person's
knowledge of a second language is somewhat limited because of word, tone, and
nonverbal nuances that develop over time among native language speakers. Increased
global contacts, along with a high percentage of U.S. residents whose native language is
not English, multiply opportunities for misunderstandings among employees, clients,
customers, suppliers, and other contacts.
2 Some words have different meanings and connotations in different countries and
cultures. The Advertising Research Resource Center 6 at the University of Texas gives a
number of examples of humorous or lost marketing opportunities because of mixed
meanings in different languages. For example, the American Dairy Association's decision
to extend the “Got Milk?” advertisements to the Mexico market failed because the
Spanish translation was “Are you lactating?” When KFC entered the Chinese market, its
slogan “finger lickin' good” came out in translation as “eat your fingers off!” Chinese
translation proved difficult for Coca-Cola; it took two attempts to get it right. The first
translation was “Ke-kou-ke-la” because it sounded roughly like “Coca-Cola.” After
printing thousands of signs, company representatives discovered the phrase meant “bit
the wax tadpole” or “female horse stuffed with wax,” depending on the dialect. After
researching 40,000 Chinese characters, Coca-Cola came up with “ko-kou-ko-le,” which
translates roughly to a more appropriate “happiness in the mouth.”
3 Some words and phrases are difficult to translate from one language to another
because of mental associations that only native language speakers have for them. For
example, sports-related expressions such as “out in left field” would create translation
problems in a country without baseball teams. Likewise, time-related references such as
“time flies” and “time is money” have no logical meaning in literal translation.
4 The first wave of globalization made English the universal language, but current
marketing strategies recognize the importance of accommodating geographic or cultural
target markets. Corporations are shaping their products for local conditions and

producing websites in two or more languages. American media giants such as CNN now
broadcast in other languages as well as English to compete with regional, national, and
international media. The number of non-English websites is growing, along with newly
active Internet newsgroups that use the national language.
5 English is the common “linguistic denominator” for business. However, globalization is
changing the nature of the language. With native speakers a shrinking minority of those
who speak English, current thought resists the idea that students of English in other
countries should emulate British or North American English. There is an acceptance that
they may embrace their own local versions. Researchers are studying non-native
speakers' “mistakes”—such as “She look very sad”—as structured grammar.
6 Even the use of parts of speech varies in different languages. In Japanese, the verb is at
the end of a sentence. This enables Japanese speakers to begin to express a thought and
watch the receiver's reaction. Depending on how the receiver reacts to a message, the
verb may be changed, thereby changing the meaning of the sentence. For example, a
Japanese language speaker might start to convey a message meaning, “Please go away
from me now” but end up with the meaning, “Please stay with me now” by changing the
verb, which is said last. Because of the importance of misunderstandings that can occur
in language translations, a person with knowledge of language and language subtleties is
an organizational asset.
7 Variations of English words exist even in English-speaking countries. For example, the
American word for bathroom becomes loo or WC (water closet) in British English. In
England, the American jello becomes jelly and jelly becomes jam. The British word for a
sausage is a banger, and a car trunk is a boot. In both Australia and England, an elevator
is a lift. Regional language differences exist within the United States as well. When you
need a drink of water, do you look for a water fountain, a drinking fountain, or a
bubbler? Do you carry your lunch in a bag or a sack? Do you refer to a carbonated
beverage as a pop or soda?
8 Nonverbal language influences the receiver's understanding and acceptance of a
spoken message. If message receivers perceive a difference between the sender's verbal
and nonverbal messages, they are more likely to believe what they see rather than what
is said. In multicultural business communication, nonverbal signals vary as much as
spoken languages. Nonverbal greetings vary from a bow to a handshake, or from a hug to
an upward flick of the eyebrows.
9 Not understanding cultural differences in nonverbal messages causes communication
problems. For example, the Japanese consider crossing one's legs by placing one foot or
ankle on the knee of the other leg to be impolite or vulgar. The preferred way of sitting is
with both feet on the floor with knees together. Thumbs up in America means approval,
but in Iran and Ghana it is a vulgar gesture. In addition, the social distance or individual
space that persons need for comfort in communication varies in different cultures. If
people stand too close when conversing, Germans, Canadians, and Americans may feel
uncomfortable; in Middle Eastern cultures, however, conversations may be almost nose
to nose.
Source: From KRIZAN. Business Communication (pp. 33—5). Copyright © 2011 Cengage Learning.
Check Your Understanding

Use context clues and word part analysis to define the following words
from the passage.
connotations (paragraph 2):
denominator (paragraph 5):
emulate (paragraph 5):
4.
What is the conclusion of the passage?
5.
What are the reasons that support the conclusion?
6.
One of the examples from the passage is: When KFC entered the Chinese
market, its slogan “finger lickin good” came out in translation as “eat your
fingers off.” Is this a fact or an opinion?
7.
This is a statement from the passage: Regional language differences exist
within the United States as well. Using this statement as a conclusion in an
argument you create, come up with two reasons to support the conclusion.
8.
What is one hidden assumption that the author makes?
9.
Create an argumentation map using the main conclusion from the passage
and three reasons from the passage that support it. Make one of your
reasons the hidden assumption you wrote in your answer to #9.
10.

Chapter Review
11-9d 
 Brain Strength Options
Working in a group of no more than three or individually, create a poster.
The poster will contain two annotated pages. You may choose from the
following options:
Select a topic of interest to you (such as a medical condition, a
favorite athlete, or information about a travel destination). Find
information about the topic, including one page of information that
you believe is based on fact and another that you feel is based on
opinion. Print out both pages, and put them on the poster. Annotate
the arguments, underlining conclusions and reasons. Label one “fact”
and one “opinion.” On the opinion, write a brief section explaining
why it is opinion and not fact.
a.
Find the lyrics to two songs. One set of lyrics should contain opinions,
and the other should contain only facts. Remember that you do not
have to personally know if the facts are true, but you should know
that they could be investigated and proven. Print out both sets of
lyrics, and put them on the poster. Annotate the arguments,
underlining conclusions and reasons. Label one “fact” and one
“opinion.” On the opinion, write a brief section explaining why it is
opinion and not fact.
b.
1.
Working with one other classmate, prepare a debate in which one person
speaks only in facts and the other speaks only in opinions. Each person will
have a “side” or an argument. During the debate, each person will support
his or her position with either all facts or all opinions. The debate will
2.

consist of three major points per person. Present the debate to the class.
Working individually, select a topic and present an argument on that topic.
You must have at least three reasons and a conclusion.
Your point must be clearly stated.
Your argument must consist of all facts and no opinions.
You may present this argument in one of the following ways (as approved
by your instructor):
PowerPoint presentation
a.
Poster
b.
Essay
c.
Oral report
d.
Illustration (The argument must be stated as captions with a picture
for every statement.)
e.
3.
Find one editorial from a newspaper. Identify the argument's reasons and
conclusion. You may choose one of the following formats:
Poster (including the editorial)
a.
PowerPoint presentation (scanning in the editorial)
b.
Written report (the editorial as an attachment)
c.
4.

Chapter 12
Reading Arguments Critically
Chapter Introduction
12-1 Kinds of Arguments
12-1a Inductive Arguments
12-1b Deductive Arguments
12-2 Evaluating Arguments
12-2a Detecting Fallacies
12-2b Steps to Evaluating Arguments
12-3 Evaluating Information on the Internet
12-4 Chapter Review
12-4a Practice with a Reading Passage
12-4b Chapter Summary
12-4c Post Test
12-4d  Brain Strength Options
Chapter Introduction
“The unexamined life is not worth living.”
— Socrates
Student to Student
Alex Manion
Many of the principles taught in basic science classes have definite evidence to
back them up and have been proven again and again. Knowing this, I accept
whatever I am learning as fact. I have also witnessed the truth of these principles
firsthand while working at the National Weather Service. It is generally accepted
that low-pressure systems bring rain and high-pressure systems bring clear skies.
I was able to look at surface weather maps that displayed high and low pressure

Making Connections
What does it mean when you deduce
something?
1.
Where have you heard the word
deduce before?
2.
Has anyone ever convinced you to
change your opinion about
something? If so, what did they do to
change your mind? If no one has ever
caused you to change your mind, why
is that?
3.
What do you think a generalization
is? Look for a clue in the word itself.
4.
What do you think circular reasoning
would be? Look for a clue in the
5.
systems and associate them with the weather outside. If a high-pressure system
is sitting over Michigan, I was taught to expect clear skies. Sure enough, when I
looked out the window, the skies were clear. I was able to take what I learned and
apply it in the real world, solidifying that what I was learning was indeed true.
A senior at Michigan State University majoring in earth science with a
concentration in meteorology
Courtesy of Alex Manion
One popular argument I hear frequently about is global warming. When debates
are shown on TV, the viewer sees one person arguing for a topic and one against.
This setup makes it look like there is a 50/50 split on the point of view for a
particular subject when, in reality, the majority of scientists believe one scenario.
This makes it look like half of the general population believes in human-induced
climate change where the other half believes global warming is naturally caused.
These debates on TV are not always a bad thing, though. The scientific
community needs opposition. When one criticizes a hypothesis, it causes the
scientist to go back and make sure there is definitive proof to back what was said
and that there are no loopholes in the explanation. It is important to always
think critically about arguments. By doing this, you can understand any process
and come up with a conclusion for yourself.

term.
© Cengage Learning
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw on the brain cell how many dendrites you imagine you have for how
much you know about reading arguments critically.

Observation 1:
You open the door to the building of
your first class. The lights in the hall
are off.
Observation 2:
The classroom door is locked.
Observation 3:
No other people are in the building.
12-1 Kinds of Arguments
In Chapter 11, you were introduced to arguments. You learned what an argument is,
what its parts are, and how to make an argumentation map. As you may recall, an
argument is a conclusion supported by reasons. If you want to convince your listener or
reader that your conclusion about something is correct, present your reasons with your
conclusion. For example, suppose a friend said, “I believe that the human brain is the
most complex thing in the known universe.” Will you just believe him or does he have to
give you his reasons for why he believes this is true? If he wants you to agree with him,
he will present all the reasons, along with his conclusion, to convince you. Will he
succeed in convincing you? It depends. What do you think it depends on?
There are two primary types of arguments: inductive (a type of argument where the
conclusion is based on a series of observations and generalized to all) and deductive (a
type of argument that makes a conclusion about a specific thing based on facts and
verifiable truths or absolutes) . Both types have conclusions and reasons.
12-1a Inductive Arguments
Inductive arguments begin with a series of specific observations and conclude with a
generalization that logically follows from it. Because inductive arguments are based on
limited observations, the conclusion is likely, but not absolutely, 100% verifiably true. An
inductive argument is judged as being strong or weak. It is considered strong if the
reasons that support the conclusion are strong and actually lead to the conclusion
logically. Most arguments encountered in everyday life are inductive. What would you
think after making the following observations one Monday morning on campus?

Observation 1:
Most of the students at Glendale
Community College love pizza.
Observation 2:
Most of the students at Heartland
Community College love pizza.
Observation 3:
Most of the students at Valencia
Community College love pizza.
Conclusion:
College students love pizza.
© Cengage Learning
You might conclude that there is no school scheduled. You made specific observations
and then came to a conclusion. You may be wrong, but your observations led you to this
logical conclusion.
Here's another example of an inductive argument. After a recent study, it was concluded
that students love pizza! Papa Jozella's Pizza went to Glendale Community College,
Heartland Community College, and Valencia Community College and asked students if
they loved pizza. Most of the students confirmed they did.
Activity 12A
Identify Inductive Arguments
Read the arguments provided here and explain why they are considered
examples of inductive arguments.
The men and women of North Dakota were polled regarding an upcoming
election. Eighty-five percent of those polled said that they would vote for
Bette Grande. Bette Grande has won every debate. Bette Grande has the
support of most business owners in the area. So, Bette Grande will most
likely win the next election.
Why is this argument inductive?
1.
The Hawks won the last 11 games against the Doves. I am betting that the
Hawks win tonight's game against the Doves.
Why is this argument inductive?
2.
I played poker last Tuesday and won. I played on Thursday and Saturday
3.

and won then, too. Tonight I will play and win poker.
Why is this argument inductive?
I made charts to study for my last three biology exams and got As on all of
the exams. I will make a chart this time, too, so I can earn an A.
Why is this argument inductive?
4.
The detective comes into a room and sees a man lying on the floor with a
sword stuck through his heart. He has seen this many times during his
30-year career. He states that the man is dead or dying.
Why is this argument inductive?
5.
Activity 12B
Identify the Argument
Identify the argument in the following passage by previewing and study-reading
it. Then answer the questions that follow.
For billions of years, the man in the moon has looked down on Earth. Ancient
civilizations saw the same cycle of phases that you see, and even the dinosaurs may have
noticed the changing phases of the moon. Occasionally, however, the moon displays
more complicated moods when it turns copper-red in a lunar eclipse. In cultures all
around the world, the sky is a symbol of order and power, and the moon is the regular
counter of the passing days. So it is not surprising that people are startled and sometimes
worried when they see the moon grow dark and angry-red.
Source: From SEEDS/BACKMAN. Foundations of Astronomy, 11e (pp. 32–3). Copyright ©
2001 Cengage Learning.
What is the conclusion (main idea) of this passage?
1.

Reason 1:
All flowers need water and sunlight.
(scientific fact, not an observation)
Reason 2:
A rose is a flower.
Conclusion:
Therefore, roses need water and
sunlight.
Reason 1:
All humans breathe air. (fact)
What is one reason (major supporting detail) that supports the conclusion?
2.
Write or find your own example in a newspaper, magazine, or textbook of
an inductive argument.
3.
12-1b Deductive Arguments
There is a difference between a statement about all things and a statement about some
things. A deductive argument begins with a general statement or a general law and leads
to or concludes with a statement about something specific. It is your job as a reader and
critical thinker to determine if a deductive argument is valid (when a deductive
argument has a conclusion that logically follows from the reasons, including the general
statement/law) . What does this mean? The argument has reasons that lead to only one
possible conclusion, which follows logically from already accepted generalizations or
truths. The first reason in a deductive argument is usually a general idea, truth, accepted
theory, or other widely accepted principle. The second reason is typically a specific item
that is linked logically to the first reason.
© Cengage Learning

Reason 2:
Andy is human.
Conclusion:
Therefore, Andy must breathe air.
Reason 1:
All humans need sleep.
Reason 2:
Jack is human.
Conclusion:
Therefore, Jack needs sleep.
Reason 1:
All cats have fur.
Reason 2:
The Sphynx is a cat.
Conclusion:
Therefore, the Sphynx has fur.
While reading, you determine if an argument is valid by seeing if the reasons follow
logically from the conclusion. If they do, the argument is valid.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Figuring out arguments is like figuring out a puzzle, which is rewarding to the
brain and makes you feel good when you succeed. Think of it as pretending you
are a detective, perhaps like Sherlock Holmes, and you are going to deduce, or
uncover, the deductive argument.
Once you have determined that the deductive argument is valid, you need to determine
whether it is true. Just because it is valid does not mean it is true.
This is a valid argument, but it is not necessarily true. The Sphynx is a breed of hairless
cat. Other breeds of hairless cats are the Donskoy, Bramble, and Dossow. The argument is
valid in that the second reason is related logically to the first, but the first reason is not
true, so the conclusion is false. Advertising is famous for presenting false
argumentation. The arguments are valid, but they are sometimes false.
Many of the arguments you will read in your textbooks, especially in the sciences, will be
deductive because these arguments are based on facts and verifiable truths that lead the

Reason 1:
All organisms are cellular.
Reason 2:
Plants are organisms.
Conclusion:
Therefore, plants are cellular.
Reason 1:
Hydrologically and geologically
active areas are not good burial
spots of radioactive waste (general
statement/law).
Reason 2:
Yucca Mountain is hydrologically
and geologically active.
Conclusion:
reader to only one possible conclusion. Here is an example of a deductive argument
from biology.
Activity 12C
Think Deductively
Read the following passages, and answer the questions that follow each.
1. Burial of radioactive waste is the best disposal method. Yucca Mountain, however, is
not the best site because it is hydrologically and geologically active. Burial at this site
poses the risk of radioactive materials leaking out and contaminating surrounding soil
and ground water. If a leak did occur, ground water contamination would be a major
problem. Many of the surrounding cities, including parts of Las Vegas, receive some of
their water from the aquifers in the area.
Source: ACT Victory Partial Passages. Cambridge Educational Services: Des Plaines,
Illinois. E-20, 2003.
Identify the conclusion of the deductive argument using the reasons to guide
you.
2.
Superficially, today's problems with the abuse of illegal drugs such as heroin and cocaine
resemble the problems of alcohol abuse during the 1920s, when many people kept
drinking in spite of Prohibition. There is, however, a significant difference. The use of
drugs such as heroin and cocaine has never been a wide-spread, socially accepted
practice among most middle-class, otherwise law-abiding Americans.
Source: ACT Victory Partial Passages. Cambridge Educational Services: Des Plaines,
Illinois, 2003.
Of the following answers, circle the hidden assumption about this passage.

Reason 1:
Reason 2:
It was believed that the best way
to accomplish this was through
social persuasion and informal
social control.
Conclusion:
Informal social control
mechanisms include family
members, neighbors, and fellow
workers, as well as local town, city,
or countywide boards that point
out deviant behavior and provide
sanctions.
During Prohibition, drinking alcohol was commonly accepted among
most Americans.
a.
As long as drugs are available, they will be used despite laws to the
contrary.
b.
Most Americans consider heroin and cocaine to be in the same category
as alcohol.
c.
In a democracy, laws must be based on the fundamental beliefs and
values of the majority of citizens.
d.
American popular opinion has always been molded by the values of the
middle class.
e.
3. Taoist philosophy, which was developed in Asia a century after the introduction of
Confucianism, proposed that all forces of nature are connected and that it is necessary
for individuals to become “one” with those forces. If a person is in a state of harmony or
“oneness” with nature, then conflict will cease to exist. Together, Confucian and Taoist
thought have permeated Chinese society, with the goal of getting citizens to be in
consonance with those around them, to be in harmony with others and the rules of
society. It was believed that the best way to accomplish this was through social
persuasion and informal social control. Informal social control mechanisms include
family members, neighbors, and fellow workers, as well as local town, city, or
countywide boards that point out deviant behavior and provide sanctions.
Source: From Dammer/Albanese. Comparative Criminal Justice Systems (p. 76). Copyright ©
2011 Cengage Learning.
Identify the first reason of this passage. Remember the first reason in a
deductive argument is a general principle or theory.
4.
There is a basic rule involved in maintaining economic growth: The more things people

I
D
must pay for, the more the economy grows. For example, if you do your friend a favor by
driving her to the store, you may have advanced your friendship, but you've done little
for the economy (other than using gasoline). If, on the other hand, you charge her (and
report the charge on your taxes), you have added to the nation's GDP. In a similar sense,
the greater the number of goods and services that can be obtained only by purchase, the
better it is for economic growth. This means that some things that we would not
consider desirable—a divorce, an oil spill, an illness or natural disaster—are
economically positive events because they result in more money being spent. Other
things that we might think are desirable, such as sharing your lawnmower, are negative
because, by using something without paying for it, you hinder economic growth.
Source: From Robbins. Anthro (p. 62). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
Thinking deductively and using this passage as Reason 1 (general principle,
accepted theory), what is an example of one positive event that could affect
the economy and one negative event?
5. Food irradiation has significant value in destroying the bacteria that infect the food.
Irradiated food has a much longer shelf life than traditionally treated food. Irradiation
destroys nutrients, but no more than normally destroyed by cooking food. Food
irradiated with 10,000 rads or less of gamma rays show little or no nutrient loss.
Therefore, irradiation of food should be supported.
Source: ACT Victory Partial Passages. Cambridge Educational Services: Des Plaines,
Illinois. E-19, 2003.
What can you deduce specifically about meat, wheat flour, poultry, or other
specific food items after reading this passage?
Activity 12D
Decide between Inductive and Deductive Arguments
Read the following statements, and determine whether they are inductive (I) or
deductive (D). Ask yourself whether the conclusion probably follows from the
statements (inductive) or does follow necessarily (deductive).
All actors are extroverts. Julia is an actress. Therefore, Julia is an extrovert.
1.
A professor provides a definition of ethnocentrism and then makes the
2.

I
D
I
D
I
D
I
D
I
D
I
D
I
D
I
D
I
D
definition clearer by providing examples.
After reading an article that rates the quality and energy efficiency of
dishwashers, you can now decide which one to purchase.
3.
The detective determines that the man's brother-in-law is the murderer
because his fingerprints are on the open window sill and on the murder
weapon.
4.
The coaches feel that the new football recruit will be of exceptional value
to the team because he exhibits all of the recognized qualities of an
outstanding athlete.
5.
The vast majority of salespeople are extroverts. Tom is a salesperson.
Therefore, Tom is an extrovert.
6.
The Tigers have won all of their home games for the past two years, so they
will win their next home game.
7.
If the key players for the Tigers are healthy and able to play, then the Tigers
will win their next home game. The key players are healthy and able to
play; therefore, the Tigers will win their next home game.
8.
The longer a pendulum is, the longer it takes to swing. Therefore, when the
pendulum of a clock is lengthened, the clock will slow down.
9.
Either the lines on people's hands are indicators of personality and life
characteristics or hand-reading is a fraud. The lines on people's hands are
not indicators of personality or life characteristics. Therefore,
hand-reading is a fraud.
10.
Activity 12E
Identify Deductive and Inductive Arguments

Read the following textbook passages, and highlight the conclusion (main idea) in
green. Determine whether the argument is deductive or inductive, and explain
why you think so.
1.
Source: From NAIRE. Psychology 5e (p. 69). Copyright © 2009 Cengage Learning.
Is the passage deductive or inductive?
Why?
2.
Source: Exploring Health: Expanding the Boundaries of Wellness. Prentice Hall: Englewood
Cliffs, New Jersey p.192.
Is the passage inductive or deductive?
Why?
3.

Source: From Solomon/Berg/Martin. Biology 7e (p. 7). Copyright © 2005 Cengage Learning.
Is the passage deductive or inductive?
Why?
4.
Source: From MITCHELL. Roots of Wisdom 5e (p. 166). Copyright © 2008 Cengage
Learning.
Is the passage deductive or inductive?
1.
Why?
2.
5.
Source: From Haviland. Anthropology: The Human Challenge (p. 402). Copyright © 2008
Cengage Learning.
Is the passage inductive or deductive?

Why?
Activity 12F
Write a Deductive Argument
Try writing your own example of a deductive argument. Here is an example
written by Nathan Wagner, a college student.
It's hard to write a good example of a deductive argument. I'm sure I read and hear them
all the time….I just haven't recognized them before. Maybe this is one….If I plagiarize my
research paper for English 102, I will receive a zero in the class. That's a fact. It says so in
my syllabus. That's one. If I eat canned tomato soup, I'll get cancer. No. There are people
who eat canned tomato soup and they live a long life. If I smoke, I might get cancer.
No…doesn't work. This statement is true, but it's not a deductive argument. In a
deductive argument, the reason is true and logically leads to the conclusion (cancer)
must be true. Forget that one. I think this works: If I get my hair cut, it will be shorter.
(Cutting hair makes it shorter. I am getting my hair cut. Therefore, my hair will be
shorter.) Ha. That's two. I'll use one from Newton's gravity thing…Law of Gravity…If I
throw my book up in the air, it will come down. There. I wrote a couple of deductive
arguments.
Comprehension Check
What are the differences between deductive and inductive arguments?
An interpretation of a poem is a good example of what kind of
argument?
Deductive Argument Puzzles
Good problem solvers do not give up. They try experiments with several different ideas
and possible solutions. Remember—sometimes the obvious answer is wrong. Read the
following example:
Ms. Lowmer works in a dress factory. Her job is to operate a cutting machine. Each time
she presses the button, the machine cuts a piece of cloth two meters long. If she starts
with a piece of cloth twenty meters long, how many times should she press the button in
order to cut the cloth into two-meter lengths?
Source: Adapted from: Harnadek, A. Critical Thinking Book One. Midwest Publications, Paciﬁc Grove, CA.
Provide a response before reading the answer.

© David Crausby/Alamy
The usual answer is ten. But the correct answer to the question is nine. Here is the
reasoning: When she presses the button eight times, she will have eight two-meter
lengths of cloth cut off, or a total of sixteen meters of cloth cut off. This leaves her with a
piece of cloth four meters long. So, when she presses the button the ninth time, the
machine cuts a two-meter length of cloth, leaving a two-meter length of cloth. So there is
no reason for her to press the button a tenth time.
Before you begin solving the deductive problems, keep the following tips in mind. Good
problem solvers:
Never give up! Persistence pays off.
Think through several options.
Keep an open mind.
Activity 12G
Solve Deductive Puzzles
Try to solve the following deductive arguments. Based on the statements
provided, there is only one possible correct answer. Have fun. Don't give up.
Think it through. Draw pictures! Chart it out! Get creative! The first puzzle is
modeled for you. See if you can come up with the answer on your own.
Example:
If the wind is strong, kites are flown.
If the sky is not clear, kites are not flown.
If the temperature is high, kites are flown.
Assuming the statements above are true, if kites are flown, which of the following
statements must be true:

The wind is strong.
a.
The sky is clear.
b.
The temperature is high.
c.
a and c
d.
b and c
e.
Try to determine the only response that is absolutely true. The puzzle does not
say that all three criteria are required to fly a kite; so, the only one we know
absolutely is that the sky is clear because the kites are being flown. It could be
cold, but the winds are strong or the temperature could be high and the winds
are not so strong. But kites are not flown if the sky is not clear. Rewrite the
statements so that a, b, and c are all correct.
a.
b.
c.
You have two coins totaling 30 cents, and one of them is not a quarter.
What are the two coins?
1.
2. There are no lower airline fares from Denver to Chicago than those of Anter
Airlines. Which of the following is logically inconsistent with the above
advertising claim?
Zadina Bus Company has a Denver-to-Chicago fare that is only half that
charged by Anter.
a.
Smilkstein Airlines charges the same fare for a trip from Denver to
Chicago.
b.
Daiek Airlines has a lower fare from Denver to Detroit than does Anter.
c.
a and b
d.
None of the premises is inconsistent.
e.
3. In Madeup-ville, dob crack means “yellow bananas.” Crack shoe hij means
“big yellow foot.” And hij pab means “big house.” What is the word for foot?
dob
a.
crack
b.

shoe
c.
hij
d.
4.
At the Races
The problem:
Five men, each with a different occupation—a banker, accountant, lawyer, engineer, and
a doctor—bet on a horse race by contributing $100.00 each to the pot. The pot was
divided into three cash prizes, according to how the horse placed in the race (1 , 2
, or
3
). In addition to cash prizes, a local merchant contributed a flat screen television,
iPhone 5, and a microwave oven—to be split up as 1 , 2
, and 3
 places. List each
person's occupation, eye color, return on investment, placing of his horse, cash price,
and the donated gifts won.
Directions: Compile the information from these clues into a final classification table that
will give all of the required information.
The Clues:
The banker lost $100 on his bet.
1.
The person who won the microwave oven gained $50 on his total cash investment.
2.
The lawyer has brown eyes.
3.
The person with gray eyes did not place.
4.
The person with green eyes took first place.
5.
The engineer won the T.V.
6.
The person who took third place lost $50 on his cash investment.
7.
The banker has blue eyes.
8.
The accountant has black eyes.
9.
The lawyer, even though he received a prize, lost money on his total investment.
10.
Complete the following chart based on the 10 clues.
Occupation Eye
Color
Return on
Investment
Place of
Horse
Cash
Prize
Donated
Gift
 
 
 
 
 
 
st
nd
rd
st
nd
rd

Occupation Eye
Color
Return on
Investment
Place of
Horse
Cash
Prize
Donated
Gift
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: From KOLLARITCH. Reading and Study Organization Methods for Higher Learning.
Copyright © 1990 Cengage Learning.
On this day, I am able to go to the tutoring center, buy paper from the
bookstore, visit the student center theater, and then meet with my
professor. The tutoring center is closed on Wednesday; the bookstore is
closed on the weekends; the student center theater is open only on Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday; and my professor has office hours Tuesday, Friday,
and Saturday.
Conclusion: There is only one day of the week that I can do all of these
things and that day is:
5.
Activity 12H
Challenge Yourself with this Deductive Argument
Now try something a little more challenging! Read the following story, and decide
whether the statements that follow are true, false, or questionable. Provide a
reason for each of your answers. For the purposes of this activity, accept each
sentence as fact. Think about what information each sentence conveys before
making judgments about the statements that follow. Become the detective! Ask
good questions.
Karl's Day at Work
Karl had a busy day at the university. As he was driving home late that night, he stopped
at a neighborhood convenience store to pick up a pack of cigarettes. After completing his
errand, Karl stayed on for a few minutes to chat with the pretty store clerk. A heavy-set
woman entered the store and, brusquely pushing Karl aside, walked up to the counter.
She handed the clerk a large canvas bag and insisted that the contents of the cash

register be placed into it. The clerk reluctantly obeyed her order. The woman then sped
away with the filled bag under her arm, leaving the clerk in tears, the empty cash register
drawer still open, and Karl looking on helplessly.
Don't jump to conclusions! Sometimes the obvious is not always correct. Mark
each statement with T for true, F for false, or ? for questionable. Explain why you
chose the answer that you did.
Karl worked hard at the university that day. 
Reason:
1.
On his way home from the university, Karl stopped at a convenience store.
Reason:
2.
Karl stopped at the store around noon. 
Reason:
3.
Karl is a smoker. 
Reason:
4.
Karl purchased a pack of cigarettes. 
Reason:
5.
Karl made a date with the store clerk. 
Reason:
6.

The store clerk was male. 
Reason:
7.
A heavy-set woman entered the store. 
Reason:
8.
The heavy-set woman brought a large canvas bag into the store.
Reason:
9.
The heavy-set woman brusquely pushed Karl aside.
Reason:
10.
The clerk put all of the money into the bag. 
Reason:
11.
The heavy-set woman left the store with the bag under her arm.
Reason:
12.
The moon was shining brightly. 
Reason:
13.

A crime was committed at the convenience store. 
Reason:
14.
The police were called. 
15.
Source: Adapted from: Ormrod, J. (1989). Using Your Head: An Owner's Manual.
Educational Technology Publishing: Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Comprehension Check
Why is validity important in a deductive argument?
What doesn't make sense to you up to this point in the chapter?
Tip from the Brain Doctor
Being able to detect fallacies requires using your frontal lobes, the center for
“executive” or higher-order functions in the brain. Good frontal lobes improve
critical thinking, including the art of detecting fallacies in arguments. The good
news is that practicing looking for fallacies and thinking more deeply about
things help you develop your frontal lobes.

Reason 1:
I studied for the multiple-choice
exam and should be ready.
Reason 2:
I read most of the assigned
chapters.
Conclusion:
But I failed anyway because my
professor is a woman who doesn't
like me and is too emotional to
grade objectively.
12-2 Evaluating Arguments
When you encounter arguments in your textbooks, it is best to read them with a healthy
skepticism. Ready your mind to accept that the argument may be true, but do not just
accept whatever is written without some analysis and evaluation of the argument.
Arguments are tools authors use to persuade you to support their opinions, ideas, or
beliefs. As a critical reader, you need to decide whether an argument is fair and good. It
is important for you to keep asking yourself as you read authors' arguments, “Is the
information presented true? Are the reasons facts or opinions? Does the conclusion
logically follow from the reasons?”
12-2a Detecting Fallacies
Fallacies (errors in reasoning) are Errors in reasoning. Some authors have fallacies in
their arguments by accident or due to their own bias. At other times, authors
purposefully use fallacies when arguing to tempt you toward their way of thinking.
Either way, fallacies make arguments weak and should be avoided. As a reader, you
should be knowledgeable about fallacies and learn how to detect them in your textbooks
or in anything you read. Once you understand what fallacies are and how to detect them,
you will be able to determine if an argument is strong or weak. There are various types
of fallacies. This chapter addresses the more common ones.
Ad Hominem (Personal Attack). When authors commit an ad hominem (personal
attack) error of reasoning, they avoid the true issue of an argument by attacking
the person they disagree with.
The
fact
that
this
student's professor is an emotional woman has nothing to do with the fact that the
student failed the exam. The student failed because he or she could not answer all of the
questions on the exam.
Red Herring. Authors introduce red herrings (irrelevant material presented into
an argument) , or irrelevant material, into an argument when they want to distract
readers' attention away from important information that does not support their

Reason 1:
Voting yes to reduce our taxes may
be a good idea.
Reason 2:
But there are now 10 other issues
on the ballot.
Conclusion:
It is getting out of control.
Reason 1:
The Tigers won their game today.
Conclusion:
Because they scored more runs, the
Tigers won.
Reason 1:
I can quit eating and lose weight.
Reason 2:
Or, I can eat and never lose weight.
Conclusion:
I am always going to be fat.
conclusion. An argument with this error leaves the original issue and moves to
another one.
The
issue
is to
vote
yes to
reduce taxes. However, the argument dodges this issue by throwing in irrelevant
material. The 10 other issues have nothing to do with whether someone should or
should not vote yes to reduce taxes. The argument never addresses reasons to support,
or not support, a vote of yes.
Circular Reasoning. When authors use circular reasoning (argument in which the
conclusion and reason are the same) , instead of presenting an argument with a
reason and a conclusion, they make two statements that say the same thing. The
conclusion is logically the same as the reason(s).
Both
the
reason and the conclusion are the same.
Either/or Thinking. The error in either/or thinking (argument that allows for only
two solutions to a problem when there are may be more) is that it allows for only
two answers to a problem, when in fact there may be more.
Obviously, there are other possible alternatives. Perhaps selecting healthy foods would
be an option, or perhaps adding exercise would cause someone to lose weight.
Slippery Slope. The error in slippery slope (argument where the author assumes
one event will lead to another, and to another, and to yet another) reasoning is that
the author assumes that one event will most assuredly lead to another event,

Reason 1:
Voting for a Democrat for office will
raise taxes.
Reason 2:
As a result of the increased taxes,
people will riot.
Reason 3:
Once people begin to riot, the whole
country will collapse.
Conclusion:
Voting for a Democrat will be the
end of civilization as we know it.
Reason 1:
My neighbor Dani is a nurse and
always eats too many cookies.
Reason 2:
Judy is a nurse, and whenever we
eat out, she always eats chocolate
cake.
Conclusion:
All nurses eat too many sweets.
which will lead to another event, and so on. The author provides a chain of
improperly linked conclusions as reasons to support an unjustified main
conclusion. Conclusions found in this fallacy are often greatly exaggerated.
Although voting for a Democrat could increase taxes, it is highly unlikely that doing so
would cause the end of civilization. Voting for a Republican could raise taxes as well.
One event does not necessarily cause the other chain of events.
Hasty Generalization. Hasty generalizations (argument that makes a sweeping
generalization without strong reasons to support it) are fallacies where the author
makes the error of using too few or too weak of reasons to support a broad,
sweeping conclusion.
Obviously, this is a sweeping generalization. The two reasons provided may be true;
however, it is very difficult to apply this evidence to all nurses. Be very aware of
absolutes such as every, never, always, all, or none when they are used in arguments.
Situations are usually not black and white and either/ or. Remember this for tests. Unless
you know an answer for certain, avoid guessing at answers using absolutes such as every,
never, always, all, or none.
False Cause. In a false cause (argument where the author states a conclusion and
gives reasons, but fails to explain how the reasons and conclusions are connected
to each other) argument, authors state a conclusion and give reasons for it, but fail
to explain how the conclusion and reasons are connected to each other or provide

Reason 1:
Dr. Jay's window is broken.
Reason 2:
My window is broken.
Conclusion:
I am positive Jake broke the
windows. I saw him playing outside
yesterday.
Reason 1:
Dwyane Wade says to buy this car.
Reason 2:
All the stars drive this type of car.
Conclusion:
The car must be good if Dwyane
Wade and other stars drive it.
Reason:
Women are better at decorating
than men are.
Conclusion:
The woman in the couple should
pick out the paint color for the
home.
unclear and/or faulty connections between them.
Although two windows are broken and Jake was playing outside the previous day, there
is no evidence presented in this argument to prove that Jake had anything to do with
breaking them. There is no proof of cause and effect.
False Authority. False authority (a celebrity promotes a product but is not an
expert or authority on it) occurs when a celebrity promotes a product and tells you
to purchase it, even though he or she is not an expert or leading authority
regarding the product. Marketing departments often use celebrities to sell their
products.
The
error
in
reasoning is that unless the stars are car mechanics or experts, they may not be reliable
sources of information regarding cars.
Begging the Question. Begging the question (providing a reason for something
that is itself a questionable or debatable conclusion) is a fallacy where authors
present a reason that is itself a questionable conclusion. The author assumes that
you agree that the reason is true without providing evidence of its truth and then
builds the argument on it.
The

Reason:
Everyone is majoring in
engineering.
Conclusion:
You should major in engineering,
too.
reason, Women are better at decorating than men are, is debatable. It has to be proven
before it can be used as a good reason for a conclusion. An author should not assume
that you agree with that statement.
Bandwagon. Bandwagon (fallacy where authors try to persuade you to agree to
their point of view because many others already have accepted it) is a fallacy
where authors try to persuade you to agree with their point of view because many
others already have accepted it. It is the “everybody's doing it” appeal. Though the
point of view might be good, the fact the “everyone agrees” is not a reason why you
as a reader should accept it.
Activity 12I
Detect Fallacies
Read the following arguments, and determine whether they contain a fallacy. The
first one is modeled for you.
A good athlete must exercise regularly and be careful about what he or she
eats. Therefore, attention to diet and a routine of exercise are necessary to
a good athlete.
Error in Reasoning?
1.
If you do not get good grades, you will never get into college. If you do not
get into college, you will never get a job. Therefore, you will end up a
homeless person in some major city.
Error in Reasoning?
2.
Trees are so beautiful in the springtime. The air seems cleaner and the
grass seems greener. In my opinion, there is something so wonderful
regarding the onset of summer.
Error in Reasoning?
3.
The doctor said I could either stick with his diet plan or accept being
4.

overweight.
Error in Reasoning?
Hesa Geeke, mayoral candidate, suggests changing several local laws. He
believes that the laws need to be more reflective of the times. He's just a
Millennial. What does he know?
Error in Reasoning?
5.
Every student who earns a 3.0 grade point average or higher is eligible for
the Lah D. Dah Scholarship. I have a 3.2 GPA. I will try to get the scholarship.
Error in Reasoning?
6.
If I go to the casino with Niran, I know that I will lose money. The first time I
went to the casino with Niran, I lost $10. The second time I went, I lost $50.
Error in Reasoning?
7.
Johnny Depp, a well-known movie star, eats Cap'n Crunch cereal. It must be
good if he eats it. You should eat Cap'n Crunch cereal.
Error in Reasoning?
8.
Judy gave an outstanding presentation in class today, and I admit that she
seems like a good candidate for student council. But I am leery of someone
whose parents support euthanasia.
Error in Reasoning?
9.
Men make better police officers than women. Therefore, only men should
be allowed in the police academy.
Error in Reasoning?
10.
Activity 12J

Detect the Fallacy in a Cartoon
Write down the main idea of this cartoon and what fallacy it depicts. Be sure to
explain your answer.
© Graham Harrop. Reproduction rights obtainable from www.CartoonStock.com
Main Idea:
1.
Fallacy:
2.
Activity 12K
Identify Fallacies in a Reading
The following passage is from a book on the environment and our efforts toward
preserving it. See how many fallacies you can find. Highlight the fallacies in the
paragraph and label them in the margins.
1 Yes, either we are going to rise to the level of leadership, innovation, and collaboration
that is required, or everybody is going to lose—big. Just coasting along and doing the
same old things is not an option any longer. We need a whole new approach. As they say
in Texas: “If all you ever do is all you've ever done, then all you'll ever get is all you ever
got.”
2 The simple name for the project I am proposing is “Code Green.” What “red” was to

America in the 1950s and 1960s—a symbol of the overarching Communist threat, the
symbol that was used to mobilize our country to build up its military, it industrial base, it
highways, its railroads, ports, and airports, its educational institutions, and its scientific
capabilities to lead the world in defense of freedom—we need to be “green” to be for
today's America.
3 Unfortunately, after 9/11, instead of replacing red with green, President George W. Bush
replaced red with “Code Red” and all the other crazy colors of the Department of
Homeland Security's warning system. It's time to scrap them all and move to Code
Green.
Source: Friedman. Hot, Flat, and Crowded: Why We Need a Green Revolution—and How It
Can Renew America. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2008, p. 6.
12-2b Steps to Evaluating Arguments
You learned in Chapter 11 that the first step in identifying an argument is to make an
argumentation map. By combining an argumentation map with other steps, you can
begin to effectively evaluate arguments made in readings.
Step 1: Create an argumentation map.
Step 2: Cross out weak parts of an argument.
Step 3: Make a judgment.
Step One: Create an Argumentation Map
An argumentation map is a picture of an argument. It includes only the conclusion and
the reasons. Each conclusion and reason is written in a separate box in complete
sentences. The purpose of an argumentation map is to completely reveal the argument
so that you can see what you are evaluating. Read the following passage from a sociology
textbook, and then look at the argumentation map that follows. You will note that
hidden assumptions have been added to this argumentation map, which help ensure
that you understand the whole argument and encourage you to think about the reasons
a little more deeply—where are they coming from? However, most important is knowing
what the argument is, its conclusion, and the reason(s) that support it.
Who Decides what's Deviant?
Source: From BENOKRAITIS. SOC 2e (p. 119). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
The conclusion (main idea) of the passage is highlighted in green and the reasons (major
supporting details) are highlighted in yellow. Those reasons and conclusions are

transferred to the argumentation map in Figure 12.1. The hidden assumption included
is: It is true that deviance is culturally determined. The author assumes that you agree
with this statement and builds her argument on that idea. Do you agree that deviance is
culturally relative? Is slavery, for example, ever good for some people in some cultures
or is it always wrong? Is murder okay among some cultures? Are there no absolute
truths?
Figure 12.1
Argumentation Map for who Decides what's Deviant? Passage
Step Two: Cross Out Weak Parts of an Argument
In this step, you analyze the argument looking for fallacies or opinions and cross them
out on your argumentation map. These weak elements of the argument (if there are any)
should be discarded so that only the logical and true parts of the argument remain. See
Figure 12.2 for an example.
Figure 12.2
Crossing Out Weak Parts of an Argument
The hidden assumption is crossed out on the map because it is a fallacy. Which fallacy is
it? It is the fallacy of begging the question. The author uses as a reason something that is
debatable, not universally accepted.
Step Three: Make a Judgment
Now you are ready to judge the argument. You see it clearly. You have crossed out weak
parts. What is left? Do people with power and authority decide what is right and wrong?
Not always. Sometimes people with power and authority do the wrong things. A dictator
of a government may say citizens who protest are deviant, but are they? Martin Luther
King, Jr., broke laws and was labeled deviant, but was he? The issue is complicated. It

seems the author oversimplifies the issue and makes assumptions that might not be
true. This argument is weak.
Some arguments can have weak parts that you cross out and still be good arguments. The
problem with the argument on deviance is that the author uses “right and wrong”
without defining them (legally right and wrong? morally right and wrong?) and assumes
deviant behavior is culturally determined and not influenced by others factors such as
natural law or moral truth. That is a big assumption, a conclusion in itself, and should be
argued, not just assumed.
Earlier in the chapter, you learned the difference between inductive and deductive
arguments. As you evaluate the arguments you find in your college reading, you will
discover that this knowledge comes in handy. Most of the arguments you will find in
your textbooks will be inductive. As you decide whether they are weak or strong, ask
yourself the following questions:
Are the reasons based on fact?
If some of the reasons are opinions, are the opinions wild or reasonable based on
my background knowledge?
Do the reasons logically support the conclusion?
Are the hidden assumptions fair?
Are there enough observations to make the conclusion reasonable?
Can I think of an argument that goes against this argument (a counter-argument)?
If the argument is deductive, you can ask if the reasons are true and if they logically
follow to the conclusion. Evaluating arguments takes practice and is not a perfect
science. The goal of evaluating arguments is to truly think about what you read and
examine it before you just accept it. The best way to reach this goal is to ask good
questions. See Tables 12.1 and 12.2 for a checklist of useful questions to ask while
evaluating inductive and deductive arguments.
Table 12.1
Evaluating Inductive Arguments
Questions to Ask Yourself
Check (✓) if Answer Is Yes
1. Are observations (reasons)
veriﬁable (able to be seen by
others)?
 
2. Are reasons provided in strong
support of the conclusion?
 
3. Does the argument appeal to
reason more than feelings or
unsupported opinion?
 

Questions to Ask Yourself
Check (✓) if Answer Is Yes
4. Is there an absence of errors
or fallacies in reasoning?
 
5. Does the argument omit no
signiﬁcant information?
 
The more checks you have, the stronger the inductive argument. You ideally should have
checkmarks for at least #1, #2, and #5.
Table 12.2
Evaluating Deductive Arguments
Questions to Ask Yourself
Check (✓) if Answer Is Yes
1. Does the argument start with
a general principle or law?
 
2. Is the conclusion speciﬁc?
 
3. Are the reasons all true?
 
4. Does the conclusion follow
logically from the reasons?
 
5. Does the argument omit no
signiﬁcant information?
 
You should have checkmarks for #1, #2, #4, and #5 for the argument to be considered valid. You
should have checkmarks for all numbers for the argument to be considered valid and true (sound).
Activity 12L
Evaluate Arguments
Read the following passages, highlighting the conclusion in green and the reasons
in yellow, and create argumentation maps. Decide if there are any weak parts to
each argument, and cross them out on the map. Finally, judge whether the
argument presented is weak or strong.
Social Class

2 Voting rates also increase with income levels. The voting rate of people with annual
family incomes of $100,000 or more was 92 percent compared with 56 percent of those
with annual incomes under $30,000 (see Table 12.3). People with higher incomes are
more likely to be employed, to have assets (such as houses and stock), and, therefore, are
more likely to be aware of the costs of not voting to protect or increase their resources.
In contrast, people who are unemployed usually have few assets and may be too
disillusioned with the political system to vote (“Who Votes…” 2006).
Table 12.3
Selected Characteristics of Voters in the November 2008 Election
© Cengage Learning
Source: From BENOKRAITIS. SOC 2e (p. 208). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
Create an argumentation map for this passage.
1.

Fill out the following table to help you determine if the argument is strong.
Questions to Ask Yourself
Check (✓) if Answer Is Yes
1. Are observations (reasons)
veriﬁable (able to be seen by
others)?
 
2. Are reasons provided in strong
support of the conclusion?
 
3. Does the argument appeal to
reason more than feelings or
unsupported opinion?
 
4. Is there an absence of errors
or fallacies in reasoning?
 
5. Does the argument omit no
signiﬁcant information?
 
2.
Is the argument strong or weak? Explain why.
3.
Ethical Concerns with Nonhumans
1 Some psychological deals with nonhuman animals, especially research on basic
processes such as sensation, hunger, and learning. Researchers use nonhumans if they
want to control aspects of life that people will not let them control (e.g., who mates with
whom), if they want to study behavior continuously over months or years (longer than
people are willing to participate), or if the research poses health risks. Animal research
has long been essential for preliminary testing of most new drugs, surgical procedures,
and methods of relieving pain. People with untreatable illnesses argue that they have
the right to hope for cures that might result from animal research (Feeney, 1987). Much
of our knowledge in psychology, biology, and medicine made use of animal studies at
some point.

Brykczynski/Anzenberger/Redux
2 Nevertheless, some people oppose much or all animal research. Animals, after all,
cannot give informed consent. Some animal rights supporters insist that animals should
have the same rights as humans, that keeping animals (even pets) in cages is slavery, and
that killing any animal is murder. Others oppose some kinds of research but are willing
to compromise about others.
3 Psychologists vary their attitudes. Most support some kinds of animal research but
draw a line somewhere separating acceptable from unacceptable research (Plous, 1996).
Naturally, different psychologists draw that line at different places.
4 In this debate, as in so many other political controversies, one common tactic is for
each side to criticize the most extreme actions of its opponents. For example, animal
rights advocates point to studies that exposed monkeys or puppies to painful procedures
that seem difficult to justify. Researchers point to protesters who have vandalized
laboratories, planted bombs, banged on a researcher's children's windows at night, and
inserted a garden hose through a window to flood a house (G. Miller, 2007). Some
protesters have stated that they oppose using any drug, even a medication for AIDS, if its
discovery came from research with animals. Unfortunately, when both sides
concentrate on criticizing their most extreme opponents, they make points of agreement
harder to find.
5 One careful study by a relatively unbiased outsider concluded that the truth is messy:
some research is painful to the animals and nevertheless valuable for scientific and
medical progress (Blum, 1994). We must, most people would conclude, seek a
compromise.
Source: From KALAT. Introduction to Psychology 9e (pp. 50—51). Copyright © 2011 Cengage
Learning.
Create an argumentation map for this passage.
4.

Fill out the following table to help you determine if the argument is strong.
Questions to Ask Yourself
Check (✓) if Answer Is Yes
1. Are observations (reasons)
veriﬁable (able to be seen by
others)?
 
2. Are reasons provided in strong
support of the conclusion? (Is it
right to use nonhuman animals
for research to help mankind?)
 
3. Does the argument appeal to
reason more than feelings or
unsupported opinion?
 
4. Is there an absence of errors
or fallacies in reasoning?
 
5. Does the argument omit no
signiﬁcant information?
 
5.
Is the argument strong or weak? Explain why.
6.
12-3 Evaluating Information on the Internet

Evaluating information from all sources is a good habit, especially arguments found on
the Internet. Knowing if the source is dependable and reliable is a critical start.
Remember that anyone can publish information on the Internet. The following
questions will help you make those decisions.
How current is the information that is being used? Most people once believed that
the world was flat. It used to be considered a valid and sound argument at one
point, until science updated this belief. Information is constantly changing and
being updated. Consider all of the changes technology has experienced. The
amount of information that you have access to doubles about every 20 months.
Consider the reliability of the information if the article or resources are old. You
should at least question any information older than 10 years. Even then, if the
information is regarding technology or the author is not an expert, be skeptical if
the information is older than five years.
Are the sources of information reliable? When accessing information or reading
books, magazines, journals, or material on the Internet, you need to consider the
source. Do you believe everything you read in People magazine? Why or why not?
Knowing that a publisher is reputable is critical as you are trying to make decisions
regarding the information.
If you were researching an argument about organ transplants, which would you
trust more? An article in the American Journal of Medicine or an article in the Ladies
Home Journal? You need to ask yourself:
Who published the information?
Is the source reliable? Quality publishers invest time and money authenticating
information.
When reading material on the Internet, consider the Web site's information for
relevancy, reliability, credibility, and accuracy.
What's the focus of the Web site?
Is it a professional Web site?
Is the text easy to read?
Is the information biased?
Is the information current?
Is the information emotionally charged?
Are spelling and grammar used correctly?
Who wrote the information? Consider who has written the information you are
reading.
What are the author's qualifications?

Is the author considered an authority or expert in the field?
What are his or her credentials and/or degrees?
Does the author seem to be basing arguments more on reasons or facts?
Is the information first-hand? Or is the author interpreting someone else's
work?
Does the author have a good reputation?
Learn to become an information detective. Author information is usually located in the
beginning of books and at the beginning or end of articles. Your instructor or librarian
can also help you locate information regarding authorship and the reliability of specific
publishing houses.
Activity 12M
Determine the Reliability of Web Sites
Access two Web sites, providing the URLs. One should be an example of a reliable
source of information, and the other should be an example of an unreliable
source. Explain why each was or was not reliable.
12-4 Chapter Review
12-4a Practice with a Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Based on the title, what do you expect the following passage to be about?
What do you know about the topic already?
1.
Develop a question, using the title of this passage, to ask yourself before
you read.
2.
Study-read the passage, highlight the conclusion in green, and write any
margin notes that would be helpful to you.
3.

Handshake or Hug? why we Touch
By Paul J. Zak
1 In the last several months, I've moved several colleagues from the handshake greeting
to the hug. For my colleague Mark, it happened after the series of long intensive days
working on a new project several weeks ago. Somehow all that time together made
shaking hands seem too trivial. Still, it can be a bit uncomfortable to initiate a hug. Or
maybe it's just a guy thing to worry about hugging another guy.
2 Come to think of it, why do we even have this ritual where with nearly everyone we
meet we must touch our palms together? True, in some Latin cultures, the handshake is
replaced with a kiss or two. But isn't that really intimate for people who are just friends?
Why all this touching?
4 So, what to do? Many of the experiments I run involve blood draws, and I noticed that
when one has a white lab coat on it is easy and acceptable to comfort a nervous person
with a touch on the shoulder. Then it hit me: clinicians can touch us in a caring way and
it doesn't bother us.
5 This is the reason I spent $6,000 on massages for strangers (and I never even got a
massage myself!). Participants in this experiment came in, got a blood draw, and then
were randomized
 to get massaged for 15 minutes by a licensed massage therapist or
to rest quietly for 15 minutes. Most people then made a single decision involving money
and another person, and then received a second blood draw (a control group just did
blood draw-massage-blood draw to isolate the effect of massage alone). Not surprisingly,
we had no trouble recruiting 150 participants for this experiment!
6 I wanted to test a “pay it forward” idea: would massage by a therapist make you more
likely to sacrifice money to help another person? And if so, why? If you have been
reading The Moral Molecule, you'll have guessed that the target brain mechanism that
would connect touch to sacrifice was oxytocin.
 Our idea was not without
precedence:
 stroking the belly of rats had been shown to release oxytocin. But no
one knew if touch would do the same thing in humans.
7 In September, 2008, my colleagues and I reported our results in the journal Evolution
and Human Behavior (see www.neuroeconomicstudies.org for the details). Here's what
we found. Massage alone did not raise oxytocin, but primed
 the brain to release this
neurochemical after one received a signal of trust. This neuroeconomics experiment
used computer-mediated monetary transfers between strangers to measure trust. The
gist
 of this method is that one can take money out of one's account and entrust it to a
stranger because this will cause the amount entrusted to grow threefold. The stranger
can then return some money to the person who trusted him or her, or keep it all. And
everyone knows that they only do this once so there is no chance to build up a

reputation for reciprocity
 and make money by doing this task repeatedly. A full
description of this approach can be found in my June, 2008 article in Scientific American
(www.sciam.com) called “The Neurobiology of Trust.”
8 We knew from research that we published in 2004 and 2005 that monetary transfers
denoting trust caused the brain to release oxytocin. And we showed that there was a
positive relationship between the amount of oxytocin released and the amount people
choose to return to the person who trusted them—even though they were under no
obligation to do so. Adding massage was like putting the human oxytocin system on
steroids. Those who were massaged and trusted sacrificed 243% more money to the
person who trusted them compared to those who were trusted but not massaged. And
the change in blood levels of oxytocin strongly predicted this behavior.
9 Interestingly, women were more susceptible to the effect of touch: they had larger
changes in oxytocin and sacrificed more money to those who trusted them. This may be
why at least anecdotally,
 women touch others more than men. Oxytocin not only is
a potent anti-anxiety agent, it activates reward pathways in the brain. Yes, our brains are
designed to make it feel good to be good—even to strangers.
10 So, hugs or handshakes? Either one, along with a display of trust, is likely to cause
oxytocin release and increase the chances that this person will treat you like family even
if you've just met him or her. We touch to initiate and sustain cooperation. That's a
pretty neat trick for a little nine amino acid molecule!
Source: Copyright © Paul J. Zak. Reprinted with permission. Paul J. Zak is the author of The Moral Molocule: The
Source of Love and Prosperity.
Check Your Understanding
Use context clues and word part analysis to define the following words
from the passage.
initiate (paragraph 1): 
denoting (paragraph 8): 
potent (paragraph 9): 
5.
Is the passage a deductive or inductive argument? Explain your answer.
6.
What is the conclusion of this passage?
7.
What are three reasons that support the conclusion?
8.

Create an argumentation map from the main argument presented in the
passage. Include one hidden assumption that you think the author makes.
9.
Judge the argument from the passage as weak or strong. Provide an
explanation for your judgment.
Questions to Ask Yourself
Check (✓) If Answer Is Yes
1. Are observations (reasons)
veriﬁable (able to be seen by
others)?
 
2. Are reasons provided in strong
support of the conclusion?
 
3. Does the argument appeal to
reason more than feelings or
unsupported opinion?
 
4. Is there an absence of errors
or fallacies in reasoning?
 
5. Does the argument omit no
signiﬁcant information?
 
10.

Chapter Review
12-4b Chapter Summary
Learning to evaluate arguments allows you to determine if an author has made a
compelling point. Being a critical reader of arguments requires that you approach your
textbooks with a healthy skepticism. Be open to new ideas and arguments, but do not
accept everything just because it is in print. Evaluate the strength of what is written.
To begin to examine arguments critically, you need to understand the two basic types of
arguments: inductive and deductive. Inductive arguments start with specific
observations and have conclusions that say something general. Deductive arguments
start with a general idea or principle and conclude with a specific statement about a
specific thing. Inductive arguments can be weak or strong based on the logic that holds
them together. Deductive arguments are judged as valid and sound. When examining
arguments, look for common logic errors or fallacies. Arguments with fallacies are weak.
Nine common fallacies are ad hominem, red herring, circular reasoning, either/or
thinking, slippery slope, hasty generalization, false cause, false authority, and begging the
question. Make an argumentation map so you can examine an argument fully. Cross out
any weak parts of the argument in the map. Then make a judgment of the argument by
asking yourself the following questions: “Are the reasons based on fact? If some of the
reasons are opinions, are the opinions wild or reasonable based on my background
knowledge? Do the reasons logically support the conclusion? Are the hidden
assumptions fair? Can I think of an argument that goes against this argument (a counter-
argument)?”
As you read material on the Internet, decide whether the sources are dependable. Is the
reading recent? Are the authors qualified to speak on the subject matter? Just like
information that is in print, do not just accept Internet information because you read it.
Critically examine it.
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment
Draw the amount of dendrites you imagine that you have now about reading
arguments critically. Compare your drawing of dendrites now with what you
drew at the beginning of this chapter. If the amounts are different, explain why.

Comprehension Check
Where in the chapter did you lose concentration or become confused?
If you could ask the authors a question about this chapter, what would
you ask?
Chapter Review
12-4c Post Test

Deductive
1.
Begging the question
2.
Inductive
3.
Ad hominem
4.
Either/or thinking
5.
False cause
6.
Circular reasoning
7.
Valid
8.
Fallacies
9.
Red herring
10.
Slippery slope
11.
Hasty generalization
12.
False authority
13.
Bandwagon
14.
argument where the author
states a conclusion and gives
reasons, but fails to explain
how the reasons and
conclusions are connected to
each other
a.
when a deductive argument
has a conclusion that logically
follows from the reasons
b.
a type of argument that makes
a conclusion about a specific
thing based on facts and
verifiable truths or absolutes
c.
providing a reason for
something that is itself a
questionable or debatable
conclusion
d.
personal attack
e.
argument that allows for only
two solutions to a problem
when there are may be more
f.
a type of argument where the
conclusion is based on a series
of observations and
generalized to all
g.
errors in reasoning
h.
argument in which the
conclusion and reason are the
same
i.
fallacy where authors try to
persuade you to agree to their
point of view because many
j.
Part 1. Objective Questions
Match the key terms from the chapter in Column A to their definitions in
Column B.
Column A Column B

others already have accepted it
irrelevant material presented
into an argument
k.
a celebrity promotes a product
but is not an expert or
authority on it
l.
argument that makes a
sweeping generalization
without strong reasons to
support it
m.
argument where the author
assumes one event will lead to
another, and to another, and to
yet another
n.
Identify the following passages as inductive or deductive, and explain why.
Highlight the conclusion in green.
Is the passage deductive or inductive?
Why?
15.
Source: From HOFFER. The Understanding of Music 5e (p. 200). Copyright © 1985 Cengage
Learning.
Is the passage deductive or inductive?
Why?
16.
Source: From Solomon/Berg/Martin. Biology 8e (p. 29). Copyright © 2008 Cengage
Learning.

Is the passage deductive or inductive?
Why?
17.
Source: From Miller. Environmental Science: Working with the Earth 5e (p. 153). Copyright
© 1995 Cengage Learning.
Briefly explain why you think it is important to know whether an argument
you read is inductive, deductive, or includes fallacies.
Based on what you now know about arguments, identify whether each of
the following statements is an argument. If it is, identify it as inductive or
deductive.
18.
I certainly hope that Tom Hanks has a major part in this film. He is my
favorite actor.
19.
The Detroit Lions have beaten the New York Giants nine straight times. So,
I'm betting on the Lions to win this game against the Giants.
20.
Zippy always wins when he races on a muddy track. So, Zippy will win
today's race because the track is muddy.
21.
We interviewed 1,200 U.S. college students, and 900 of them favored 18 as
the legal age for purchasing beer. Therefore, a substantial majority of all
U.S. college students favor 18 as the legal age for purchasing beer.
22.

If you have a credit card, you will spend money you do not have. Dana has a
Visa. She will spend money she does not have.
23.
George should not run for Student Council. He is a real jerk! Every time I
see him at an event, he starts a fight.
24.
Class starts at 10. If I go, I will be late. So, I won't go.
Read the following cartoon, and answer the questions that follow.
© J.B. Handelsman/The New Yorker Collection/ www.cartoonbank.com
25.
What is the conclusion of this cartoon?
26.
Identify the argument being made in this cartoon.
27.
Explain the fallacy being used in this cartoon.
28.

What information could be added to make this a true argument?
29.
Change the language in the cartoon so that it becomes a slippery slope
fallacy.
30.
Popular Reading
Part 2. Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Based on the titles of the following two passages, what do you expect the
passages to be about?
1.
What do you believe you already know about the topic?
2.
Develop one question you expect these passages to answer.
3.
Passage #1Ending Michigan's Mandatory Helmet Law would Cost
Everyone who Pays Insurance Rates
By Alan Reiner
1 The helmet debate has now boiled down to two divergent positions. There are the
“freedom” folks, who believe we are free to ride without the government deciding for us
what apparel to don. They say the vicious insurance industry-led campaign against our
freedom is tainted. They argue: Everyone knows that if you fall off a motorcycle at 60
miles an hour, you're going to die. Everyone knows that when you hit a car, deer, school
bus, dog, gravel, oil slick or damp pavement and fall, you're going to die. Helmets won't
save you.
2 And then there's the insurance industry, which believes that when any of the above-
mentioned situations occur, somebody has to pay. And Michigan's no-fault insurance
plan places that burden on the driver of the car, truck, bus, tractor or other insured
vehicle (or really, the insurance company). And fault is not an issue. They argue: Pull out
on your motorcycle in front of a bus, the bus pays. Hit a parked car, the car pays. Hit a

dog, the homeowner pays. If everyone wore helmets, we'd pay less. If we distance
ourselves, just for a moment, from these irreconcilable positions, we might get a better
view of the brouhaha and lean toward common sense. Let's look at motorcycle racing.
Granted, it differs greatly from motorcycling on public streets, but there are
motorcycles, and people do fall off, run into things (more often than not at frighteningly
high rates of speed) and run into each other.
3 However, everyone is headed in the same direction. Everyone's skill level is similar
(classes are created to keep that in check). Everyone's motorcycle is safety checked
before the race. And everyone understands the rules. No one is forced to deal with traffic
signals. No one need worry about school buses or trucks or errant auto drivers. No one
need worry about blind corners, joggers or four-way stops.
4 In addition, everyone signs a waiver of liability at the beginning of each race. Everyone
depends on turn marshals to indicate what is happening ahead. No one is ever worried
about bridge abutments, unmarked railroad crossings or drunken drivers.
5 Every racer wears an approved helmet. They also wear boots, leather, body armor, eye
protection. Why? Racers pay for their own injuries. These folks want to go home at the
end of the day. And race promoters want people to continue to participate in the sport.
Comparing racing to the dangers on streets and highways, don't you think racers, above
everyone else, should be helmetless? Of course you don't.
6 Would you ride in an automobile and leave your seat belt unfastened? Of course you
wouldn't. Would you disconnect your airbags, just because you could? No. Would you
run a grinding wheel without safety glasses just because? No. Stand in front of Tigers
pitcher Justin Verlander without a helmet? Please!
7 And finally, to argue that motorcyclists from other states avoid Michigan and deprive
our tourist industry of their money because they don't want to wear a helmet is just
plain poppycock. Would a tourist flee to a new state because it didn't require seat belts?
Source: From Alan Reiner. Detroit Free Press (Jun 30, 2011, A.15). Copyright © 2011 Detroit Free Press, Inc. Reprinted
with permission.
Passage #2By Giving Motorcyclists Choice on Helmets, Michigan would
Gain Millions
By Jim Rhoades
1 Every year, millions of dollars are leaving our state on two wheels. Michigan's outdated
mandatory helmet law is sending motorcyclists racing across our borders and
discouraging motorcyclists in neighboring states from visiting our state.
2 When motorcyclists leave Michigan, they take their dollars with them. That's millions
of dollars that could be spent on gas, food, hotels, gifts and other items that could boost
local economies. Michigan is losing out on this source of tourism money because of its
outdated mandatory helmet law—the only one of its kind in the Great Lakes region.
3 Every one of our neighbors has modernized its mandatory helmet laws. The reason:
Helmet laws do nothing to improve safety, and they have no impact on health care or
insurance costs. Moreover, they act as a barrier to tourism.
4 Representatives from the Insurance Institute of Michigan were asked directly if
insurance rates would increase if Michigan modified the helmet law. Their answer: “But

with respect to passage of this legislation, is this going to have an impact on premiums
across the board? No.” This was in a Senate hearing in 2005. But now, they are spreading
information that contradicts their own testimony,
 saying that the legislation may
result in an increase to insurance costs.
5 In fact, no state has ever increased insurance rates with the modification of a helmet
law for adult choice—period! Saying that this “may” happen doesn't make it happen. This
is a bad law based on bad science, myths and distorted data.
6 Neither do helmets make a difference in saving the lives of motorcyclists. Head
injuries kill around 29% of motorcyclists involved in accidents regardless of whether
they wore helmets or not, according to a Wisconsin Department of Transportation study.
Wisconsin has no mandatory helmet law. Fatality rates among motorcyclists have
actually gone down by 60% nationwide since 1985, and that's counting the 30 states that
have no mandatory helmet law, according to the National Highway Transportation Safety
Administration. Moreover, fatality rates are lower in states that allow riders to choose
on helmet use.
7 More importantly, because of our law, motorcyclists in surrounding states have said
repeatedly they will not visit Michigan, depriving our state of a valuable source of
revenue. If Michigan's helmet law were to be modified, Michigan could stand to gain $1.5
billion in sales, tourism and other revenue, according to an economic study by Michigan
Consultants.
8 By lopsided majorities in the last two sessions, the Michigan Legislature passed a plan
that would let motorcyclists ride without a helmet only to have then-Gov. Jennifer
Granholm veto the legislation. New legislation has strict requirements for rider
education and/or cycle endorsements. In an age when everyone else is modernizing, it's
about time Michigan dumped its outdated helmet law and got in the fast lane to the 21
Century.
Source: From Jim Rhoades. Detroit Free Press (Jun 30, 2011, A.15). Copyright © 2011 Detroit Free Press, Inc. Reprinted
with permission.
Check Your Understanding
Use context clues and word part analysis to define the following words
from the passages.
mandatory (Passage # 1, paragraph 1): 
impact (Passage # 2, paragraph 3): 
contradicts (Passage # 2, paragraph 4): 
4.
What is the conclusion of Passage #1?
5.
What fallacies are committed in Passage #1? Explain your answer.
6.
st

What are three of the reasons the author gives to support the conclusion in
Passage #1?
7.
What is the weakest reason the author gives in Passage #1? Why is it weak?
8.
What is the conclusion of Passage #2?
9.
What fallacies are committed in Passage #2? Explain your answer.
10.
What are three of the reasons the author gives to support the conclusion in
Passage #2?
11.
Present your own point of view regarding helmet laws based on both
passages. Which side do you support? Create your own argument. Then
create an argumentation map of your argument.
12.
Chapter Review
12-4d 
 Brain Strength Options

Working individually or in a group of no more than three, create a poster.
You may choose from the following two options:
On the Internet or using another source, find an example of an
inductive argument and a deductive argument.
Each argument should be half a page to a page long.
Print out both arguments, and put them on a poster.
Indicate which one is deductive and which one is inductive.
Annotate the arguments, indicating the conclusion being made
and the reasons.
a.
Create a poster to teach about fallacies in arguments. Find examples
of each type of fallacy covered in the chapter, and place them on the
poster. Label each example, indicating and explaining the type of
fallacy.
b.
1.
Working with one other classmate, prepare a debate consisting entirely of
fallacious statements. One person will make his or her statement of an
argument followed by a fallacious supporting statement. The second
person will counter by naming the fallacy, as in “You are using a red
herring” and then make a countering argument followed by a fallacious
statement. The first person will respond by naming the fallacy and
countering with another fallacious statement. Continue until you have
presented arguments using every type of fallacious statement. Present the
debate to the class or in a video, as determined by you and your instructor.
2.
Write a letter to the editor on a topic currently under discussion in your
school or local newspaper editorial page or of concern in your community.
The letter should contain at least three supporting points, all of which must
be factual. Turn in this argument in a format suitable for submitting to the
newspaper. Once the instructor has approved it, send the final version to
the newspaper.
3.
Create a project of your choice based on the material in this chapter.
Submit a written proposal of what you will do, the length of the project, and
how it will be evaluated. Get the instructor's approval before you proceed.
4.

Chapter 13
Reading Beyond the Words
Chapter Introduction
13-1 What does it Mean to Read Critically?
13-2 Bloom's Taxonomy
13-2a Remembering Level of Thinking
13-2b Understanding Level of Thinking
13-2c Applying Level of Thinking
13-2d Analyzing Level of Thinking
13-2e Evaluating Level of Thinking
13-2f Creating Level of Thinking
13-3 Levels of Learning: The Natural Human Learning Process
13-4 Keeping Your Brain Healthy Beyond Reading
13-5 Chapter Review
13-5a Practice with a Reading Passage
13-5b Chapter Summary
13-5c Post Test
13-5d  Brain Strength Options
Chapter Introduction
“Information is not knowledge.”
— Albert Einstein
Student to Student
Mee Sook Choo

Making Connections
What does it mean to read between
the lines?
1.
Name five skills that make an
executive effective. Hint: Making
good decisions is an example.
2.
Based on #2, if you had an executive
center of the brain, what do you think
it would be good at?
3.
What do you think the difference is
4.
A nursing student at the University of Michigan
Courtesy of Mee Sook Choo
One of the most valuable academic tools that I learned while attending school to
become a nurse is to think critically. While it was true that there were subjects
that required me to memorize information so I could recall it, I also learned that
I needed to be able to demonstrate an ability to apply, analyze, and question in
order to really feel that I had the knowledge that I needed. For example, if I
needed to learn the names of a certain class of drugs for my pharmacology class,
I might make a list and memorize them. However, once I learned the names of
the drugs, I needed to know their applications. For example, one drug may have
two or more different applications. Knowing these differences requires an ability
to think critically. Another example would be learning a particular skill, like
patient assessment. Memorizing the steps in writing a patient assessment is only
the first level. However, to really understand patient assessment, you have to
know what questions to ask, be able to make accurate judgments based on the
information you received, and identify contradicting statements made by the
patient. Critical thinking is the key to being able to make these types of decisions
and judgments. For me, critical thinking gave me the tools to excel in both my
classes and my job.

between knowledge and
understanding?
While you may never have heard
these terms, what would you guess
would be the difference between
high-level thinking and low-level
thinking
5.
© Cengage Learning
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment

Draw on the brain cell how many dendrites you imagine you have for how
much you know about reading beyond the words.
13-1 What does it Mean to Read Critically?
What is the meaning behind einstein's quote at the beginning of this chapter? Use an
analogy to help answer this question. A person can look at you and not know you, right?
At first glance, you might look about 5'8" tall, dark-skinned, in your 20s. After a short
conversation with you, though, a person might learn that you are 5'6", Hispanic and Irish,
and 21. This person might also find out that you live in the city, have a sister and a
brother, are allergic to strawberries, enjoy watching baseball, can't swim, have never
been stung by a bee, and are a biology major. This person now knows some facts about
you—but does this person really know you yet, know who you really are, what you think
and feel, what your life is like? No, because to really know you, this person would need to
talk with you about your ideas, what you know, what you are thinking and feeling, and
what you are experiencing. You are more than a list of facts. You have many layers of
meanings, many thoughts and feelings that are shaped by the personality you were born
with and by your values, experiences, and knowledge. In other words, for anyone to truly
know you is a complicated process that requires going beyond the mere facts and
beneath the surface to think about and understand the deeper, truer reality inside you.
Your textbooks are also more than just a list of facts on the page. If you stop at just the
words and facts, you will miss the best part! If, however, you think about the ideas that
the facts are about, then you are actually gaining knowledge about what the author
wants to convey to you, the reader. Now you have real knowledge and not just surface
information, and you can think about, understand, and use that knowledge. You can
apply it in your assignments. You can discuss it by comparing it with other information
you know. You can evaluate it and then, ultimately, you can design, create, and construct
from new knowledge.
What does it Mean to Read Critically?

wavebreakmedia/Shutterstock.com
You need to study-read, question, and dig deeply, and then when you understand and can
do something with the information, it becomes knowledge. This is what can be inferred
from Einstein's quote. But how do you get beyond the words on the page to the deeper
layers of meaning?
13-2 Bloom's Taxonomy
Benjamin bloom, a psychologist and influential person in the field of education during
the 1950s, categorized critical thinking into six levels. Instructors use this taxonomy as a
blueprint for planning lessons and developing exam questions. For many years, only
teachers knew about this taxonomy. However, it finally became obvious that if
instruction and exams were being designed around Bloom's Taxonomy (a classification
of levels of thinking) , students should also have an understanding of these levels to help
them learn information using all six levels. Have you ever studied for an exam and
believed that you had memorized all of the necessary information? Then when you took
the exam, the questions were harder? The questions asked you to do something with the
knowledge you memorized, but you had not studied it that way and you were not
prepared.
In the 1990s Bloom's Taxonomy was revised to make it more relevant to the the 21
century, not only for teachers, but for students, too. The six levels in Bloom's Taxonomy
are:
Remembering
Understanding
Applying
Analyzing
Evaluating
Creating
Figure 13.1
Bloom's Taxonomy
st

© Cengage Learning
Because there is an order to the levels of thinking within Bloom's Taxonomy, it is often
presented as a triangle. The lower, more general levels of thinking serve as the
foundational levels—the triangle's base. Each level builds on the previous one, and it is
necessary to understand each level before moving onto the next, higher level of
thinking. Creating is the top, as it is considered the highest level and no longer
foundational. However, this does not mean that the levels cannot work in unison. You
may address more than one level at the same time. Mastery of the levels allows you to
demonstrate true application and understanding of a topic. Most employers will want
you to demonstrate all levels of thinking because having mastery over all levels is both
desirable and necessary in order to create and produce new products and services. This
is one of the reasons why the Brain Strength Options are included at the end of every
chapter. These projects allow you to demonstrate your understanding and application of
the skills at the highest level of thinking.
Most students are very good at learning information at the first two levels (remembering
and understanding), meaning that they memorize dates, names, places, vocabulary,
specific facts, and principles as well as paraphrase, make predictions, and draw
conclusions. These are considered lower levels of thinking. Even though thinking
through the first two levels is necessary in order to move on, you should not stop there.
The next four levels (applying, analyzing, evaluating, and creating) are considered the
higher levels of thinking because they require more thinking and doing. The higher
levels demand that you work with the information, show your instructors (and future
employers) that you have mastered it, and demonstrate your thinking. Critical reading is
the ability to read, think, and understand using all six levels—and expert readers read
critically.
Activity 13A
Read at One Level, Test at Another
Read the following passage. Study the parts, and answer the questions that
follow.
Flatworms (phylum Platyhelminthes) form a three-layered embryo and have organ
systems. The phylum name comes from Greek; platy-means flat, and helminth means
worm. Turbellarians, flukes (trematodes), and tapeworms (cestodes) are the main
classes. Most turbellarians are marine, but some live in fresh water, and a few live in

damp places on land. Flukes and a few tapeworms are parasites of animals.
Source: From STARR. Biology: The Unity and Diversity of Life (p. 412). Copyright © 2009
Cengage Learning.
Create a visual of a flatworm.
1.
Label all the parts of a flatworm.
2.
How is a flatworm similar to a fluke?
3.
Were you able to answer #1–3? Why or why not?
4.
Based on what you just read, you were limited by the information provided
to you. However, if you knew that you would be asked to create a visual of a
flatworm, list the parts, and compare the flatworm to a fluke, what could
you have done differently?
5.
Have you found that some college exams seem to test for information that
you did not read about in the most current chapter?
6.
How do you think you can use Bloom's Taxonomy to learn more
effectively?
7.
This chapter will teach you how to begin thinking about textbooks beyond the literal
who, what, where, and when. This type of information is a great starting point, but it is not
enough to get you through most courses. College courses build off each other. By the
time you reach upper-level courses, it is assumed that you have mastered the
foundational course information.
13-2a Remembering Level of Thinking

Bloom'S remembering level of thinking (literal level of thinking) is the most literal level
and considered the first level. It is the level you use when you recall facts or recognize
the correct answer from a list in a multiple-choice test question. Remember the
hypothetical person described earlier in the chapter? The one who is 5'6", Hispanic and
Irish, and 21? Understanding these facts about someone is an example of understanding
at the remembering level of thinking.
This is considered lower-level thinking because you do not even have to understand the
material to answer questions based on this kind of rote memory. You can just look at a
reading and write answers and not even comprehend the text.
Instructors question their students at the remembering level when they want to be sure
they know common terms, specific facts, basic concepts, principles, methods, and
procedures used in their discipline. Examples of words used in exam questions that
require this level of thinking include define, describe, label, list, match, reproduce, select,
and state.
Activity 13B
Provide Just the Facts, Please
List 30 facts about yourself. Keep these facts for Activity 13D later in this chapter.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activity 13C
Think at the Remembering Level
Read the following passage taken from a sociology textbook.
Status

1 For most people, the word status
 refers to a social position that an individual
occupies in a society (Linton 1936). Thus, executive, secretary, physician, and nurse are
all social statuses. Other statuses that are familiar to you include student, professor,
musician, voter, sister, parent, police officer, and friend.
2 A status refers to any societal position within a culture. Statuses can be (and are)
ranked, but sociologists don't assume that one position is more prestigious than another.
A mother, for example, is not more important than a father, and an adult is not more
important than a child. Instead, all statuses are significant because they determine social
identity, or who we are.
Status Set
3 Every person has many statuses at the same time (see Figure 13.2), and together they
form her or his status set,
 a collection of social statuses that a person occupies at a
given time (Merton 1968). Dionne, one of my students, is female, African American, 42
years old, divorced, mother of two, daughter, cousin, aunt, Baptist, Maryland voter,
supervisor at a bank, volunteer at a soup kitchen, president of her homeowners
associations, country music fan, and stockholder. All of these socially defined positions
(and perhaps others as well) make up Dionne's status set.
Figure 13.2
Is this Your Status Set?
Photodisc/Getty Images
The status of college student is only one of your current statuses. What other statuses comprise your status
set?
4 Status sets change throughout the life course. Dionne's statuses of child, single, and
high school student changed to married, parent, and bank employee. Her status of
married changed to divorced, and she added the status of college student. Because she
will graduate next year and is considering remarrying and starting an after-school
program, Dionne will add at least three more statuses to her status set and will also lose

the statuses of divorced and college student. As Dionne ages, she will continue to gain
new statuses (grandmother, retiree) and lose others (supervisor at a bank, or wife, if she
is widowed).
5 Statuses are relational, or complementary, because they are connected to other
statuses: A husband has a wife, a real estate agent has customers, and a teacher has
students. No matter how many statuses you occupy, nearly every status is linked to that
of one or more other people. These connections between statuses influence our
behavior and relationships.
Source: From BENOKRAITIS. SOC 1e (pp. 82-3). Copyright © 2010 Cengage Learning
Write five example questions you would expect your instructor to ask on an
exam about this passage written at the remembering level. For example, your
professor might ask you to define the term status or describe what Dionne's
status set is.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
13-2b Understanding Level of Thinking
At Bloom's understanding level of thinking (level of making predictions and inferences
and paraphrasing) , you are able to paraphrase, draw conclusions from, and make
predictions about reading material. Professors may, for example, ask students to explain
what is meant by a specific statement, paragraph, or concept. Professors question
students at this level to check whether they understand what facts and principles mean,
can interpret charts and graphs, can estimate the future consequences implied by data,
and are able to translate verbal language into mathematical formulas and vice versa.
Tip from the Brain Doctor
As you get to higher levels of thinking, the frontal lobes get more involved. The
frontal lobes have been called the “executive brain” because they specialize in
the kind of things that an executive does: organize, plan, analyze, synthesize,
delay rewards, assign priorities, keep emotions in check, use good judgment, and
focus attention. If the brain were an orchestra, the frontal lobes would be the
conductor.

The brain develops in response to input and experience. For example, some
scientists took a newborn kitten and covered one eye with a patch. They did not
harm the eye. A few months later, they took off the patch, and the cat was
permanently, functionally blind in that eye. Why? Because the connections from
the eye to the brain were not being used, the brain pruned them away. There was
no sensory input coming into the brain from the eye.
© Cengage Learning
By the same token, to develop your frontal lobes so that you are a
high-functioning adult, you must engage in the kinds of activities that develop the
frontal lobes. These higher-order-thinking tasks contribute to that. Think of these
activities as growing a better brain!
Examples of words used in questions at the understanding level include explain, infer,
summarize, rewrite, convert, defend, distinguish, and predict. When you are preparing for
an exam, you can use these same words to devise questions to test yourself on your
comprehension of textbook material.
Activity 13D
Summarize the Facts
In Activity 13B you were asked to develop a list of facts about yourself. Give your
list to a classmate. Each of you should write two paragraphs based on the other
person's list. In the first paragraph, summarize the other person's list, combining
details and omitting less important details as necessary. In the second paragraph,
make two plausible inferences from the facts in the first paragraph.
Activity 13E
Think at the Understanding Level
The following passage is taken from a book titled Actual Innocence: Five Days to

Execution and Other Dispatches from the Wrongly Convicted by Jim Dwyer and his
coauthors. The questions that follow are written at the understanding level of
thinking. The answers to these questions cannot be found word for word in the
text but are instead conclusions you should draw from the passage.
1 On the evening of December 19, 1974, a short documentary film was shown on the local
NBC newscast in New York. In it, a young woman walks in a hallway. A man lurks in a
doorway, wearing a hat, leather jacket, and sneakers. The man bursts from the doorway,
grabs the woman's handbag, and runs straight toward the camera, full-faced. The entire
incident lasts twelve seconds.
2 After the film was shown, the show presented a lineup of suspects. The viewers were
provided with a phone number and asked to choose the culprit from among the six, or to
say that he wasn't in the lineup. “We were swamped with calls,” Robert Buckhout, a
professor at Brooklyn College who organized the experiment, would write later. They
unplugged the phone after receiving 2,145 calls.
3 The “thief” was seated in lineup position Number 2. He received a grand total of 302
votes from the callers, or 14.1 percent of the 2,145. “The results were the same as if the
witnesses were merely guessing, since on the basis of chance (1 out of 7, including the
“not in the lineup” choice), we would expect only 14.3 percent identification of any
lineup participants, including Number 2,” Buckhout wrote in an article with the
charming headline NEARLY 2,000 WITNESSES CAN BE WRONG.
Source: Dwyer, Jim, Neufeld, Peter, Scheck, Barry. Actual Innocence: Five Days to Execution
and Other Dispatches from the Wrongly Convicted. New York: Doubleday, 2000, pp. 43–44.
Using the title of the book, what do you infer is the main point of this
passage?
1.
Predict what the callers would say if they were told that their responses
were incorrect. What reason do you think they would give for wrongly
identifying the thief in the lineup?
2.
Create two of your own understanding-level questions about this passage.
3.

13-2c Applying Level of Thinking
Bloom's applying level of thinking (level of applying what you have learned) requires
you to solve problems by selecting and utilizing the appropriate concepts, principles, or
theories you already know. For example, if you learn about the process through which a
bill becomes a law in your political science class, you could work out the status of a piece
of legislation before Congress and what steps still need to occur for it to become a law.
Professors ask questions at this level to see if students are able to solve mathematical
problems, demonstrate correct usage of procedures or methods, create charts and
graphs, use familiar concepts to understand new information, or apply theories to
real-life situations.
Examples of words used in questions at the applying level include change, compute,
demonstrate, discover, manipulate, modify, prepare, show, solve, apply, and use.
Activity 13F
Think at the Applying Level
Read the following passage, and answer the applying-level questions that follow.
Detailed knowledge of the brain processes that underline language has emerged in
recent years. For example, there appear to be separate brain areas that specialize in
subtasks such as hearing words (spoken language of others), seeing words (reading),
speaking words (speech), and generating words (thinking with language). Whether these
patterns of brain organization for oral, written, and listening skills require separate
activities to promote the component skills of language and literacy remains to be
determined. If these closely related skills have somewhat independent brain
representation, then coordinated practice of skills may be a better way to encourage
learners to move seamlessly among speaking, writing, and listening.
Source: Bransford, Brown, Cocking, eds., How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and
School. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1999, p. 110.
If you were a teacher, how would you use the information in this passage to
help your students learn?
1.
A friend is having trouble learning. How would you help this person figure
out how to solve his or her problem?
2.

Create your own applying-level question about this passage.
3.
13-2d Analyzing Level of Thinking
At Bloom's analyzing level of thinking (level of breaking information down into parts) ,
you take a difficult or complex concept, such as democracy, mitosis, or phonics, and
break it apart into the smaller ideas or parts it is made up of. Once you break a concept
down into its essential parts, you will have a much clearer understanding of what it
means and how the different elements interact with each other. Mentally reassembling
them back into the larger concept using your own words and examples further adds to
your knowledge.
Consider this example: A 19-year-old student on a university swim team comes in second
in an important race. The concept he wants to analyze is Why didn't I win? The parts that
make up this concept are the variables that contributed to his performance: what he ate
that day, how much he practiced, his ability to concentrate, his level of nervousness, his
sleeping habits, his mental attitude, and the strength of his competitors. After some
thought, he realizes that the problem is not his competitors, but his own behavior.
Specifically, he has been staying up late and not practicing good concentration
techniques during practice. He decides his lack of sleep and lack of focus are more likely
the reasons for his lackluster performance.
Professors question students at the analyzing level to see if they are able to recognize
fallacies in an author's reasoning, distinguish between facts and opinions, or take apart
the organizational structure of a work and recognize how the different parts interact to
form the whole.
Examples of words used in questions at the analyzing level include break down,
differentiate, discriminate, infer, outline, classify, and trace the growth of.
Activity 13G
Analyze how the Brain is Like an Orchestra
List all the ways the brain is like an orchestra. Hint: Think of everything you
know about an orchestra (activate your existing neural network), and then think
about how that information relates to what you have learned about the brain
throughout this textbook.
Orchestra
1.
2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Ferenc Szelepcsenyi/Shutterstock.com
Brain
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Source: Copyright Janet N. Zadina, Ph.D. 2009. May not be reprinted without

permission.
Activity 13H
Think at the Analyzing Level
Read the following passage, and answer the analyzing-level questions that follow.
1 Thanks to technology and to the Internet, all children now are children of the globe,
not just children of the neighborhood where they live. Today's tech-savvy kids already
have the tools for global learning at their fingertips. Gone is the day when education was
synonymous with a building housing a teacher and a blackboard. Today, the
opportunities for learning beyond the school walls and beyond the school day abound,
enabling students to connect the local to the global and back again. Globally oriented
schools can do the following:
2 Harness technology to tap global information sources, create international
collaborations, and offer international courses and languages online, especially to
underserved communities. Information and communication technology is our greatest
asset in internationalizing education. It allows students to access information from
every corner of the world, to overcome geographic barriers, to communicate and
collaborate with their peers in other countries, to publish findings, and to share words,
images, and videos with a worldwide audience—even to talk to one another in real time.
3 Lack of timely educational resources about other parts of the world was once a major
constraint on teaching about the world. Today's students can tap into free, relevant
information and networks from around the world; but at the same time they need to
learn critical-thinking skills to assess the wealth of global information that can be found
online. Online courses can allow students access to languages or other internationally
focused courses that are not available in their local school district. And Internet-based,
classroom-to-classroom projects, which allow students to learn with, not just about, their
peers in other countries, are a forerunner of what one day will become truly global
classrooms. These learning opportunities made possible through technology are
powerful for all students but are especially valuable in rural areas, where global
connections or local diversity may be limited.
Source: Jacobs, Heidi Hayes, ed. Curriculum 21: Essential Education for a Changing World
Alexandria, VA: ASCD, 2010, pp. 107–108.
Differentiate between non-global and global education in either a
paragraph or a visual.
Non-Global Learning
Global Learning
1.

Non-Global Learning
Global Learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Create your own analyzing-level question about this passage.
2.
Comprehension Check
What in the chapter up to this point is unclear?
Explain the purpose for understanding and using Bloom's Taxonomy.
13-2e Evaluating Level of Thinking
Bloom's evaluating level of thinking (level of making a judgment) , involves making a
value judgment based on specific criteria rather than on one's own opinions. The
process of asking questions, evaluating answers, and developing or acknowledging
criteria to use in evaluating information involves thinking at a very high level. Consider
a juror's task at a trial. Individual jurors cannot judge the defendant based on their own
personal experiences or biases. They have to follow specific criteria outlined in the law
and interpret that law based on the judge's directions.
Similarly, different academic disciplines have rules or guidelines for evaluating whether
information is valid and therefore acceptable. Here are some general questions you can
ask yourself as you begin to evaluate the quality of information and arguments in your

textbooks:
Are the author's arguments based on research?
1.
Does the author argue inductively or deductively? What reasons does the
author use to support what he or she says?
2.
Does the author appear to be biased? Does he or she use emotive language?
3.
Do I agree with what the author is saying? Why or why not? On what do I
base my evaluation?
4.
Students sometimes fail to prepare for an exam at the evaluating level of thinking
because the questions can be difficult to formulate and the answers are not always
objective. But it is important to ask evaluation questions because they challenge you to
think critically about what you read and not passively accept what you are being told.
They also require you to analyze an author's arguments using the specific criteria
relevant to his or her discipline and to develop your own arguments using those same
criteria.
Professors question students at the evaluating level to see if they can assess the validity
of a conclusion; judge the artistic merit of a play, poem, or sculpture using widely
accepted standards; or evaluate the logic of written or spoken material. Examples of
words used in questions at the evaluating level include justify, support, defend, appraise,
judge, and conclude.
Activity 13I
Think at the Evaluating Level
Read the following passage. Provide definitions in the margin for all of the bolded
words. Then answer the evaluating-level questions that follow.
Space Junk
1 On February 6, 1971, astronaut Alan Shepard famously hit some golf balls during his
walk on the moon. Although he claimed that one went “for miles and miles,” it actually
still rests on the moon's surface today and did not achieve escape velocity.
 Even
though there are no golf balls in lunar orbit, there is plenty of orbital debris or space
junk circling the earth. Spent rockets and dead satellites, Ed White's glove, flecks of paint,
crystallized urine, and other detritus
 make up 94 percent of the stuff that floats
around the earth along with operational satellites. (The glove stayed in orbit for only
about a month.)
2 There are also remnants
 of Project Needles (official name: Project West Ford), a
1960s plan to orbit tiny strips of metal to be used as antennae in a worldwide
communication system. (These are the “lost Air Force needs” referred to by Glenn.)

3 In early 2009, the International Space Station had a close call with a piece of micro-
meteoroid orbital debris. According to NASA, approximately nineteen thousand objects
larger than ten centimeters in diameter are known to exist; there are also an estimated
five hundred thousand particles between one and ten centimeters and tens of millions
of particles smaller than one centimeter.
4 The space agency points out that although “collisions with even a small piece of debris
will involve considerable energy,” NASA has a surveillance network to monitor debris
during space shuttle missions, and the shuttle can be maneuvered away from an object if
the chance of collision exceeds one in ten thousand, which occurs about once every year
or two. The International Space Station is well shielded and can withstand the impact of
debris as large as a centimeter in diameter.
Source: Malesky, K. All Facts Considered: The Essential Library of Inessential Knowledge.
John Wiley and Sons, Inc.: Hoboken, NJ, p. 138–139.
Judge the space practice that takes place in the passage. Should there be
regulations? If so, who would enforce them? What would be the
punishment for not adhering to the regulations?
1.
Do you agree with the concept of Project Needles? What do you base your
opinion on?
2.
Create your own evaluating-level question about this passage.
3.
13-2f Creating Level of Thinking
Bloom's creating level of thinking (level of being able to create a bigger picture after
combining parts) is considered the highest level of thinking. It requires you to arrive at
an understanding of the larger picture or meaning by combining the individual elements
that contribute to it and being able to create from it. For example, suppose you want to
create a quilt for your bed that somehow reflects your life. You decide to use pieces of
fabric that have special significance to you. You choose pieces of an old receiving blanket
your mother used when you were a baby, a dress you wore for an elementary school
picture, parts of a suede glove that belonged to an old boyfriend, a sheet that covered the
armchair in your dorm room, and a faded cotton shirt worn by your father who died last

year. You arrange all these pieces to form one big rectangle and border it with pieces of
blue fabric, your favorite color. Although your quilt is made up of a combination of
different fabrics, it is itself one bigger item. By undertaking this project, you have created
a number of important memories into one picture of your life.
Being able to synthesize information is important in college because professors will ask
you to think about discrete items of information in order to arrive at a deeper, more
comprehensive understanding of the larger topics they relate to. Unlike analyzing level
of questions, which ask you to break ideas down into smaller units, the creating level of
questions ask you to bring ideas together to create a larger picture. For example, you
may be asked in a political science class to explain how Hitler gained power in pre-World
War II Germany. By synthesizing information about the political situation, the economic
state of the country, and the culture of the German people at the time, you can answer
the larger question of how the combination of these factors set the stage for Hitler's rise
to power.
Professors question students at the creating level of thinking to see if they are able to use
different concepts and principles to arrive at a new understanding of complex issues;
write about a well-organized theme; present a persuasive speech; write a creative story
or poem; create a scheme for classifying objects, events, or ideas; or propose a plan for
research. Examples of words used in questions at the creating level include categorize,
write, relate, reconstruct, design, create, compose, and tell.
Activity 13J
Think at the Creating Level
Read the following passage from Dave Barry Hits below the Beltway. Even though
the passage is intended to be humorous, it demonstrates the skill necessary to
synthesize different items of information in order to create an explanation of a
larger topic. In this passage, the larger idea of government is pieced together
using people and ants to explain what government is and how it works.
Why do We have Governments
1 Why do we have governments?
2 This is a hard question, and, like so many hard questions, the best way to answer it is to
consider ants. When you see an ant on your kitchen floor, it appears to be an
insignificant insect scurrying around randomly, so you stomp it into a little smear
without a second thought.
3 But if, instead of stomping the ant, you were to get down on your hands and knees and
follow it, something fascinating would happen: Your head would bonk into the wall,
because the ant has scurried into a hole. So I'll just tell you where the ant goes: It goes to
a nest containing an ant colony that is every bit as complex and organized as a human
society. In fact, it is more organized, because there are no teenagers.
4 Yes, even ants—tiny creatures with a primitive brain no larger than that of a psychic-
hotline caller—have a government. The ant government operates on what political
scientists call the “Smell System,” whereby your role in society is based on what

chemicals you secrete. At the top of the hierarchy is the queen, who is elected
unanimously by the other ants after a very brief political campaign that consists of
hatching.
5 “Hey!” the other ants say. “This smells like the queen!”
6 Most of the other ants smell like workers, so they spend their lives scurrying around
looking for food and exchanging important chemical information with the other ants
they bump into (“I'm an ant!” “Hey, me too!”) Also, there are a few winged ants, whose job
is to scare you by flying around your house pretending to be termites. (This is the only
form of entertainment that ants have.)
7 Ants are not the only animals that have government. Similar organizational structures
can be found throughout nature: Monkeys form troops, birds form flocks, fish form
schools, worms form bunches of worms, intestinal parasites form law firms, etc. In other
words: Governments are natural. All animals form them, including humans. In a way, we
are like the ants scurrying across our kitchen floor: We give our Cheez-It fragments (tax
money) to the colony (government), and in return we enjoy the many benefits provided
by the colony (the Federal Avocado Safety Administration).
8 Of course human beings are far more advanced than animals; we do not elect the
president of the United States based on how he smells. As cerebral beings, we are much
more interested in other qualities in our president, such as height. As a result, we here in
the United States have developed a sophisticated, highly complex government structure
involving three major branches. (Among other animal species, only woodpeckers have
more.)
Source: “Why Do We Have Governments” from Dave Barry Hits below the Beltway by
Dave Barry (pp. 5–6). Copyright © 2001 by Dave Barry. Used by permission of Ballantine
Books, a division of Random House.
Examine the word hierarchy in the following sentence from the passage: At
the top of the hierarchy is the queen, who is elected unanimously by the other
ants after a very brief political campaign that consists of hatching. Use context
clues and word part analysis to define the word.
1.
Create your own creating-level question about this passage.
2.
Design a fictitious government structure for an animal group not
mentioned in the passage. Using the information provided in the passage as
a guide, include the details on your criteria for selecting a leader, the role of
followers, the types of taxes you would impose, and the various branches of
government.
3.
Use Table 13.1 to help you prepare for exams by asking yourself questions from the
different levels when studying. To use this chart effectively, select a level of thinking.

Then use the verbs provided in the middle column to develop your practice test
questions at that level. The third column gives you ideas for projects that demonstrate
that level of thinking. By learning about the different levels of thinking, you are able to
explore all possible question types.
Table 13.1
Verbs and Types of Activities Associated with the Levels of Bloom's Taxonomy
Level of Thinking
Verbs Associated with
Level
Types of Activities
Associated with Level
Remembering new
information:
Remembering
deﬁne
label
locate
draw
identify
select
state
name
describe
match
recall
order
recognize
relate
list
show
deﬁnitions
use a dictionary
use text reading
list information
match words with
deﬁnitions
Understanding new
information:
Understanding
explain
express
paraphrase
summarize
predict
compare
summary
outline
analogy
collage
poster
reflection paper

Level of Thinking
Verbs Associated with
Level
Types of Activities
Associated with Level
extend
restate
rewrite
recognize
translate
examples
Using/applying new
knowledge: Applying
apply
change
solve
modify
sketch
produce
demonstrate
illustrate
interpret
use
write
predict
photograph
list
mind map
puzzle
essay written from an
outline
diagram
Breaking down
information into
component parts:
Analyzing
analyze
outline
infer
break down
separate
investigate
classify
trace the growth of
diﬀerentiate
model
graph
conclusion
questionnaire
report

Level of Thinking
Verbs Associated with
Level
Types of Activities
Associated with Level
discriminate
compare
contrast
experiment
question
test
solve
manipulate
Judging the value of
knowledge:
Evaluating
apprise
compare
recommend
assess
conclude
criticize
solve
critique
judge
justify
support
defend
argue
group
discussions
recommendations
court trial
editorial
survey
Putting the pieces
together to
design/construct:
Creating
combine
construct
formulate what if
reconstruct
produce
article
play
song
game
Brain Strength

Level of Thinking
Verbs Associated with
Level
Types of Activities
Associated with Level
categorize
write
relate
design
assemble
compose
plan
propose
distinguish
hypothesize
Options
book
cartoon
experiment
poem
Activity 13K
Apply the Levels of Thinking
Using Table 13.1, identify the activities you would recommend based on the
levels of thinking required.
Critique a newspaper article regarding the current elections
What level of thinking is required?
What activity would you recommend and why?
1.
Outline a chapter in your psychology text
What level of thinking is required?
What activity would you recommend in addition to the outline and why?
2.

Explain how photosynthesis works
What level of thinking is required?
What activity would you recommend and why?
3.
Label the parts of the foot
What level of thinking is required?
What activity would you recommend and why?
4.
Design a lesson plan for your internship
What level of thinking is required?
What activity would you recommend and why?
5.
Activity 13L
Apply Bloom's Taxonomy to a Textbook Reading
Preview and study-read the following passage from a sociology textbook.
Highlight the main idea in green and the major supporting details in yellow.
Write margin notes as you see fit, and then answer the questions that follow.
Some Benefits and Costs of Technology
1 The ever-accelerating pace of change means that most U.S. children born after 2000 are

now using technologies that didn't exist just a decade ago. Indeed, much of this
“iGeneration” views even those in their 20s as outdated in their tech skills (Rosen 2010).
2
Table 13.2
Opinions of Technological Changes
Technological Changes
Percentage Saying
that the change has
been “for the better”
Cell phones
69
E-mail
68
Internet
65
Increased
surveillance/security
58
BlackBerrys/iPhones
56
Online shopping
54
Social networking sites
35
Internet blogs
29
Sources: Based on Kohut et al. 2009, p. 2.
3 Should the average American be less upbeat about technology changing for the better?
Let's first look at some of its benefits.
Some Benefits
4 Technological advances have for some time offered benefits such as performing
surgery, tracking people's medications, and monitoring children and older family
members from afar using webcams. In other cases, robotic devices have performed
repetitive, dirty, or dangerous tasks, including digging deep wells, testing military

equipment, and locating bombs.
5 DNA testing has provided millions of people with information about their genetic
predispositions
 for diseases such as emphysema, cancer, and Huntington's disease
(an incurable neurological disorder). Having such information has helped doctors and
patients make more informed healthcare decisions (Harmon 2008).
6 More than one-third of Americans age 65 or older falls each year. The economic cost of
falls, including hip fractures and replacements, is about $75 billion a year. Low-cost
wireless sensors in carpets, clothing, and rooms allow doctors to monitor an older
person's walking and activity. As a result, physicians are reducing falls by devising
exercise programs for specific muscles or changing medications to eliminate dizziness
(Lohr 2009).
7 Some scientists also maintain that use of the Internet has enhanced human
intelligence: As people have more access to information, they become smarter and make
better decisions. In effect, as the digital systems that people rely on become faster and
more sophisticated, so will our capabilities in working on solutions for problems such as
the growing population density,
 the spread of pandemics,
 and global pollution
(Cascio 2009).
Some Costs
8 Cell phones, the Internet, and other forms of telecommunication bring people together
and provide quick access to a wealth of information. Some argue, however, that the
Internet, especially, has made us more sedentary and lazy, and that the ease of online
searching and browsing has limited our ability to concentrate, to read without
distractions, and to think (Carr 2008). Others worry that the iGeneration expects an
instant response from everyone they communicate with, and has little patience for
anything else (Rosen 2010). A more common concern is that virtually every
technological advance in telecommunications reduces privacy.
9 Many companies routinely collect information about people as they click from site to
site on the Internet. Much of this Web tracking is done anonymously, but a new crop of
“snooper” sites is making it easier than ever before for anyone with Internet access to
assemble and sell the information, including your name, Social Security number,
address, and which sites you've visited on almost any topic, product, or service. The data
come from a variety of sources, including public records on campaign contributions,
property sales, and court cases; networking sites where people provide information
about themselves, their jobs, relatives, and friends; and even Netflix, where marketers
can track the movies that customers have watched and rated (Sarno 2009; Singer 2009,
2010).

© Ralph Hagen. Reproduction rights obtainable from www.CartoonStock.com
10 Many Americans are vulnerable because they're not very knowledgeable about
privacy laws. For example, only 22 percent know that if a Web site has a privacy policy,
the site can share information about you with other companies without your permission
(Throw et al. 2009). Another increasingly common intrusion on privacy is by health and
life insurance companies that pay only about $15 per search to other companies that
prepare health “credit reports.” They have accessed at least 200 million Americans'
5-year history of purchases of prescription drugs, the dosages and refills, and possible
medical conditions. With such reports, insurance companies can charge some
customers higher premiums or exclude some medical conditions from policies. Even
worse, according to some health experts, some insurance companies have
misinterpreted the information and denied coverage (Nakashima 2008; Terhune 2008).
Source: From BENOKRAITIS. SOC 2e (pp. 328—330). Copyright © 2012 Cengage Learning.
(remembering) List three benefits of technology.
1.
(understanding) Using your own words, summarize the main points of this
reading in five sentences or less.
2.
(applying) Interpret the meaning of the cartoon that accompanies the
passage.
3.
(analyzing) Outline the passage to differentiate the major and minor details
presented.
4.
(evaluating) Use this passage to evaluate whether technology enhances
5.

human intelligence. Support your response with information from the
passage along with information you know.
(creating) In what way(s) does Table 13.2 relate to the main idea of this
passage?
6.
13-3 Levels of Learning: The Natural Human Learning Process
While bloom developed his six stages of thinking using experience and critical thinking,
Rita Smilkstein identified the six stages of the natural human learning process (NHLP) by
research with more than 10,000 people, from students through elementary, middle, high
school, college, and graduate school to university educators, about their process of
learning. When asked how they learned something outside school, every group
identified similar stages, leading to the research-based conclusion that there are specific,
sequential, natural stages of learning (see some of the NHLP research results in Chapter
1).
Compare the NHLP's stages with Bloom's stages. You will see that its six stages are also
almost identical, suggesting that learners progress through Bloom's stages of thinking
because they are experiencing the NHLP's stages of learning.
It is important to note that both the NHLP and Bloom's Taxonomy expect that to learn
something new, you must connect it with something you already know about the topic.
This is the first stage of the NHLP (motivation) and Bloom's Taxonomy (remembering).
For example, if you are going to read about psychology, think about what you already
know about psychology. If you do not already know anything on the topic, then you will
need to investigate or research more on psychology to begin to know something and
connect the new topic to. Otherwise, you will not be able to fully understand the topic.
You will feel lost. Has this ever happened to you?
Tip from the Brain Doctor

The brains of participants in a research study were scanned while they studied.
Those who used multiple mental strategies had better memory performance.
You have learned many strategies in this book. Apply as many as you can each
time you study, and you will make the most of your study time, learn more
effectively, and remember the material better!
At the second stage (beginning practice, understanding), you practice relating what you
are reading to what you know. Does the reading make sense to you? Can you see or
comprehend how it relates to your own knowledge or experience? If not, is it wrong or
are you wrong? If you cannot relate it to what you already know, you will need to become
familiar with the new ideas and information in the reading. You will have to practice
relating the new material to what you already know until you have gone beyond to learn
something new and can begin to comprehend the new material.
Figure 13.3
Comparing the Natural Human Learning Process (NHLP) and Bloom's
Taxonomy
© Cengage Learning
At the third stage (more practice, applying), you continue reading the text and see how it
applies, not only to your own experiences but also to what else the reading tells you.
Sometimes you might need to page-flip or cross-reference to relate the new ideas to
previous ones. Then you continue practicing to see how the previous material and the
new material relate. When you are learning new material, applying what you already
know to the new topic will help you understand the new topic more completely and
easily.

In the fourth stage (advanced practice, analyzing), you understand and analyze (know
the parts and how they relate to each other) the text. To support your understanding of a
text, you are able, with advanced practice, to identify or present an analysis of the ideas
or information in the text.
In the fifth stage (skillfulness, evaluating), you now have your own ideas and
understanding about the topic, possess a certain amount of skill with the new
information, and you are able to evaluate and make decisions about the text. You
understand other ideas about the topic and are able to determine whether you agree or
disagree. This ability to perform an evaluation of ideas or parts from one or more texts
gives you an even deeper understanding so that you can skillfully, with evidence, write
or talk about your understanding.
Finally, in the sixth stage (mastery, creating), you are able to fully integrate the new
information you have mastered from your text with other information you already
know to create new knowledge. Your ability to master text material, integrate it with
your prior knowledge, and create something new from it, is based on all the learning and
thinking you have done in the previous stages.
Knowing that there are different levels of thinking, you can approach your textbooks
with a greater expectation of learning. Aim for a deeper, more critical reading of your
textbooks by questioning yourself at the six levels of Bloom's Taxonomy and actively
experiencing the six stages of the NHLP.
Activity 13M
Identify the Steps of the NHLP
Using your own words, describe each of the six steps regarding the natural
human learning process. How are they similar to Bloom's Taxonomy?
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

13-4 Keeping Your Brain Healthy Beyond Reading
Applying what you learned in this chapter about how to read at higher levels can also
make you a better thinker. Not taking everything you hear at face value is an important
mental trait. Applying what you learn in one situation to another situation in your life
makes you more intelligent and effective. Being intelligent is about more than a score on
an IQ test. It is operating at higher levels in your everyday thinking and interactions.
Applying, analyzing, and creating are desirable and marketable job skills that will
contribute to your success when you graduate and apply for a job of choice.
You have learned so much about your brain, reading, and learning in this textbook that
will benefit you throughout your life. But, there is more to being a good learner, a good
student, a good employee, a good parent, or a good citizen than just being an expert
reader. You need to maintain a healthy brain at all stages of life for everything that you
do.
As you have learned through this book, your brain changes as a result of what you do—it
demonstrates plasticity. So remember that the activities that you engage in, the habits
you have, and your persistent thoughts and attitudes all serve to form your brain as it
will be later in life. If you persist in negative habits, behaviors, or thoughts, you will
become more negative. So keep a positive attitude!
Some research has shown that exercise grows new neurons in the hippocampus, which
is involved in memory. Much research has shown the importance of exercise for a
healthy brain. Keep in mind that oxygen carries fuel to the brain, so getting oxygen to the
brain through exercise is beneficial. Get up and move around when you are studying or
working at a desk. Make walking a daily habit. Instead of complaining about how far the
parking lot is on campus, enjoy that walk. Get some aerobic exercise weekly. Strength
training has also been shown to be beneficial.
Diet affects brain health. Avoid trans fats as indicated by the words “partially
hydrogenated” on food product nutrition labels. Avoid excess sugar. Get plenty of
antioxidants with fruits and vegetables. Keep in mind that you grow your body and brain
every day with the choices that you make.
Statistics show that the average person today will have seven careers in a lifetime. This
means that you will be a lifelong learner. This textbook has prepared you to read and
learn effectively so that you can continue to adapt to changing society and your changing
interests.
Activity 13N
Follow Up with a Reading Survey
Now that you have completed this textbook, check your current knowledge of
your reading skills and strategies by taking the following survey for a second
time. Read each statement, and respond based on your current reading habits. Be
honest with yourself. This is a way to help you discover how well you are

applying the strategies you have learned. Write Y if the statement correctly
describes you or what you currently do or N if it does not.
 I make every attempt to learn the words I do not
understand while reading. (See Chapter 3.)
1.
 I create questions to ask myself before I begin to
read a textbook chapter. (See Chapters 4 and 8.)
2.
 When I decide to read a chapter, I start at the
beginning and read straight through, often forgetting most of what I read.
(See Chapters 1, 4, and 8.)
3.
 I highlight main ideas consistently so that I can
review the key points of a chapter easily. (See Chapters 8 and 9.)
4.
 Thinking at different levels has nothing to do with
reading at different levels. (See Chapter 13.)
5.
 I do not make connections between what I know
and new reading material. (See Chapter 1.)
6.
 When I detect an argument in my reading
assignment, I locate and evaluate the reasons supporting it. (See Chapter
11.)
7.
 Detecting fallacies helps me to understand
authors' conclusions more effectively. (See Chapter 12.)
8.
 I am always able to identify the main ideas of
textbooks. (See Chapters 4, 5, and 6.)
9.
 Sticking to a schedule seems too rigid for me. I'm
too spontaneous to stick to a regular reading plan. (See Chapter 1.)
10.
 When I read, I try to locate organizational word
clues. (See Chapter 7.)
11.
 Having a good attitude is related to how well I
read. (See Chapters 1 and 2.)
12.
 It is important to actually say to myself that I
intend to remember specific information in my textbook chapters. (See
Chapter 2.)
13.
 Using authors' patterns of organization is not an
important reading skill. It is more of a writing skill. (See Chapter 7.)
14.
 I create visuals for my most challenging textbook
information. I use different visuals based on the type of information
presented. (See Chapter 10.)
15.

 Tracking my concentration will not improve my
ability to read. (See Chapter 1.)
16.
 I always look for clue words to help me gain
deeper insight into the author's meaning. (See Chapters 7, 8, 9, and 13.)
17.
 I often try to create a metaphor to help me
remember. Making comparisons makes recall easier. (See Chapters 2 and
6.)
18.
 I give up on trying to figure things out. It is a waste
of my time. (See Chapters 6 and 7.)
19.
 I use specific colors to identify main ideas and
supporting details when marking my textbooks. (See Chapter 9.)
20.
To calculate your score, your instructor will provide you with the answers of an
expert reader. For every answer you have that matches that of an expert reader,
give yourself 5 points.
Your Score:
100–95
Outstanding
Outstanding application of critical
reading and thinking strategies.
90–85 Above
Average
Above average application of critical
reading strategies.
80–75 Average
Additional knowledge of skills and
strategies will strengthen your ability
to read and think more eﬀectively.
70–65
Marginally
Adequate
You may have diﬃculty getting the
most out of your college textbooks.
Additional knowledge of skills and
strategies will strengthen your ability
to read and think more eﬀectively.
60 and below
Needs Work
You will beneﬁt from learning and
applying the strategies learned in this
course. Not only will the strategies
help you academically, but they will
also beneﬁt you in the world of work.
Compare your score on this survey with the score you earned the first time you
took this survey, (in Chapter 1). How is your current score different? What

changes did you note in your reading strategies?
You know that knowledge is power. The more you read, the more you know, and
the ability to use information in a meaningful way will always give you an
advantage. How will you use what you learned from this book? How will you read
your textbooks now as an expert reader?
13-5 Chapter Review
13-5a Practice with a Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
The following sociology passage includes the results of a study of the
American ritual of the marriage proposal. Twenty engaged couples were
interviewed and studied and parts of the conclusions of the study are
provided in this passage.
What is a ritual?.
1.
What do you already know about marriage proposals?
2.
Develop a question, using the title of this passage, to ask yourself before
you read.
3.
Preview the passage by reading the title and headings. Then, study-read the
passage, highlighting the main idea in green and the major supporting
details in yellow. Write margin notes as necessary.
4.
Circle all new vocabulary, and provide the definitions as margin notes.
5.
The Proposal Script
By David Schweingruber, Sine Anahita, and Nancy Berns
1 The majority of the proposals in this study contained five elements. Three were found
in every proposal:

(1)
(2)
(3)
the man asking the woman to marry him,
the man presenting the woman a ring, and
the man orchestrating the proposal as a “surprise.” Another element, the man
getting down on one knee, was found in 17 of the 20 proposals.
The final element, the man asking permission of the woman's father, was found in 12 of
the 20 proposals.
Man as Proposer
2 A universal element in the proposals of heterosexual couples we interviewed was that
the proposer was the male member of the couple and the audience was the female
member. Breaking this rule, as only the female member can do, did not result in an
official engagement. In fact, switching the roles may turn the proposal into a parody
that produces amusement, instead of the usual romantic feelings. As one woman
explained:
I actually, as a joke, the week before, on our one year anniversary, I put in the card, I'm
like, “I love you so much. Will you marry me?” And he just looked at me and he's, like
[with intonation of amused scolding], “Oh, Julie.”
Another woman twice asked her boyfriend to marry her and even gave him a ring. He
wore the ring but did not take her proposals seriously. The couple did not consider
themselves engaged until he asked her to marry him….
Importance of the Ring
3 Although the man's verbal request that the woman marry him was important, words
without an engagement ring did not make a complete proposal. The presentation of a
ring made it clear that what was going on was an engagement proposal. This was a strong
necessity not only for the first audience, the woman, but also for the secondary
audience. Without a ring, the proposal was not yet appropriate as a public story and did
not provide the official marking of their future as an engaged couple. The following two
examples illustrate the change in the woman's emotions from hope to disappointment
when she realized that her boyfriend was not presenting a ring and thus the proposal
was not a “real” one:
I actually kind of faked her out that night [shortly before the actual proposal]. [laugh]
I acted like I was getting something on the couch, and I was on one knee, and I had my
hands closed, and she was getting all excited then. And so like I go, “Molly, will you
marry me?” And I open my hands up and there's nothing there. And… [she] told me
how mean that was and that the next time I do that it'd better be real. [laughs] (male)
He said, “… will you marry me?” And I said, “Yes.” And then he pulled out this ring box,
and in it was a ring made out of pine needles, and I started to cry because I was
expecting my real ring. And so I started to cry and he's like, “I promise I'll give you the
real ring as soon as I can” and all this stuff. And so I was trying to be really nice about
it, but in my head I was going, “Oh my gosh. I want my diamond.”… So after doing that
for about two minutes, then he pulled a box out of the other pocket, and it had my
ring in it…. I still have the pine ring, but I like this one better. (female)

In the first case the proposal was transformed into a humorous rehearsal. In the second,
the joke (until it was resolved) ruined the performance and created the impression that
the proposer did not understand the script and, consequently, might not be serious
about becoming engaged. Not all women shared the opinion that a proposal without a
ring would be illegitimate. However, if there was no ring, some sort of explanation, such
as financial exigency,
 was required…
4 The ring was just as important, or even more important, during the secondary
performances. The presence of a diamond ring on the woman's ring finger acted as
prima facie
 evidence to the couple's friends and family that they were indeed
engaged. The secondary audience may in fact demand that the ring be produced. For
instance:
I think the first thing my mom said is, “Let's see your finger,” because she knew he
was going to ask so we just kind of broke [the news], you know, told everyone what
happened and that we were engaged and let everyone know. (female)
Surprise
5 The proposal was supposed to be a “surprise” but only in a limited sense because an
agreement to marry had already been reached by all of these subjects. The woman
expected that a proposal would be made. What was supposed to surprise her was when
and where the proposal would take place. Whether surprise was achieved varied within
our sample. At one extreme, the woman knew that the proposal was imminent.
 She
knew the ring had been purchased, and she suspected that she would be proposed to that
day. The surprise was in the details. Her fiancé said, “We both knew it was coming, and
we both knew it was going to happen that night, but she didn't know exactly how it was
going to happen.”
6 At the other extreme, the woman knew that the man would someday propose to her,
but the time and place of the proposal caught her off guard. “He surprised me. That was
his big thing 'cause we both knew that we'd be getting married. He was afraid that I was
going to say I thought this was coming, and I didn't.” Note that although this woman “had
no idea” the proposal was coming, the couple had discussed the ring. She had also
previously given her boyfriend instructions about what she expected from the proposal.
7 One of the purposes of the surprise was to allow the woman to respond spontaneously
to the proposal. As one woman reported:
It kind of swept me off my feet… If I know something's coming up, I can kind of plan
for it and kind of prepare myself for it. But this, I just had none of that so maybe it was
just like complete raw emotion when you just don't expect anything, you can't have
any feeling preplanned or anything. You just kind of react and it seemed… more
genuine that way. If you don't plan out what you're going to say before or after… if it
just happens, maybe it's more true.
This outpouring of emotion was an expected part of the proposal and not just by the
women. Respondents reported the outpouring of emotion that accompanied the
proposal occurred in various ways. First, respondents reported weeping and not
understanding what was going on. Second, they reported that they could not remember
parts of the proposal because they were overwhelmed by emotion. Finally, men reported
that performances were disrupted by emotion and some of their plans were

abandoned….
Down on One Knee
8 Seventeen of the 20 men got down on one knee during the proposal. Another was down
on both knees. The two exceptions were explained by the circumstances. One couple got
engaged while looking at the stars as they sat in a car (it was too cold to go outside). The
other proposal involved the man turning around to show his girlfriend the ring balanced
on the end of a hockey stick. In many cases the woman had earlier requested that her
boyfriend get down on one knee. This element of the proposal exemplified much of the
entire ritual in that it clearly indicated that a proposal was taking place, but its origin or
original meaning was unknown to the people who were participating. Specifically, the
man getting down on one knee signaled that the proposal was beginning and the
presentation of the ring and the verbal request to marry were imminent. When
respondents were asked about the meaning of this element, they were able to come up
with possible meanings but indicated that they did not know the “real” meaning or had
not even given it much thought. For instance:
I don't know. Maybe it's like going back to tradition, man trying to be submissive to his
wife. Who knows really, but it just seems like the chivalrous
 thing to do, I guess,
you know, because you're asking and when you get lower than the other person,
you're supposed to be submissive. I don't know what it means really, but I like it.
(male)
9 The lack of a tradition of men's submission to their wives suggests that this man's
hypothesis
 was incorrect. The elements of the engagement proposal are important
because they convey that a proposal is going on, not because of other symbolic
meanings. Getting down on one knee is uniquely useful in communicating a proposal is
taking place because it is rare during typical interactions.
Asking Permission
10 Twelve of the 20 men asked permission from their girlfriend's father before
proposing. As with the proposal itself, asking the father was a performance with dual
audiences. By asking his girlfriend's father's permission, the man acted out his respect
for his future father-in-law, his hope to have his father-in-law's blessing, and his desire to
join the family. His secondary audience was his girlfriend, who viewed asking
permission as a romantic gesture and often specifically requested it. In fact, she might
have been a more important audience than her father.
I told them [my girlfriend's parents] that after careful consideration I would really
like to marry Shari and wanted to know if that was all right with them, kind of
knowing that it was, but they said that that was really all right with them and that was
about it. Really it was kind of more of a formality for her than directly involved with
us. (male)
11 As with other sex-specific requirements of the script, most couples did not make the
connection between the script and its seemingly sexist symbolism, i.e., its suggestion
that the woman is owned by her father, who is empowered to turn her over to her future
husband. Couples liked it not only because it was “traditional” but also because women
liked to involve their fathers in the event. As one woman explained:

I thought it was kind of nice…. I just think it would make [my dad] feel special to be
involved in that way and stuff, and I think that it really did make my dad feel good that
he called and asked him. I mean my dad obviously… loves Dan, and we both knew that
he wouldn't say “no” or anything, but it's just kind of nice to have him involved that
way.
One woman who thought the process “takes out the independence of the woman” still
encouraged her fiancé to “notify” her father because he was “old-fashioned” and “I knew
he'd get really excited about it and feel like he was part of the process…. It gives my dad a
story to tell.” Only one woman indicated a strong objection to her boyfriend asking her
father, saying, “I'm my own person, and my dad has nothing to do with it.” Another
woman, though, said she thought that asking her father was more significant than asking
her, because “then I knew that he was really serious.” Only four of the 12 men who asked
permission from their girlfriend's father also asked permission from her mother.
From David Schweingruber, Sine Anahita, and Nancy Berns, “The Engagement Proposal as Performance,” Sociological
Focus 37(2), 2004. Reprinted by permission of the North Central Sociological Association.
Why is the marriage proposal called a “script” in the passage's title? How is
the marriage proposal a ritual?
1.
What reasons does the author give to support the main idea? What are the
parts or elements of the ritual?
2.
What pattern of organization does the author use? How do you know?
What organizational word clues helped you determine the pattern?
3.
Examine the “Asking Permission” section of the proposal script. How can it
be seen as sexist? How can it be look at as endearing?
4.
Do you agree with the author's main idea (conclusion)? Why or why not?
5.
Design a scenario for the the perfect marriage proposal. Use three of the
five elements described in the passage.
6.

What level of questioning are questions #9, 10, and 11?
7.
Chapter Review
13-5b Chapter Summary
Bloom's Taxonomy began as a teaching tool for instructors to use to help their students
achieve more complex levels of thinking. The six levels of Bloom's Taxonomy are
remembering, understanding, applying, analyzing, evaluating, and creating.
The natural human learning process (NHLP) is a specific, sequential, natural process that
people go through as they learn. Working through Bloom's six levels of thinking actually
prompts you to go through the six steps of the natural learning process. The end result is
higher-level thinking.
In the first stage, you must learn something new and recall what you already know on
the subject you are reading. Doing this helps you establish a place in your brain where
the new information will go. In the second stage, you practice relating what you are
reading to what you already know. This establishes a place for your knowledge to grow.
In the third stage, you take what you understand from the reading and apply it to other
parts of the reading and the information you already know on the subject. In the fourth
stage, you analyze the parts of what you are reading to see how each part stands against
what you already know and the rest of the new reading material. In the fifth stage, you
evaluate what you have learned, allowing you to make decisions about the information.
In the last stage, the highest level of learning, you create a big mental picture of the new
information, which also includes what you already know. Then you can create from
what you have learned.
Knowledge of Bloom's Taxonomy and the NHLP not only helps you explore many levels
of thinking. It also provides a blueprint for upcoming exams and future learning
experiences. Remember that instructors will test you with questions at the various
levels of thinking to ensure that you are learning. If you know these levels and test
yourself beforehand, you will perform better on exams. More importantly, you will
become an expert reader and a better thinker.
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment

Bloom's Taxonomy
1.
evaluating level of thinking
2.
remembering level of thinking
3.
understanding level of
thinking
4.
applying level of thinking
5.
analyzing level of thinking
6.
creating level of thinking
7.
level of breaking information
down into parts
a.
level of making a judgment
b.
literal level of thinking
c.
a classification of levels of
thinking
d.
level of being able to create a
bigger picture after combining
parts
e.
level of applying what you
have learned
f.
Draw the amount of dendrites you imagine that you have now about reading
beyond the words. Compare your drawing of dendrites now with what you drew
at the beginning of this chapter. If the amounts are different, explain why.
Comprehension Check
Where in the chapter did you lose concentration or become confused?
If you could ask the authors a question about this chapter, what would
you ask?
Chapter Review
13-5c Post Test
Part 1: Objective Questions
Match the key terms from the chapter in Column A to their definitions in
Column B.
Column A Column B

level of making predictions
and inferences and
paraphrasing
g.
Circle the best answer to the following multiple-choice question.
Which of the following is an example of critical reading and thinking?
developing mnemonics to recall important dates from a book on
World War II
a.
understanding the main ideas of a large biology chapter
b.
understanding the concept of area in geometry, working out the
problems at the end of the chapter, and figuring out the areas of
shapes outside the Student Union
c.
disregarding a new article in a magazine because it disagrees with
what the textbook says
d.
8.
Read the following scenarios, and determine what level(s) of thinking is
(are) involved. Explain your answers.
Toni was assigned a psychology chapter to read. She was asked to:
critique section one of her chapter, using her own words.
write a poem regarding the chapter's main idea.
define the words in the section regarding the Bell Curve Theory.
9.
How can an understanding of Bloom's Taxonomy and the natural human
learning process help someone in future college and work assignments?
10.
Popular Reading
Part 2. Reading Passage
Prepare to Read
Based on the title, what do you expect the following passage to be about?
1.
What do you already know about the subject?
2.

Develop a question from the title. As you read the passage, try to answer
that question.
3.
Study-read the passage and highlight the main idea in green and the major
supporting ideas in yellow.
4.
Empress Wu
By T. Walter Wallbank Alastair M. Taylor
1 
2 Wu rose steadily in the new emperor's favor until, after accusing the empress of
engaging in sorcery, murdering her baby daughter, and plotting to poison her husband,
she was herself installed as empress. According to the official history of the age, “The
whole sovereign
 power passed into her hands. Life and death, reward and
punishment, were determined by her word. The Son of Heaven merely sat upon his
throne with hands folded.”
3 After the death of the emperor twenty years later, Wu installed two of her sons as
successive puppets. She ruthlessly employed secret police and informers to suppress
conspiracies against her. Finally, in 690 at the age of sixty-two, she usurped the imperial
title and became the only woman ever to rule China in name as well as in fact.
4 To legitimize her usurpation,
 the empress was aided by a group of unscrupulous
Buddhist monks, one of whom is reputed to have been her lover. They discovered in
Buddhist scriptures a prophecy that a pious woman was destined to be reborn as the
ruler of an empire that would inaugurate a better age and to which all countries would
be subject. Not only did the monks identify Wu as the woman in the prophecy, but they
acclaimed her as a divine incarnation of the Buddha. The T'ang capital was renamed the
Divine Capital, and Wu assumed a special title—”Holy Mother Divine Imperial One.”
5 Despite her ruthlessness—understandable in the totally unprecedented
 situation
of a woman seeking successfully to rule a great empire—the Empress Wu was an able
ruler who consolidated the T'ang Dynasty. She not only avenged earlier Sui and T'ang
defeats at the hands of the northern Koreans who had been subject to the Han, but she
made all of Korea a loyal vassal
 state of China. Yet because she was a woman and a
usurper,
 she found little favor with Chinese Confucian historians. They played up
her vices, particularly her many favorites and lovers whom she rewarded with
unprecedented honors.

6 Among those who gained great influence over the aging empress was a peddler of
cosmetics, famous for his virility,
 who was first made abbot of a Buddhist
monastery, then palace architect, and finally commander-in-chief of the armies on the
northern frontier. At the age of seventy-two, her favorites—and reputed lovers—were
two young brothers of a type known as “white faces” (men who were physically
attractive but otherwise of no account), whose powdered and rouged faces were a
common sight around the palace. When the empress appointed a younger brother of her
two favorites to an important governorship, her leading ministers successfully
conspired
 to put her son back on the throne. The two brothers were decapitated in
the palace and the Empress Wu, the founder and only member of the Wu Dynasty, was
forced to abdicate.
Source: From WALLBANK, CIVILIZATION PAST & PRESENT, 5th Edition, © 1985. Reprinted by permission of Pearson
Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Use context clues and word part analysis to define the following words
from the passage.
successive (paragraph 3):
incarnation (paragraph 4):
consolidated (paragraph 5):
Now complete three of the essay questions provided here. Every student's
essay answer will be different based on the key word in the individual
assignment. Be sure that your answer corresponds with the specific
question. Every essay answer must have a minimum of five sentences. Be
sure to cite specific examples from the passage to support your main idea.
Your main idea sentence will be determined by your question.
5.
Compare and contrast yourself with Empress Wu.
6.
Criticize or critique the essay. (Example: The author did not present a fair
picture of Empress Wu.)
7.
Define Empress Wu as a tyrant. (Example: Empress Wu is a tyrant because….)
8.
Describe Empress Wu.
9.
Discuss Empress Wu as a leader of a country. (Example: Empress Wu had
both good and bad qualities as a leader.)
10.
Evaluate Empress Wu as a leader. (Example: As a leader, Empress Wu….)
11.
Explain why Empress Wu was forced off the throne.
12.
Illustrate why Empress Wu would be disliked.
13.
Interpret Empress Wu's behavior.
14.

Justify the decision to remove Empress Wu from the throne.
15.
List how Empress Wu got to the throne.
16.
Outline the rise and fall of Empress Wu.
17.
Prove that Empress Wu was a good leader.
18.
Relate the behavior of Empress Wu in office to a leader that you know of.
19.
Review the rise and fall of Empress Wu.
20.
Summarize the history of Empress Wu.
21.
Trace the rise and fall of Empress Wu.
22.
Source: Copyright Janet N. Zadina, 2002
Chapter Review
13-5d 
 Brain Strength Options
Working individually or in groups of no more than three, create a poster
portraying each level of Bloom's Taxonomy. The purpose is not just to list
the levels. Instead, give an example of each level by listing an activity that
would represent it. Use your creativity, but be consistent throughout the
poster and make sure all levels are labeled.
1.
Working individually or in groups of no more than three, choose one of the
following prompts based on the story of Empress Wu.
Draw a series of pictures (like a comic book) that illustrates Empress
Wu's story.
a.
Write a song that illustrates Empress Wu's personality or tells her
story.
b.
With your group, act out Empress Wu's story.
c.
Make a PowerPoint presentation or poster that compares Empress
d.
2.

Wu with a current person. Include at least four points of comparison
or contrast.
Find a movie that you think is a modern-day version of Empress Wu's
story. Present to the class at least four points of comparison. The
movie does not have to have a political theme; it can relate in terms
of personality or cause and effect or in other ways.
e.
Turn Empress Wu's story into a movie that you design in the form of a
movie poster. Use pictures to illustrate your casting, scenery, and
relevant symbols. Include at least four sentences that describe the
movie and motivate viewers to attend.
f.
Your idea (obtain approval from your instructor).
g.

Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Appendix
Test-Taking Strategies
Test-Taking Self-Assessment
Preparing for a Test
Coping with Test Anxiety
Practicing Time Management during Tests
Answering Test Questions
What to do after the Test
Test-Taking Self-Assessment
Take the Following Quiz to Determine the Strength of your test-taking strategies. Answer
Yes if the statement is characteristic of you and No if it is not. Preferred answers with
explanations are provided following the quiz.
I never seem to have enough time to finish an exam.
1.
I answer all exam questions. I leave nothing blank.
2.
I read the directions twice before answering the exam questions.
3.
While taking multiple-choice tests, I select the first answer if it seems
correct.
4.
I always double-check my answers.
5.
When I answer essay questions, I organize my thoughts as I am writing.
6.

Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
I always match the grammar used in the question with the grammar used
in the correct answer.
7.
If I am unsure of the answer, I avoid those that use absolute words.
8.
I often change my answers when taking objective tests.
9.
I answer questions I know well first.
10.
If I get nervous, I take a few seconds to take a deep breath and know that it
is normal to experience momentary blocks during an exam.
11.
When writing an essay exam, I understand the difference between the
terms evaluate, summarize, contrast, prove, and justify.
12.
Now compare your answers to those provided here. If you find that any of your answers
are different, take some time to review the information in this appendix.
No: Plan on using time management when taking tests. If you have 50 minutes to
answer 50 questions, make sure you spend no more than a minute per question.
Skip over questions you do not know the answer to right away, mark them in some
way, and plan to come back to them later. Do not waste time on questions that you
are not confident about as all questions are usually equal in point value.
1.
Yes: Good habit. Try to never leave any questions blank—there is a chance your
guess might be right and you will get the point value for it.
2.
Yes: Good habit. Students sometimes get questions wrong because they do not read
the directions correctly. If you are asked to select the best answer, then you do not
want to select the first answer that seems correct as it may not be the best answer.
3.
No: Cover up the multiple-choice options provided and try to answer the question
yourself. Then see if your answer is one of the options. If so, it most likely is
correct.
4.
Yes: It is a good habit to double check your answers. It can be easy to make careless
mistakes, but do not change your answer unless you are very certain your initial
response was wrong.
5.

No: It is more effective to spend a third of your time before writing your essay
exam answer brainstorming to organize your thoughts. Outline your answer and
then write it completely. If you write it before fully thinking out your answer, it
becomes difficult to add or change paragraphs as more ideas come to you.
6.
Yes: If the question is in present tense, the answer most likely will be also.
7.
Yes: Unless you know for certain that the answer is correct, absolutes, which
include words like all, always, and never, are usually wrong.
8.
No: Unless you are certain an answer you selected is incorrect, it is best not to
change your initial answer.
9.
Yes: When you answer questions that you are positive you know the answers to
first, it saves you time to focus on the more challenging questions and relaxes you
by building your confidence. Using this strategy is rewarding.
10.
Yes: Breathing deeply is good for you and your brain. It sends good chemicals
throughout your brain, making you feel calmer, and it also provides a needed boost
of oxygen to the brain, which often provides clarity and calm.
11.
Yes: It is good to know test-taking vocabulary. Often, students know the answer to a
test question, but they do not understand what is being asked and then answer
incorrectly. If a test question asks a student to contrast an apple and an orange, but
the student writes an answer that shows similarities between the two fruits, the
answer would be wrong, even if what the student wrote was factually correct.
12.
Preparing for a Test
There are Several Strategies You can Use to Help you prepare to take a test. Most
importantly, you need to understand and learn the information you are being tested on.
However, there are other strategies that can help you feel prepared. These strategies will
give you confidence. Think of them like a floating device as you “jump in” and take an
exam. Even if you are a good swimmer, the extra assistance keeps you afloat should the
waves of questions suddenly feel rough. If you have studied and know the material, your
knowledge and confidence will guide you through.
Prepare early. You can begin preparing for tests on the very first day of class.
Review your syllabus and your textbook(s). A syllabus is your contract with your
instructor. Put test dates in your planner, calendar, or schedule so you always
know when they are. Schedule dates to study for tests so that you know how to
plan for the test. Also, take the time to go through your textbook's table of contents
to get an idea of what you will be learning. When you are aware of when and what
you will be studying and when exams are coming, you will feel less anxious.

Avoid cramming. Cramming is the enemy of concentration. If you try to cram
several weeks' worth of information into one day of studying, you will not be able
to concentrate on the information long enough to thoroughly understand it.
During a test, your confidence will be shaken as you scramble to answer the
questions correctly. Study every day for each subject that you had that day.
Remember that the more you fire a network in your brain, the stronger it is.
Repetition is key! If you spend a few minutes every day reviewing, think how many
repetitions you will have before the test!
Review often. Plan reviews as part of your regularly weekly study schedule.
Reviews are much more than reading and rereading assignments. Make sure that
you also read and review lecture notes and ask yourself questions on the material
you do not know well. Review for several short periods rather than one long
period. You will find that you retain information better and get less fatigued. Your
brain needs time to process information. Review Chapter 9 for strategies to help
you take more effective notes.
Make study time intentional. When you study, it is sometimes useful to use special
items, like wearing a specific sweatshirt or hat. This gets you in the mindset to
study and can also signal to family members or roommates that you are studying.
When they see your item, they know to give you the time and quiet you need.
Test yourself. Create flashcards using your textbook markings to test yourself on
concepts or vocabulary words that may be giving you trouble. Develop questions
from the green-highlighted main ideas and yellow-highlighted major supporting
details. Use the card review system (CRS) for new vocabulary (see Chapter 3).
Review the cards in random order. Test yourself over and over (see Chapter 2 for
more on retrieval). From your flashcards, create a pile you can answer easily and a
pile for questions that stump you. It will help you know where to focus your time.
Think big. Focus on the big picture. Often, you will be able to plug in the minor
details if you understand the bigger picture. Study your margin notes—the items
that you identified as being the “main points” of your reading. If you understand
the bigger picture, it makes it easier to remember some of the details that support
it. If you focus on a million details, sometimes the main idea and larger picture get
lost and become difficult to remember.
Ask questions beforehand. Make sure you fully understand what you will be
tested on. Ask your instructor what course content the exam will cover and what
kinds of test questions you should prepare for. Find out if the exam is open-book or
open-notes. If it is, remember to bring the allowed items with you. Review Chapter
9 for strategies to help you take more effective notes.
Bring all the necessary supplies. Come prepared for the exam. Bring more than
one pencil or pen. Bring a calculator, if appropriate, and scrap paper to brainstorm
or draw to aid your memory retrieval.
Get a good night's sleep. A rested brain concentrates better. Research shows that

sleep helps to consolidate learning—it helps you remember what you learned!
Eat beforehand. Start with a good breakfast. What you really need on the morning
of a test is a combination of complex carbohydrates and protein: peanut butter on
whole-wheat toast with a glass of orange juice is a good choice. Avoid large
quantities of caffeine, sugar, and fat, and do not eat too much or you will feel
sleepy. Do try to stay hydrated by drinking water.
Coping with Test Anxiety
Take the Following Self-Assessment, and honestly answer how each statement relates to
you and tests by marking it as True or False.
Test Anxiety Scale
Developed by Lois McGinley
 While taking an important exam, I find myself thinking
how much brighter the other students are than I am.
1.
 If I knew I was going to take an intelligence test, I would
not feel confident and relaxed.
2.
 While taking an important exam, I perspire a great deal.
3.
 During class examinations, I find myself thinking of things
unrelated to the actual course materials.
4.
 I feel very panicky when I have to take a surprise exam.
5.
 During a test, I find myself thinking of the consequences
of failing.
6.
 After important tests, I am frequently so tense my
stomach gets upset.
7.
 I freeze up on tests and final exams.
8.
 Getting good grades on one test does not seem to increase
my confidence on the second.
9.
 I sometimes feel my heart beating very fast during
important exams.
10.
 After taking a test, I always feel I could have done better
than I actually did.
11.

 I usually get depressed after taking a test.
12.
 When taking a test, my emotional feelings interfere with
my performance.
13.
 During a course examination, I frequently get so nervous
that I forget facts I really know.
14.
 I seem to defeat myself while working on important tests.
15.
 The harder I work at taking a test or studying for one, the
more confused I get.
16.
 As soon as an exam is over, I try to stop worrying about it,
but I just can't.
17.
 During exams, I sometimes wonder if I'll ever get through
school.
18.
 I would rather write a paper than take an examination for
my grade in a course.
19.
 I wish examinations did not bother me so much.
20.
 I think I could do much better on tests if I could take them
alone and not feel pressured by time limits.
21.
 Thinking about the grade I may get in a course interferes
with my studying and performance on tests.
22.
 If examinations could be done away with, I think I would
actually learn more.
23.
 On exams I take the attitude, “If I know it now, there's no
point in worrying about it.” But I still worry.
24.
 I don't understand why I get so upset about tests.
25.
 I do not study any harder for final exams than for the rest
of my coursework.
26.
 Even when I am well prepared for a test, I feel very
anxious about it.
27.
 I do not enjoy eating before an important test.
28.
 Before am important examination, I find my hands or
arms trembling.
29.
 I seldom feel the need for “cramming” before an exam.
30.
 The college should recognize that some students are more
31.

nervous than others about tests and that this affects their performance.
 It seems to me that examination periods should not be
made such intense situations.
32.
 I dread courses where the instructor has the habit of
giving “pop” quizzes.
33.
Source: © Lois McGinley. Reprinted with permission.
SCORING: Total the number of “true” answers you have. This is your test anxiety score.
A score of 12 or below ranks in the low test anxiety range. However, you may not
realize that a little anxiety is good. It can keep you on your toes and help you
concentrate. If you are too relaxed, you may miss key words. Stay relaxed, but
maintain focus.
A score of 13 to 20 ranks in the medium test anxiety range. Although you probably
handle stress well, you may benefit from learning some test-taking strategies to
help you feel more confident.
Scoring 21 or greater is a good indication that you experience considerable anxiety
when taking tests. Meet with your instructor to learn more about the resources
that are available on your campus to help address your issues and focus on all the
strategies presented in this appendix. Many students experience test anxiety, but
there are many ways for you to overcome the anxiety.
Sometimes students perform poorly on a test not because they did not study but because
their anxiety over the test impairs their thinking. This is quite common in math classes,
for example, and is known as “math anxiety.”
The brain is designed to respond to threat with a survival mechanism. However, this
mechanism has a negative effect when it comes to learning and test taking. When you
feel “threatened” by a test, you put your survival mechanism into motion. Your best plan
is to keep these threat alarms from going off in the first place. Thinking of a test as a
challenge rather than a threat will keep the negative reactions of stress from going into
action and making it harder to think well. It is only one test, not your identity. Mentally
reframe your approach.
If the threat (fight-or-flight) alarm has gone off, you need to kick it back out. The brain
has a feed-forward and a feed-backward system. When you think about a test, you may
get anxious. This sends signals to the body, such as tightened muscles and faster
breathing. This system helps you in a dangerous situation, like running from a tiger, but
this kind of response hurts you when you are taking a test. However, you can send a
different message back to the brain. Slow breathing sends messages to the brain that all
is calm and all is well. Forcing yourself to take a few calm breaths sends a message to the
brain to turn off the anxiety. Taking a few slow breaths before every test can help you to
combat the threat that your brain perceives.
Practice deep breathing exercises. The following exercise is helpful when you are
feeling stressed. Do this exercise the night before and the morning of an exam, if
possible. Deep breaths will oxygenate the brain, giving it energy and allow it to

function optimally. Stand up and stretch by reaching high with both hands. Try to
reach for the ceiling. Slowly bend over and touch your toes. Let your arms loosely
dangle by your feet. Repeat. Now position yourself so that you are comfortable and
close your eyes. The preferred way to complete the remainder of this exercise is to
lie down on a couch, floor, or bed. If you prefer to sit, make sure that your posture
is good, keeping your back straight. Do not cross your arms or legs. Take a deep
slow breath and slowly count to four. Exhale slowly, again to the count of four. As
you exhale, notice how your body relaxes and becomes calm. Breathe deeply again
to the count of four. Exhale to the count of four. While continuing to take deep
breaths, relax all of your muscles one group at a time. Tell each muscle group to
relax: face muscles, eyes, mouth, and forehead. Drop your tongue from the roof of
your mouth. (When we are tense, our tongues stick to the roofs of our mouths.)
Relax your neck, shoulders, chest, and upper arms. Continue to breathe deeply.
Notice how your body relaxes and becomes calm. Relax your hands and each
finger. Relax your stomach. Relax your upper back. Now relax your lower back.
Relax your upper legs. Relax your knees; again, notice how your body relaxes and
becomes calm. Relax your lower legs. Relax your feet. Relax each toe. Keep
breathing deeply. Let the anxiety go. Take notice of how good you feel. You feel
relaxed and calm. Enjoy how good you feel. Appreciate how you have created this
calm and peaceful atmosphere within yourself. Keep your attention on your body.
Wait a few moments before opening your eyes. When you open your eyes, you will
feel refreshed and peaceful.
Stay calm. If you have prepared well for an exam, you can be confident that you
will do well. Taking a few deep breaths right before the test starts helps you relax
and focus your concentration. Close your eyes and think about your deep
breathing exercise and the calm feeling that you had.
Think positively. Decide that you will get the most out of each class session and
from your instructors. Thinking positively increases your ability to concentrate in
the classroom and do well on exams. Sometimes the answers will come if you keep
a clear head and don't panic.
Do not take things too seriously. Keep the test in perspective. A test is an
opportunity to show your instructor what you have learned. If you have studied
your best, know that you have given it your best. If you fail a test, it does not mean
that you are a failure. It just means that you may need to try different approaches
to how you study. Meet with your instructor and find out what you missed and
what you can do better next time.
Practicing Time Management during Tests

Arrive early on test days. Research indicates that sitting in your regular seat may
help to improve your memory and concentration. If you intend on sitting in your
seat, make sure to arrive early enough to secure it. Arriving early will also give you
the opportunity to breathe deeply and organize your materials and thoughts.
Avoid distracters. Avoid the same distracters during test time that you would
during study time. Do not sit next to your friends or by windows or doors if at all
possible. Try to sit as close to the front as you can in case your instructor writes
important directions on the board. This will also decrease the distraction of other
students' test behavior.
Do not be concerned if other students finish before you do. Set a pace that is
comfortable for you.
Answer the easy questions first. If you have 50 minutes to answer 50 questions,
pace yourself. If each item is worth the same amount of points, do not spend five
minutes on one question when you could be correctly answering four others. Skip
over the questions you are not sure about, mark them with a question mark, and
return to them later, if you have time. Oftentimes, reading other easier questions
will trigger your memory, which will help you find answers to the questions you
struggled with. Then, when you tackle more difficult questions, do not panic if the
answers do not immediately come to mind. Relax. Breathe. And silently talk
yourself through the question and its solution.
Answering Test Questions
Skim the test. Before you start answering questions, skim the whole exam to get
an overview of what to expect.
Read all of the directions. It is important to know exactly what you are being
asked to do. Also, listen to any verbal test instructions carefully, and be sure that
you understand any last-minute changes the instructor may announce.
Read each question carefully and identify its purpose. Ask yourself, “What
information is this question asking me to provide?” Circle clue words to help you
focus on the question's purpose.
Read the questions as they are, not as you would like them to be. Do not add
more to the question so that it fits the response you want to make rather than the
one being asked for.
Do not become flustered by unfamiliar words and phrases. Try to determine the
meaning of unfamiliar words using context clues that you learned in Chapter 3.
Then translate the question into your own words. If you are unable to determine

the meaning, mark the question so that it is easy to locate later, and come back to
it. Very often, a question presented later on in the exam may use the word or
concept and define it. Come back to it later.
Do not change your answers. Your first instinct is usually right, but do change
your response if you are absolutely sure it is wrong or you made an accidental
error. If you are unsure, leave your responses alone. Do not let your doubt cloud
your concentration.
Use your memory strategies for retrieval. You will do better on exams when you
consistently use memory strategies while studying because they help you store
and efficiently recall what you have learned. See Chapter 2 to review memory
strategies.
Strategies Speciﬁc to Objective Tests
Objective Tests are exams where the questions have only one right answer. Question
types include multiple-choice, true-and-false, matching, and fill-in-the-blank. There is
usually no disputing a correct answer.
Multiple-Choice
Answer multiple-choice questions yourself. Attempt to answer multiple-choice
questions without looking at the answer choices first. This practice will make you
more likely to choose a correct answer when you look at the options and see one
that matches your answer. It will boost your memory and increase your
confidence when your answer matches one of the options.
Do not make assumptions. No matter what kind of answer pattern you think has
been established in a test, do not assume anything. It is possible to have four
correct “c” answers in a row. Stick with what you absolutely know or think is
correct.
Write on your exam. Unless you have been directed to not write on the exam,
mark up your exam. Cross off the answer options you have eliminated. Underline
key terms in the question. Draw pictures to help you remember what you have
learned.
Make sure your answer is the best answer. If you are asked to select the best
answer, do not select the first correct answer. Make sure it is actually the best
answer. If you are unsure, skip it, and return to it later. Just because an option is
true does not mean that it answers the question correctly. If you are asked to pick
the best answer, read all of the options and then decide which one answers exactly
what is being asked.
Avoid absolutes and universals. Avoid answer options that use absolutes, such as
all, every, and always. These tend to be wrong. Rather, select options that say often,
most always, and in many instances, as these tend to be correct.

Avoid double negatives. Not unimportant = important. If something is
unimportant then it is not important (remember the prefix un- means “not”).
However, if it is not unimportant, then it is important. Two negatives equal a
positive.
Note the grammar used in multiple-choice questions and answers. If you choose
an answer that does not fit grammatically with the question stem, you have
probably chosen the wrong answer. Make certain the verb tense matches in the
question and in the answer options. For example, if you are asked, “Who wrote the
novel The Caper?” the verb tense should match.
Jim and Raul will have written the novel The Caper.
a.
Professor Anter wrote the novel The Caper. (correct)
b.
Sandy JJ writes the novel The Caper.
c.
Remember that most multiple-choice tests include a main idea question or
questions. Make sure you understand the main idea of everything you read.
True-and-False
Underline key terms. This will help you focus on exactly what you are being asked
to determine the correctness of.
Watch for any inaccuracies. If any part of the statement is incorrect, the whole
statement is false.
When in doubt, guess true. There are usually more true statements on exams than
false because it is easier for an instructor to write factual statements.
Remember absolutes and universals. As discussed above in strategies for
multiple-choice questions, questions that use absolutes (words such as always,
never, every, and all) are usually false.
Matching and Fill-in-the-Blank
Study often. Because these types of tests require you to memorize facts, study
regularly and vary your study methods so you create more pathways for learning
the information. Repetition and rehearsal are keys to success for these types of
tests. Matching questions require you to know specific information, but you can
see possible answers. Fill-in-the-blank questions can be one of the most
challenging types, especially if you have not studied, because there are no options
from which to guess.
Learn the discipline-specific vocabulary. These types of questions usually focus
on key terms from the textbook and discipline, so make sure you are familiar with
them. Learn the names of key people, places, things, and events introduced in the
material on which you are being tested. Learn key processes introduced.

Strategies Speciﬁc to Essay Exams
Subjective Tests are exams where your thoughts are required, like responding to an
essay prompt. You provide the complete response based on a question presented to you.
Although your instructor will most likely have key features you need to address for
points toward your grade on a subjective test, you can show how much you know using
your own thoughts.
Write on your exam. Underline key terms in essay questions so you know exactly
how to answer and what needs to be included.
Brainstorm. It is usually a good idea to spend one third of your time
brainstorming. List all the information you know about the topic; then organize it.
Very often, students jump into writing and end up forgetting key information.
Understand exam terminology. The way questions are written can give you clues
about how to answer them. If you do not understand exam terminology, you can
perform poorly on tests even though you know the material. Study the following
terms, which frequently appear in test questions and essay exams.
Analyze: Look at individual parts and examine each critically.
Compare: Bring out the points of similarity.
Contrast: Bring out the points of difference.
Criticize: State your opinion and support your opinion by using examples.
Define: State the meaning of a word or concept; place it in the class to which
it belongs.
Describe: Tell about, give an account of or characteristics of something.
Discuss: Present a detailed argument or consideration of a topic.
Enumerate: List and explain each point in concise form.
Evaluate: Make a judgment based on specific criteria.
Explain: Make clear, tell how to do by giving an example. Tell as is.
Illustrate: Use a chart, word picture, diagram, or concrete example of what
you are being asked to “illustrate.”
Identify: Establish the essential characteristics.
Infer: Draw a conclusion based on given facts that allow you to make a
prediction.
Interpret: Present the subject at hand in understandable terms.
Justify: Show good reasons for, give evidence to support your position.

Outline: Summarize by using a series of headings and subheadings.
Prove: Establish the truth by providing factual evidence or logical reasons.
Sequence: Arrange events or a process in a meaningful order, from
beginning to end.
Summarize: Provide a brief overview of the main idea and major details.
Synthesize: Put the pieces together, combine the parts into a coherent
whole.
Trace: Review in detail, step by step.
What to do after the Test
Just because You have Finished the Test does not mean your learning is over. These are
some strategies you can use immediately after you have taken a test or after you have
received your grade.
Write in your journal. Predict how well you believe that you did. Comment on
your study techniques and if you think there is any room for improvement. Were
there certain test questions that you were not prepared for? Why were you not
prepared?
Reward yourself. If you honestly prepared for the exam, take a mini-break. You
have earned it. Perhaps go out for a meal or a movie or be with family and friends.
Analyze what you got wrong. Once you receive your test back, use it as an
opportunity to learn what you may have missed. Find out why you answered
incorrectly. Get clarification from the instructor if the correct answer does not
make sense to you. Write down the questions missed and explanations in your
journal. Also, return to the page in your journal where you wrote your prediction.
Write down your score next to your prediction as a confirmation or as a signal that
you need to do something differently. If you did not get the score you thought,
meet with your instructor or a tutor.
Use the test as a study guide for final exams. Past tests make great study guides to
help you prepare for the final exam, which is usually cumulative.

Instructor’s Manual 
 
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States 
College Reading 
The Science & Strategies of Expert Readers 
Janet Nay Zadina 
Tulane University School of Medicine 
Rita Smilkstein 
North Seattle Community College, 
Emeritus Western Washington University 
Deborah Daiek 
Schoolcraft College 
Nancy Anter 
Schoolcraft College 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

 Printed in the United States of America 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 17 16 15 14 13 
© 2014 Wadsworth, Cengage Learning 
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the 
copyright herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or 
used in any form or by any means graphic, electronic, or 
mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying, 
recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, 
information networks, or information storage and retrieval 
systems, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 
1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher except as may be permitted by the 
license terms below. 
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at 
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support,  
1-800-354-9706 
For permission to use material from this text or product, submit 
all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions 
Further permissions questions can be emailed to 
permissionrequest@cengage.com 
ISBN-13: 978-1-133-95914-4 
ISBN-10: 1-133-95914-8 
Wadsworth 
20 Channel Center Street 
Boston, MA 02210 
USA 
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized 
learning solutions with office locations around the globe, 
including Singapore, the United Kingdom, Australia, 
Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local office at: 
www.cengage.com/global 
Cengage Learning products are represented in 
Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd. 
To learn more about Wadsworth, visit 
www.cengage.com/wadsworth 
Purchase any of our products at your local college 
store or at our preferred online store 
www.cengagebrain.com 
NOTE: UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES MAY THIS MATERIAL OR ANY PORTION THEREOF BE SOLD, LICENSED, AUCTIONED, 
OR OTHERWISE REDISTRIBUTED EXCEPT AS MAY BE PERMITTED BY THE LICENSE TERMS HEREIN. 
READ IMPORTANT LICENSE INFORMATION 
Dear Professor or Other Supplement Recipient: 
Cengage Learning has provided you with this product (the 
“Supplement”) for your review and, to the extent that you adopt 
the associated textbook for use in connection with your course 
(the “Course”), you and your students who purchase the 
textbook may use the Supplement as described below. 
Cengage Learning has established these use limitations in 
response to concerns raised by authors, professors, and other 
users regarding the pedagogical problems stemming from 
unlimited distribution of Supplements. 
Cengage Learning hereby grants you a nontransferable license 
to use the Supplement in connection with the Course, subject to 
the following conditions. The Supplement is for your personal, 
noncommercial use only and may not be reproduced, or 
distributed, except that portions of the Supplement may be 
provided to your students in connection with your instruction of 
the Course, so long as such students are advised that they may 
not copy or distribute any portion of the Supplement to any third 
party. Test banks, and other testing materials may be made 
available in the classroom and collected at the end of each class 
session, or posted electronically as described herein. Any 
material posted electronically must be through a password-
protected site, with all copy and download functionality disabled, 
and accessible solely by your students who have purchased the 
associated textbook for the Course. You may not sell, license, 
auction, or otherwise redistribute the Supplement in any form. We 
ask that you take reasonable steps to protect the Supplement from 
unauthorized use, reproduction, or distribution. Your use of the 
Supplement indicates your acceptance of the conditions set forth in 
this Agreement. If you do not accept these conditions, you must 
return the Supplement unused within 30 days of receipt. 
All rights (including without limitation, copyrights, patents, and trade 
secrets) in the Supplement are and will remain the sole and 
exclusive property of Cengage Learning and/or its licensors. The 
Supplement is furnished by Cengage Learning on an “as is” basis 
without any warranties, express or implied. This Agreement will be 
governed by and construed pursuant to the laws of the State of 
New York, without regard to such State’s conflict of law rules. 
Thank you for your assistance in helping to safeguard the integrity 
of the content contained in this Supplement. We trust you find the 
Supplement a useful teaching tool. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
1
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
THE NEW SCIENCE OF TEACHING AND LEARNING 
Background...................................................................................................................................... 4 
Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 4 
Benefits of Brain-Compatible Teaching........................................................................................... 4 
Make Your Classroom More Brain Compatible .............................................................................. 5 
Why Teach Reading? ....................................................................................................................... 7 
Why Teach Students about the Brain?............................................................................................. 7 
 
HOW TO TEACH WITH THE FEATURES IN SCIENCE AND STRATEGIES 
Student to Student ............................................................................................................................ 8 
Making Connections ........................................................................................................................ 9 
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment................................................................................................ 9 
Comprehension Checks.................................................................................................................. 10 
Tip from the Brain Doctor ............................................................................................................. 10 
Practice with a Reading Passage .................................................................................................. 11 
Chapter Summary .......................................................................................................................... 11 
Post Test......................................................................................................................................... 11 
Brain Strengths Options................................................................................................................. 12 
 
COURSE TEACHING TIPS 
The First Day of Class: Icebreakers.............................................................................................. 13 
Teaching Tips to Engage Students................................................................................................. 15 
Mind Mapping in Science and Strategies....................................................................................... 17 
Creating and Facilitating Effective Groups................................................................................... 19 
Using Journals with Science and Strategies .................................................................................. 30 
Sample Syllabi................................................................................................................................ 31 
 
FEATURES, TEACHING TIPS, AND TESTS  
CHAPTER 1: MAKING BRAIN CONNECTIONS TO BECOME AN EXPERT READER 
Author Spotlight................................................................................................................ 46 
Activities............................................................................................................................ 48 
CHAPTER 2: REMEMBERING WHAT YOU READ 
Author Spotlight................................................................................................................ 52 
Activities............................................................................................................................ 52 
CHAPTER 3: DEVELOPING YOUR COLLEGE VOCABULARY 
Author Spotlight................................................................................................................ 57 
Activities............................................................................................................................ 58 
CHAPTER 4: LOCATING STATED MAIN IDEAS 
Author Spotlight................................................................................................................ 60 
Activities............................................................................................................................ 61 
CHAPTER 5: FINDING SUPPORTING DETAILS 
Author Spotlight................................................................................................................ 65 
Activities............................................................................................................................ 65 
CHAPTER 6: USING INFERENCE TO IDENTIFY IMPLIED MAIN IDEAS 
Author Spotlight................................................................................................................ 67 
Activities............................................................................................................................ 68 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
2
CHAPTER 7: RECOGNIZING PATTERNS OF ORGANIZATION 
Author Spotlight................................................................................................................ 72 
Activities............................................................................................................................ 72 
CHAPTER 8: USING PREVIEW, STUDY-READ, AND REVIEW (PSR) 
Author Spotlight................................................................................................................ 77 
Activities............................................................................................................................ 79 
CHAPTER 9: TAKING CONTROL OF YOUR TEXTBOOK: MARKING AND NOTE TAKING 
Author Spotlight................................................................................................................ 82 
Activities............................................................................................................................ 82 
CHAPTER 10: USING VISUALS TO INCREASE YOUR UNDERSTANDING OF TEXTBOOKS  
Author Spotlight................................................................................................................ 86 
Activities............................................................................................................................ 87 
CHAPTER 11: UNDERSTANDING AND CREATING ARGUMENTS 
Author Spotlight................................................................................................................ 90 
Activities............................................................................................................................ 91 
CHAPTER 12: READING ARGUMENTS CRITICALLY 
Author Spotlight................................................................................................................ 95 
Activities............................................................................................................................ 95 
CHAPTER 13: READING BEYOND THE WORDS 
Author Spotlight................................................................................................................ 97 
Activities............................................................................................................................ 98 
 
Test Bank questions and answers can be found on the instructor companion website for this title. Go to 
www.cengagebrain.com to locate the specific book site. 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
3
AUTHOR INTRODUCTION 
 
From the Desk of Janet Zadina 
To me the most exciting feature of Science and Strategies is that we are teaching students about how their 
brain works! We are not only teaching them that they can change their brain, but also showing them how 
they can change their brain by leading them through activities that strengthen their learning processes. As 
someone who teaches teachers about how the brain learns, I am thrilled to have an opportunity to bring 
students into this conversation. As a researcher, I know that some research has shown that when low 
performing students are taught about how their brain learns and that they can change their brain, their 
grades rise, while those who were not given that information had grades that continued on a downward 
trend. As a teacher, I know that students are more motivated when they understand why they are being 
asked to do a particular task. As a result, this book is very personal and exciting to me as it does what I 
think we now know all books should do—that is to teach students how to learn the content or skills we 
present to them and to share with them the important information that we have about the neurobiology of 
learning. 
 
From the Desk of Rita Smilkstein 
Science and Strategies is different from all other books that teach the skills and strategies of how to be an 
expert reader because its methods are based not only on research about how the brain learns, but also on 
unique research with more than 9,000 people on how human beings naturally learn, how they are born to 
learn. This research is discussed in Chapter 1, and the natural human learning process it describes informs 
the methods and approach used throughout the book. When students are given the opportunity to learn the 
way they are born to learn—the way the brain naturally learns—they are motivated, engaged, and 
successful. The brain-based opportunities throughout the book for students to think critically, practice the 
skills they are learning, and interact in a community of learners make it possible for all students to 
successfully learn and use the skills and strategies of expert readers. 
 
From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
My favorite feature of Science and Strategies is that it truly promotes authentic learning. From the very 
beginning of the book, students are guided and encouraged to think about their reading and thinking, and 
to think about how others think, which gives students a more global perspective. All lessons are modeled 
for easier transference of skills. Comprehension Checks are embedded assessments, which let instructors 
know how well students are learning. Scaffolding is used to foster confidence and independent 
application of the skills, which is the most important aspect of the text. Through the combination of brain 
science and reading theory taught throughout this textbook, students emerge from the class knowing what 
it takes to become expert readers. 
 
From the Desk of Nancy Anter 
We designed each chapter of Science and Strategies to model an effective approach to college reading. 
This consistent framework for the chapters is probably the aspect of the book I like the most. The quote at 
the beginning of each chapter offers inspiration. The Student to Student feature provides empathy from 
another student who has experienced the struggles and triumphs of college. The Making Connections 
feature encourages students to access their background knowledge before delving into the meat of the 
chapter. The Brain Connections: Self-Assessment reinforces the idea of metacognition—that students 
should monitor their own learning. If every student began every reading assignment with inspiration, an 
understanding that they are not alone in the college challenge, a habit of accessing relevant background 
knowledge, and the responsibility of knowing how they learn best, our colleges would be filled with 
reading experts. This book is our best attempt at making that happen. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
4
THE NEW SCIENCE OF TEACHING AND LEARNING 
 
Background 
 
In the last few years, research on teaching and learning has exploded, including research coming from the 
fields of neuroscience, medicine, and psychology. In fact, a new specialty has arisen—Educational 
Neuroscience. In the past, teachers used the term brain-based to speak about these new insights from 
brain research into the teaching and learning process. As this field has progressed, we have moved to new 
terminology and new insights, and we can talk about how science, particularly neuroscience, has 
informed our practice in the classroom. Historically, some untenable leaps were made, but now, as more 
and more scientists are working with educators and building this bridge between science and education, 
we have learned more about underlying processes, environmental factors, and student differences that 
affect learning. Some of this research has implications for actual classroom teaching strategies and 
student study strategies. While brain research still does not prove anything about what we do in the 
classroom, it certainly is providing a new window into the learning process and giving us insights that we 
can translate into practice. This textbook is designed to work with new information coming from all of the 
cognitive and medical sciences that are illuminating the field of education. Education is at the edge of an 
exciting new frontier in which new technologies in brain imaging are leading to new insights which lead 
to new scientific studies involving students leading to new implications for our classrooms. Many steps 
are required from the brain imaging to the classroom implications, but this new bridge is being crossed 
and this book is designed with this new information in mind. 
 
Introduction 
 
College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers was written in part by a cognitive 
neuroscientist who specializes in Educational Neuroscience. Throughout the chapters, you will find tips, 
information, and strategies coming from this field. Underlying the pedagogy is an understanding of what 
we currently know about how the brain learns best. Implications from brain research underlie much of 
what is in the book, in some cases explicitly and in other cases implicitly. Throughout this book you will 
see lessons and activities that are designed in a way that support the learning process as we are coming to 
understand it. Traditional lessons and activities are still included for those who prefer to teach and test in 
traditional style, but at the same time additional options are provided that approach the lessons differently. 
This combination may be the best of both worlds. Teachers can do what they have seen works best with 
their students, while having an opportunity to explore non-traditional approaches, activities, and 
assessments if they so desire. This textbook makes it easy for a teacher to create a more brain-compatible 
classroom by simply taking advantage of many of the features in this book. 
 
Benefits of Brain-Compatible Teaching 
 
The benefits of teaching with an awareness of brain research are many. When you as a teacher understand 
the biological nature of learning (discussed explicitly in Chapter 1 and in segments throughout the book), 
you can design your lessons accordingly. This explanation of the learning process is presented to students 
in this textbook because research shows that when students learn that their brain is malleable—that it 
changes as a result of learning—their achievement rises. This book is designed to increase student 
achievement by providing them with this important information immediately. We also know that when 
students understand why something should be done, they are more willing to do it. Therefore, students 
learn about their brain and the why behind the activities and strategies. This transparency of the learning 
process is a unique feature of this book. Teachers and students acquire these new insights into learning 
together. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
5
Additional benefits to this new approach to teaching and learning accrue throughout the book. 
The design of the activities, the sometimes unusual process by which a student is taken through a lesson, 
the order of activities, and the additional options are based on an understanding of the importance of 
several key aspects of teaching based on neuroscience insights.  
Making Your Classroom More Brain Compatible 
There are many ways to create a more brain-compatible classroom that are implicitly and explicitly 
presented throughout the textbook. Teacher Tips, Tips from the Brain Doctor for the student, and textual 
information provide you with this information as you go. However, some of the key strategies and 
insights underlying this textbook are: 
•
Learning involves making connections. The chapters start with a section called Making
Connections. This section enables you to guide the student through connecting some of the
concepts that will be learned to an existing neural network—what the student is already familiar
with. It can be used in multiple ways: class discussion, journal activity, group discussion, or
individual reflection.
•
It isn't enough to fire it, the student must wire it. This means repetition, but not necessarily
“drill and kill.” Neuroscience has made clear the importance of repetition and also the sequencing
of it, so this underlies the instructions and activities in the book. The repetition or practice occurs
in a recursive and spiral fashion and is often achieved by activating more than one pathway or
process.
•
Metacognition is a key factor in learning. Therefore, students are asked to draw their dendrites
as a metaphorical metacognitive activity to get them to stop and assess what they know with the
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment feature. It also is a factor in reminding them that they have
the power to change their brain and to control their learning. A sense of progress is rewarding to
the brain and this feature provides them with that sense of progress by asking them to complete
the self-assessment early and again later in the learning process.
•
Students learn better when they figure things out for themselves. This principle from brain
research relates to several learning pathways. When students figure things out for themselves, it is
rewarding to the brain in the form of chemicals that make them feel good. Many of the activities
in the book are designed in such a way as to create this reward. In addition, when students figure
things out, they own it, rather than when they memorize it. This process is also motivating and
engaging. Rigor is rewarding to the brain, so lessons get more challenging as they go along. This
stimulates students who may learn quickly or easily at first and provides a sense of progress,
another sense leading to rewarding chemicals in the brain.
•
Relationships are key to learning. Therefore, most of the activities are designed in such a way
that you can put students into groups to do part or all of the activity. In addition, Brain Strengths
Options at the end of each chapter provide opportunities for collaborative learning.
•
We are probably all wired differently. Teachers want to address learning differences in the
classroom but find this a challenge. The Brain Strengths Options is a feature designed to work
with learning differences. The variety of options allows for students to self-select an activity that
uses their strengths. It is critical that students be allowed to select the activity rather than it being
assigned. We want to tap into strengths (which they will naturally select) rather than increase
stress by giving an assignment that taps into a weakness, such as asking them to show the class a
drawing or to sing for the class. It is encouraged that a project be part of every chapter, but you
may find that class time does not allow for this. This feature can be used in other ways. Students
may select one of these as an alternative to traditional testing if you wish to make that option
available. Alternatively, you may allow a student to do a project to make up for missed work.
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
6
• 
Learning is more effective when it is meaningful and relates to real life. The readings, 
activities, and examples were selected with this brain-research principle in mind. The Student to 
Student feature capitalizes on this. And, Brain Strengths Options is an attempt to create more 
meaningful activities than that of answering objective questions. 
 
As you work with the book, you will gather ideas that you can use to design your own brain-
compatible activities. In addition to textbook material, the classroom environment is also important to an 
effective learning environment based on what we know about brain research and engagement, motivation, 
relationship to physiology, and emotion. The most important aspect of the classroom environment is 
safety—emotional safety. Sarcasm, anger, or demeaning comments, of course are not appropriate, as 
teachers know. However, this goes beyond that. Freedom to fail and try again gives a feeling of safety. 
Having choice is key to the kind of emotion that is effective for learning. Not only do the Brain Strengths 
Options provide choices, you can find other ways to give students choice wherever possible as 
appropriate. Allowing students to work with their strengths when possible through use of Brain Strengths 
Options gives them a feeling that they will be able to do some of the work and builds success. Starting 
with something likely to be achievable on the first attempt is another concept coming from brain research. 
The lessons start simple and build to more challenging tasks. Use the Brain Connections: Self-Assessment 
feature as a way to remind students of the progress that they are making. Address testing anxiety with 
some of the suggestions provided in the appendix of the textbook. This is an important issue because 
anxiety can make it more difficult for students to perform well on tests, thus creating a misleading 
impression of their true ability. 
 
Some simple steps will help you make your overall course more brain compatible:  
 
Addressing classroom behavior is an important first step. It is not compatible with what we 
know about emotion and learning to scare students the first day or to start off hard and get easier, as 
previous maxims indicate. Negative emotion and fear is not conducive to learning. However, starting out 
firm yet positive is important. By providing students with a clear, written list of procedures (rules) and 
consequences you are creating a safe yet effective classroom. Be sure to include that bullying or mocking 
another student will not be tolerated and state the consequence (sent to dean, referred to counselor, etc.)  
 
Another important step is to form relationships. Learn students’ names and have them learn each 
other’s names. One exciting way to do this is to tell them you are stepping out of the classroom for ten 
minutes and when you return everyone must know everyone else’s name. That is appropriate for a class of 
30 or less and it is exciting and attainable. In addition, you want to address them by name. Not only does 
that improve attention, but also it creates positive emotion that enhances learning. Take stiff paper and 
fold it in half lengthwise. Write their name on one side in big letters and have them bring it to class and 
stand it up on their desk until all names are learned. If they forget it, have them make one and keep some 
tape handy so they can tape it to the front of their desk. Tell them you are doing this because their name is 
important to you, but you have 100+ (or whatever the case may be) names to learn. Make sure you use 
their names. 
 
A third important step is to provide a clear, simple syllabus. Design it with the student in mind. 
Include deadlines. Create a calendar for every month with holidays, test days, and deadlines. Just as with 
your handout on procedures and consequences, having a sense of what to expect is important to the 
proper learning environment. Provide assignments in written fashion whenever possible. Keep in mind 
that students ages 18-25 are still developing their frontal lobes and may not exercise the executive brain 
as well as older students would. They may struggle with using good judgment, meeting deadlines, 
planning early for tests, and budgeting their time. Consider giving one free “pass” for a deadline not met. 
However, keep in mind also that a teacher’s job is to help students grow their frontal lobes well by 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
7
providing them with and expecting them to meet deadlines and schedules. Our job is not to make school 
easy but to make it engaging! Set a challenge and expect them to rise to it, but keep some scaffolding 
handy. There are example syllabi on page 31 of this Instructor’s Manual that you can refer to as well. 
 
Finally, since research shows that when students understand how much control they have over 
their learning they rise in achievement, be sure to insist they read the part of the text that instructs 
them in the learning process. This is the best thing you can do for your students. You will convince 
them by your leadership that learning about their brain and learning about learning is important with an 
emphasis on this important aspect of the textbook. Perhaps you may feel that learning study skills is a 
topic best taught elsewhere or something that can be omitted when time is short, but this textbook goes 
beyond study skills—it is how to be a better learner, which translates into being a better reader when 
working through Science and Strategies. Yes, working through this textbook is important and will make 
them a better reader, but teaching them about their brain, how to use it, and how much control they have 
over the process will enhance their learning in all classes and throughout life.  
 
Why Teach Reading? 
 
Reading is not a normal activity. Yes, you read that correctly. There is no single part of the brain devoted 
to reading as there is for vision or hearing. Instead, there are multiple parts of the brain working together 
to do a task for which the brain was not originally designed. Reading uses parts of the brain designed for 
other tasks and recruits them in this task that is relatively new in human history. Therefore, learning to 
read requires wiring a pathway that is effective and efficient for reading. Neuroimaging shows us that 
while most good readers use a similar pathway in the brain that is efficient and effective, those with 
dyslexia sometimes use an alternative pathway. This pathway is not as efficient or effective. In fact, often 
those with dyslexia must use a compensatory pathway or compensatory strategies to accomplish this quite 
intricate skill of reading. 
 
Science and Strategies was written with this understanding in mind. Topics are selected to help 
the reader consciously learn the skills and strategies of expert readers. Some will struggle with this more 
than others depending upon their prior reading experience and their “wiring” for reading. Therefore, 
opportunities for compensation are included. Suggestions for leading with strengths are provided. Brain 
Strength Options also reminds students that while reading may be a weakness, they have other strengths 
that can be used in life to compensate and to support achievement. 
 
Why Teach Students about the Brain? 
 
Recent neuroscience research studies indicate that when students learn that the brain is malleable and that 
it changes as a result of experience, their achievement rises. Therefore, Science and Strategies provides 
explicit information throughout the book about how the activities change the way they have been using 
their brain or help them create more effective brain “wiring.” 
 
A unique feature of Science and Strategies is the chapter on the memory process. It takes the 
student beyond “I am not good at memorizing” to an understanding of how the brain creates a memory, 
and the steps that a student can take to consciously create stronger memories. A difficulty that may be 
invisible to teachers but can underlie reading comprehension problems is working memory. Teachers 
think that a student can’t comprehend even though he or she seems to be a good reader, but this may 
actually be a deficit in working memory capacity. The student cannot hold the entire sentence or 
paragraph in working memory long enough to process the information and make sense of it. To our 
knowledge, this is the first and only textbook on the market that addresses this underlying issue of 
working memory. The textbook shows students how to deal with this issue and break down material into 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
8
units that they can process. It is very empowering to students to understand that it is not that they can’t 
comprehend, but that they may be “biting off more than they can chew” for their working memory and 
how to compensate for this. 
 
Vocabulary instruction is included throughout the textbook because learning means making 
connections in the brain, but if students have no understanding of the concept, they cannot make a 
connection. If they can’t “fire it” then they certainly can’t “wire it.” Again, the importance of this is made 
explicit to the student. 
 
Oftentimes students have trouble reading because they do not understand what is important and 
what to focus on when reading. Explicit strategies throughout the book help students learn this skill of 
evaluating what they read and making sense of it. 
 
 
HOW TO TEACH WITH THE FEATURES IN SCIENCE AND STRATEGIES 
 
Science and Strategies includes specific features, which were designed with both the instructor and 
student in mind. The features are designed to provide relevancy, motivation, formative and summative 
assessments, collaborative experiences, as well as independent learning. It’s not easy motivating students 
who initially don’t want to be in a developmental reading class. By teaching students that academic 
success isn’t about intelligence you will open doors; our students are far more capable than they may at 
first imagine. Success is all about knowing what skills and strategies to use, when to use them, and how to 
use them. By teaching students how to optimize their ability to learn, instructors can make an immediate 
connection with students, keep them on track, and provide them with successful and authentic learning 
experiences. The following features demonstrate to students that successful learning can be fun, engaging, 
and is a choice. Each feature and strategy provides a goal, as well as the intended benefit to students and 
instructors. 
 
Along with the various features included in the book, the authors wanted to give instructors more 
information on their favorite parts of Science and Strategies. Throughout the Instructor’s Manual you will 
find Author Spotlight features and activities for classroom use. The Author Spotlights give you 
information on why the authors included these items in the book and how to use them in your own 
classroom.  
 
Student to Student 
Goal: The goal of this feature is to make the instruction relevant. Introducing students to another 
student who has experienced what they are experiencing also provides students with hope. Relevancy 
and hope help create a positive foundation for instruction. 
 
Overview: Students were interviewed from around the country and invited to discuss their concerns, 
frustrations, and strengths regarding specific topics. They were also encouraged to share strategies 
that worked. 
 
Benefit to Students: When the chapters are introduced, students who have gone before current 
students share their story regarding specific strategies and skills. This makes what instructors teach 
relevant. These introductions are a way to legitimize what students are being asked to learn.  
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
9
Benefit to Instructors: In order to get students to buy-in to what you are teaching, it has to be 
relevant; students need to be able to connect with it. These introductions make that needed 
connection. They give their viewpoints and provide students with hope. 
 
Making Connections 
 
Goal: The goal of this feature is to activate students’ existing network of knowledge in order to help 
them make connections to the new material introduced in that chapter.  
 
Overview: The feature consists of a list of five to eight questions. There are no specific instructions 
for this feature other than a very general guideline. It is to be used as the instructor prefers. Students 
may think about it, write about it, or talk about it. It is the process, not the modality that is the 
important part of this feature. 
 
Benefit to Students: In order to learn, students must make connections from existing knowledge to 
the new material. These questions help them activate what they already know and use that prior 
knowledge to process the information in the chapter. It is a sort of scaffolding for students in that it 
helps them apply existing concepts and experiences to the new material. It also builds confidence as 
they start out with a no-fail activity. 
 
Benefit to Instructors: Activating prior knowledge is a step that is easily overlooked by instructors as 
they are pressed for time to get into the chapter. This provides a quick and easy way to incorporate that 
important first step of ascertaining what they already know. It is designed to be quite flexible for the 
instructor who can just have them think about it while taking roll, use it for a learning journal, or use it 
for class discussion to start off a chapter so that students can begin with no wrong answers and build 
confidence going into the chapter. A teacher may want to select only one question or use them all. It is a 
very flexible, efficient, and effective way to start the conversation about the concepts in the chapter. 
 
Brain Connections: Self-Assessment 
 
Goal: This feature is the key to student confidence, engagement, and motivation. Students gain the 
metacognitive knowledge that when they are practicing, processing, thinking, trying to understand, 
and working at learning something, their brain actually grows dendrites, which underlie their 
learning, understanding, and skill. When students make this real connection, they know they can and 
will learn if they work at it. They know it is a physical fact that by their practicing, processing, 
thinking, trying to understand, and working at learning, the result will be natural physical changes in 
their brain that will be their new learning. This metacognitive knowledge empowers students because 
it provides them with knowledge and confidence about how and why they can and will learn. Thus, 
by having students self-assess how much they know by imagining and representing how many new 
dendrites they might have grown, it is no longer a mystery how and why learning occurs; they see that 
it is in their own hands: If they do it, they grow it; if they grow it, they know it. Share this statement 
with your students, as and after they learn about the brain in Chapter 1. Also let them know, and 
remind them each time they do a self-assessment by drawing the amount of dendrites (knowledge, 
understanding, skill) they imagine that they have, that this metacognitive activity will show them that 
they can be successful learners if and when they do the work and practice needed to grow their 
dendrites. Students are always happy to hear this. There are two goals of this feature. One goal is to 
give students the opportunity to assess the knowledge they already have for the material in the new 
chapter before they begin reading the chapter. The second goal is to give students the opportunity 
periodically to focus on and assess their level of understanding as they progress through the chapter. 
That is, this feature gives students a specific, clear, focused way to assess what they already know 
about the topic of a chapter and also to keep track of how and what they are learning as they proceed 
through a chapter.  
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use.
10
Format: The format for this feature is a box at the beginning of each chapter. The box contains an 
illustration of a brain cell upon which students are to draw the amount of dendrites they imagine that 
they already have—the knowledge they already have—for this chapter. There is also a box containing 
a brain cell at the end of the chapter upon which students draw the amount of dendrites they imagine 
that they have so far grown, representing the amount of knowledge and skill they have so far learned 
in the chapter. 
Benefit to Students: When students understand that learning actually means their brain is growing 
dendrites, they are able to visualize their learning, which in turn demystifies learning. This 
metacognitive knowledge is empowering. It makes it possible for students to say, “If I do this work 
that the teacher and book give me to do, my brain will grow new dendrites—I will learn. Let me draw 
the dendrites I think that I have now which is what I know now.” As they progress through a chapter, 
they draw more dendrites on their brain cell, which they know means they have learned more. 
Because of this empowering knowledge, their confidence, self-efficacy, and engagement increase. 
Benefit to Instructors: Demystifying learning makes an instructor’s work easier and less stressful. 
Instructors who guide students to focus on growing their dendrites find that their students are 
motivated to do more work so they can grow more dendrites and know more. Thus, instructors no 
longer have the problem of how to motivate or engage their students because students are responsive 
to their instructor’s assignments when they know that if they do the work assigned by their instructor, 
they will grow their dendrites and learn more. Discussing with students the connection between 
drawing dendrites and what students have learned and are learning helps instructors ensure that their 
students are motivated and engaged. 
Comprehension Checks 
Goal: The Comprehension Check is a formative assessment technique—a type of classroom 
assessment technique (CAT). The goal is to let students and instructors know if students understand 
the information that has been presented in the chapter, up to the point of the Comprehension Check. 
Benefit to Students: The Comprehension Checks become a metacognitive tool for students. They 
begin to think about their thinking in every chapter by learning how to monitor their own thinking. 
They are guided to ask questions about what they understand. It serves as a checkpoint for students to 
know if they need to ask for assistance, or if they feel comfortable moving forward. The 
Comprehension Check is a strategy students should begin applying to all of their other coursework. 
Benefit to Instructors: The Comprehension Checks let instructors know if corrections need to be 
made to their lesson plans, or not. If students do not understand the new information presented in the 
chapter, it will be very obvious. Instructors don’t want to wait for the end-of-the-chapter assessments 
to learn that students didn’t understand the intent. If necessary, instructors can then use additional 
activities from the Instructor’s Manual to reinforce concepts, or move on if all students understand the 
information. 
Tip from the Brain Doctor 
Goal: This feature gives students information about the brain from an outside source that they would 
find credible. Sometimes students don't want to hear study tips from their parents or their teacher, but 
might be more accepting if they knew the study skills came from someone else, such as a scientific 
researcher. The feature consists of a piece of research explained in layman terms followed by an 
explanation of what this might mean in terms of student learning and success, or a tip based on 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
11
something presented in the text. It is written informally, as if the scientist were giving the students an 
insider tip. 
 
Benefit to Students: This feature puts information into a format that might not be overlooked or 
ignored. It is set apart, quickly read, and is clearly for the students’ benefit. It is more personal than 
the rest of the text so it benefits them by putting them at the center of the learning. 
 
Benefit to Instructors Much of this research may be unfamiliar to instructors as well, so they are 
actually gaining teaching tips. The feature contains research and practice in a visible, brief format so 
that it can be accessed and used. It is one of the pathways in the chapters used to reinforce material, 
but in this case, in a more personal format. 
 
Practice with a Reading Passage 
 
Goal: This feature is designed to provide guided reading practice with longer readings. Questions 
become incrementally more challenging so that students are scaffolded through application of the 
reading strategies taught. 
 
Format: This feature occurs at the end of each chapter and has pre- and post-reading questions. Pre-
reading questions reinforce the idea of previewing readings. The post-reading questions synthesize 
the reading strategies from all previous chapters and the current chapter. 
 
Benefit to Students: Students can begin to synthesize reading strategies and gain practice in applying 
them. 
 
Benefit to Instructors: This feature sets up scaffolding in learning and allows instructors to address 
any weak areas before post testing students. 
 
Chapter Summary 
 
Goal: The summary provides the main point and important details of a chapter, thus providing 
another review of the material to strengthen the learning of the material.  
 
Benefit to Students: The summary is a previewing tool that students can use in order to get an 
overview of the chapter. It also helps students see the essential elements of a chapter after studying 
the chapter. 
 
Benefit to Instructors: A summary presents important points of a chapter so instructors can review 
chapters with students. A summary also serves as a previewing tool. 
 
Post Test 
 
 
Goal: The Post Test serves as a measurement of student learning, or student learning outcome. 
 
Format: A Post Test is presented at the end of the chapter as a cumulative test. Part 1 consists of 
multiple-choice, matching, true-and-false, and fill-in-the-blank question types. Part 1I provides 
students with a reading selection, and students will be expected to apply the reading strategies 
presented in the current chapter and preceding chapters. Questions, at varying levels of Bloom’s 
Taxonomy, will be asked to test their understanding of the reading selection.  
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
12
Benefit to Students: Students will become aware of the gaps in their learning. They will know where 
they need to focus to remediate. It’s important for them to understand the strategies they still haven’t 
mastered or to celebrate those they have. 
 
Benefit to Instructors: It’s difficult for instructors to make adjustments in their teaching if they are 
not certain what students have learned or how well they have learned it. The Post Test provides an 
opportunity for instructors to remediate and opportunities to offer supplemental instructional 
materials, if necessary. 
 
Test Bank questions and answers can be found on the instructor companion website for this title. Go 
to www.cengagebrain.com to locate the specific book site. 
 
Brain Strengths Options 
 
Goal: Brain-compatible teaching and learning includes the understanding that we are probably all 
wired differently and that students have differing strengths and deficits. It is impossible to diagnose 
and remediate the wide variety of differences in underlying processes, such as memory and attention, 
subtypes of reading difficulty, biological and learning exceptionalities, impact of English as a second 
language, and experiential differences. Providing an opportunity for students to self-select learning 
strategies and/or assessments enables the instructor to address some of these differences. This feature 
provides options that tap into a variety of strengths that can be used to compensate for deficits. This 
feature also increases motivation and engagement as it provides students with an opportunity to show 
the instructor their strengths instead of a constant focus on their deficits. 
 
Format: This feature is designed for use in a variety of ways according to the preferences of the 
instructor.  
• 
Alternative assessment: Educators know that objective tests do not always measure the true 
level of understanding, especially in those with test anxiety, dyslexia, second-language issues, or 
other exceptionalities. Providing options for alternative assessment using strengths helps 
instructors address these challenges. We suggest allowing students to self-select the option so that 
they can lead with their strength rather than assigning items, as that potentially taps into another 
weakness, thus increasing stress and discouragement. 
• 
Brain-compatible learning: The Brain Strengths Options feature is designed to create a 
learning scenario that is more compatible with the way the brain learns best. These activities are 
designed to be more engaging, more like real life, more social, and to utilize a variety of skills to 
reach the goal. Therefore, instructors may wish to have students do a project per chapter as an 
alternative to some of the paper and pencil activities throughout the chapter. As-needed options: 
Sometimes students need to be allowed to complete make-up work due to illness or other 
legitimate absences. Having them complete activities later that they did not turn in earlier is not 
always an option when the rest of the class has completed the work and possibly even had their 
work graded and returned. These options are ideal for make-up work. The student would have to 
select ones that could be done individually. Sometimes instructors want to allow students to do 
make-up work if they have failed a test. These options are ideal for that as well. 
 
Benefit to Students: This feature is of great benefit to students because they would not be in this 
reading class if their skills were up to par. However, everything else in the book requires them to use 
their weak modality of reading to learn any of the concepts or information. This feature allows them 
to use their strength to unlock the material. If they speak well, they may choose an oral presentation. 
If they are artistic, they may choose to represent, for example, patterns of organization with 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
13
illustrations or a poster. Some may choose to use their computer strengths to review and present the 
information. 
Benefit to Instructors: In our experience, teachers read the research and want to apply it, but few 
actually know what that looks like in the classroom. Also, how do you diversify your strategies with 
everything else you have to plan for and cover? This section provides them with strategies that have 
proven popular with instructors in our experience working with diverse and challenged learners. It 
makes it very easy for teachers to deal with learning differences. Teachers can allow students to select 
a project rather than a post test, which deals with memory—a problem for many students. They can 
be used for make-up work. However, these are options available to the instructor, not required. 
COURSE TEACHING TIPS 
One of the great features about Science and Strategies is that it intentionally provides many extra 
activities. At first glance, the size of the book may look overwhelming. However, we have provided 
additional information so that you can select some or all of the material to ensure that your students have 
learned the skills and strategies presented in each chapter. If students are having difficulty after the 
Comprehension Checks, all of the activities may be used. Or, individual students can be given extra work 
for extra credit. If, however, students seem to understand the concepts, you can choose to move forward. 
We acknowledge that you are a reading professional who is teaching the course using this textbook and 
honor your experience, background knowledge, and ability to teach. This book is a vehicle designed to 
help you facilitate your teaching and students’ learning. 
The First Day of Class: Icebreakers 
The first day of class is usually one of the most important days. You get to introduce yourself, your 
expectations, the syllabus, and your environment to your students. You set the stage for a great semester. 
From day one, you begin to build a sense of community. Share something about yourself. Begin to bridge 
the humanistic side of learning with the academic. Icebreakers help you to accomplish this. They are not 
“fluff” if done correctly. Critical thinking will not occur in a classroom where students feel uncomfortable 
sharing information. You want students to engage in learning, not sit through class in fear of appearing 
stupid to others. Students need to know that what they think is important to you, the instructor. 
Icebreakers are a great way to get to know students, and they allow students an opportunity to get to know 
each other.  
Icebreakers play a critical role in developing a safe environment in your class. If you expect 
students to develop authentic critical thinking skills, students need to know that they have the right to 
disagree and that they are not going to be punished for sharing their thoughts. Icebreakers bridge the 
academic with the humanistic. They make students feel comfortable, relaxed, and give students an 
opportunity to connect fun with learning. They give students a chance to learn about each other and make 
connections. The time you invest in your initial icebreaker will be well worth it. 
Provided are some favorite, tried-and-true icebreakers for you to consider: 
•
M&Ms
Give students small treat-size packet of M&Ms. Have each student dump his/her individual bag
to determine which color of M&M occurs most. (Or give students a 3 x 5 card with a color on it
as they enter the room. Not as much fun as the candy, but students still like it.) Have students
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
14
introduce themselves by their names, and then answer the question for the most color of M&M in 
their bags, or have each student respond to the color on the card he/she selected. If students have 
more of the following colors, they answer the question associated with it: 
 
Green: 
most exciting moment 
Blue:  
a funny thing that happened to me 
Yellow:  favorite book 
Brown:  best learning experience 
Red:  
most frightening moment 
 
• 
Beach Ball (Thumb-ball) 
In each slice of color on the beach ball, write a number using a permanent marker, 1–6. On the 
board or on a handout, list six questions of your choice, suggestions provided here: 
 
 
1. My favorite novel/movie/cartoon character 
 
2. Favorite time period 
 
3. The most unusual thing about me 
 
4. If money weren’t an option, I would 
 
5. My favorite hero 
 
6. Most exciting day of my life 
 
Throw the ball to anyone to get it started. Whichever number is touching the student’s left thumb, 
that’s the question he/she responds to. Then, that student throws the ball to another student until 
everyone responds and is introduced. 
 
• 
3 x 3 Squares 
Create a sheet with six to nine squares (the number will depend on available time). In each square 
put a characteristic (i.e., someone who plays an instrument, someone who has an unusual 
collection, someone who is married, someone who is has been a Brownie or Girl Scout, someone 
who writes poetry, someone who is a parent, someone who is a musician, someone who is a 
serious athlete, etc.) Students need to move around the room and find someone who fits the 
square and can initial it. Then when class reconvenes, each student introduces one person from 
their square to the rest of the class.  
 
Variation: Six to nine other students need to fill in the squares by providing the answer and 
signing their names. Each student first fills in one of the squares. In the squares for students to fill 
in, questions may include: longest journey to school, weirdest thing I’ve ever eaten, unusual 
hobby, favorite author, favorite class, best day of my life, most frightening moment, etc. 
 
• 
Fact or Fiction 
Each person writes down three facts about themselves, one of which is a lie. Each person takes 
turns reading his/her list aloud and the rest of the class writes down the one they think is the lie 
with the person’s name. When everyone has finished going around, you can go through list and 
have students vote on the lie. Each person then identifies the lie. 
 
• 
Interview 
Students pair up and interview each other. Each pair introduces themselves to the class when 
class reconvenes, remembering key points without taking notes. 
 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
15
•
Desert Island
To start this icebreaker, announce, “You've been exiled to a deserted island for up to two years.
You are allowed to take a few clothes, enough food, soap, toothpaste, etc. You may take one
piece of music, one book, and one luxury item you can carry with you. What would you take and
why?” Allow a few minutes for students to write down their list of three items. Then, in a circle,
have students introduce themselves and share their three items. You will want to share your three
items with the class as well. You’ll need to be a timekeeper to keep everyone on track. There are
many versions of this activity; however, this version works well as an icebreaker. Students get to
pick their items.
Teaching Tips to Engage Students 
•
See If You Can Figure It Out
Use this sentence to encourage students to cooperate with you and each other in a learning
environment where students are given time and tools to figure out patterns and logical structures
in what they are learning. This “figure it out” strategy creates a stronger memory in students’
brains, which helps learning. This strategy underscores most of the instruction in Science and
Strategies. When students figure out a pattern or an idea with guidance, they have a more vivid
and positive learning experience. Instructors should look for any opportunity to let students
discover knowledge. Many of the Teaching Tips in the Annotated Instructor’s Edition of Science
and Strategies give examples of “figure it out” teaching strategies.
•
Keep It Rewarding (share this information with students)
Some people, such as the authors of Science and Strategies, are actually addicted to learning.
This means that they choose to engage in this activity as often as possible because it makes them
feel good. They take more courses and keep going to school. They love to read material that
enables them to learn new information. They devour books. They have learned that learning is a
very pleasurable activity. These are the lifelong learners. And since our world is changing so
rapidly and we are in an information age, these are the people who can learn, change, adapt, and
continue to have a great quality of life no matter what life throws at them. Sounds good, doesn’t
it? How can students take advantage of this? First, in order to get that feel-good feeling, students
have to actually learn, and that means they have to be emotionally engaged and involved with the
material. So tell students to approach Science and Strategies with the attitude that they are
actually going to learn, not just go through the motions.
•
10-80-10
To optimize learning, it is recommended that you consider using the 10-80-10 plan. At the
beginning of class, 10% of the class time is spent reviewing the last class—making connections.
80% of the class time is spent on a new topic, or new session. And, at the end of the class, 10% of
the class time is spent reviewing the current day’s lesson. It’s an excellent way to ensure that your
students understand and learn what was being taught. Both the preview and review can be
classroom assessment techniques (CATs). This is a great way to engage students, keep them
focused, and make everything you teach relevant.
•
Creating the Safe Environment
Creating a safe environment cannot be over-stressed. If students are going to learn to think
critically, they need to know that it’s ok to disagree. A safe environment produces good
chemicals in the brain: serotonin and dopamine. These good chemicals optimize the brain’s
ability to learn. If students feel safe, they are more likely to participate. If they know that it’s ok
to not answer correctly, students will be motivated to participate. All ideas are good; however, not
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use.
16
all answers may be the right answers. All responses—seeing multiple viewpoints—make 
teachable moments! A great educator, Parker Palmer, has said that creating a safe environment is 
a way for instructors to bridge the academic with the humanistic. It’s a way to connect learning to 
fun and positive thinking—something many students have unfortunately not experienced during 
their years in education. 
•
Emphasize the Need to Develop Vocabulary
Encourage students to practice the methods that will help them to learn vocabulary. Regardless of
all other reading strategies taught, students’ ability to read will be thwarted by a limited
vocabulary. If they don’t understand the words and they don’t have a vocabulary system, their
reading will not usually improve. Developing a strong vocabulary makes connections. Knowing
the language used in textbooks and college-level words will help students make sense of what
they are reading. Additionally, students will often be hired because of their ability to speak and
read well. This book provides students with strategies to help them to define and learn new words
and to process new words into their long-term memory. Students are taught how to identify
context clues, word analysis, word mapping, and a card review system (CRS).
•
Group Work
Almost all of the activities presented in the textbook can be done in groups. Group work is an
excellent way to facilitate students’ learning. From our experience in the classroom, students
benefit from working with each other. Weaker students have new skills reinforced when working
with other students. They are able to expand their thinking about reading by making connections
they may have missed without the benefit of a group. Very often, the instructor assumes students
understand what’s being presented, but it’s the group work that often allows students to move
beyond the frustration and instructional levels, and segue into the application level of learning.
Students feel comfortable asking other students questions, and students enjoy demonstrating what
they know. Moving around, talking and moving in groups oxygenates the brain, which in turn
energizes the brain. This is an opportunity for optimal learning. All students benefit from the
group success; it gives students confidence, and it connects into students’ competitiveness when
you use games with the groups. Group work is explained in more detail on page 19 of this
Instructor’s Manual.
•
Mind Maps
Mind maps are one of the most powerful learning/study tools we have used with students in the
classroom. It forces them to look at the textbook information differently than they previously
have been. It makes the concept of main idea and supporting details very concrete, and it makes
students’ thinking very visible. Students learn to slow down and analyze what they are reading.
Mind maps are more visual than outlines, even though outlines utilize the same concept. Because
the information is presented non-linearly, the relationship between ideas is more visible and
serves as a great study aid. To begin learning how to create mind maps, group work is
recommended. More information regarding how to help students create mind maps is presented
on the next two pages.
•
Classroom Assessment Techniques
Classroom assessment techniques (CATs) are opportunities for instructors to know if their
students learned what was intended or how much students already know about a concept or
strategy. It allows students to know what they know and have not yet learned. CATs should be
used to establish lesson plans for each class. They are usually presented during the first 10
minutes of class or the last 10 minutes to review. CATs also let instructors know how much of the
book will be used/needed to teach each strategy.
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
17
Mind Mapping in Science and Strategies 
 
Mind maps are visuals that connect ideas. Mind maps visually represent information. They are similar to 
an outline, except that they are not linear. Students are able to see, at a glance, the main idea, as well as 
the major and minor details. It is an effective strategy to organize large amounts of information in an easy 
to read, well thought-out way. Mind mapping gives students an opportunity to think through information 
presented in readings. It forces students to question the relationships between the sentences within 
paragraphs and how the paragraphs relate to each other as well. 
 
Students may be surprised to learn that Aristotle’s work was graphically organized in the third 
century. Beethoven, Darwin, and da Vinci also used forms of mind mapping. Although people have been 
using mind maps for centuries, Tony Buzan is often given credit for its origin and use in academics in the 
twenty-first century. Mind maps can be used for: 
• 
Brainstorming 
• 
Problem solving 
• 
Individual expressions of creativity 
• 
Providing an overview 
• 
Organizing one’s thoughts 
• 
Team work 
• 
Creating an activity 
• 
Mapping a process 
• 
Identifying structure and relationships with information 
• 
Condensing material in a concise and easy to remember format 
 
According to Buzan, mind mapping is the brain’s natural preference to view information in a non-
linear way. In some cases, students may want to add pictures within their maps. Mind maps reflect the 
way the brain thinks; students use imagination, association, and connection. Because students are 
constructing their own mind maps based on their understanding of information, it increases the likelihood 
that students will retain more information. Only if students understand material are they able to create 
accurate mind maps.  
 
Mind mapping also supports multiple pathways by involving all visual, auditory, and kinesthetic 
opportunities. Students read information, draw it, use color, organize it and should be encouraged to read 
it aloud if the information seems challenging. When they are working in groups, they are discussing the 
information. Perhaps because of gaming and more visual technology that’s available today, students seem 
to prefer mapping to outlining. 
 
Mind maps are created around the main idea, which is often located in the center of the mind 
map. Ideas that are directly connected to it are considered the major supporting details. And, those ideas 
directly connected to the major supporting details, reinforce those major details and are considered minor 
supporting details. Not all major supporting details will always have minor supporting details; and those 
that do, may have one or several supporting details. The less directly connected concepts are to the main 
idea, the less important the details are. Major details directly support the main idea and help the reader 
understand the main idea. The minor supporting details directly support the major details to help readers 
understand the major details. Minor details may have minor details supporting them, but are usually not 
included in the mapping of textbook information. 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
18
 
 
It is a good idea to introduce mind maps as a whole class activity. First, share the mind map used 
to introduce Chapter 1 as an example and walk students through. (Science and Strategies models the 
concept of mind maps by using them to introduce each chapter.) Then, have the class create a map so that 
everyone can see and participate in the process. Start out by asking a student to provide details to his or 
her day up to the point of your class and map it. Start with the main idea (getting ready to come to class) 
and place that in the center. Then, add branches, such as got dressed, ate breakfast, drove to campus; these 
are the major supporting details and are connected to the center circle. Then, add minor supporting 
details; minor details supporting the major detail got dressed could include put on favorite jeans, blue 
shirt, and sneakers. 
 
Main Idea 
Major 
Detail 
Major 
Detail
Minor 
Detail 
Minor 
Detail
Minor 
Detail 
Major 
Detail 
Getting 
ready for 
class  
Got 
dressed 
Ate 
breakfast 
Drove to 
campus 
Put on favorite 
jeans 
Put on 
blue shirt 
Put on 
sneakers 
Toast 
Cereal 
Milk 
Fruit 
Stopped 
for gas 
Parked 
car 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
19
This activity teaches the process of mind mapping. Students may want to color code the levels so 
that the hierarchy is more understandable at a glance. You can ask for other simple examples and let 
students map the process and invite each one to explain his/her map to the class. Sit down and let the class 
take over. When introducing this concept, it also works well if you have students work in groups. Have 
each group create a map and explain their maps to the rest of the class.  
 
Students usually enjoy mapping, once they understand it. It sounds more esoteric than it actually 
is. Students catch-on quickly because mapping is brain friendly. The difficulty will be making certain 
they are detecting main idea and major and minor supporting details correctly. Once students seem to 
understand the process of mind mapping, give them a short paragraph with which to practice. All groups 
should be using the same paragraph for comparison. Again, have groups create their own maps and share 
with the class when they have all completed their maps. Students should have similar information since 
they are all using the same paragraph. This is an excellent time to make corrections if necessary. Students 
should now understand the mapping process at this point. 
 
When you introduce mapping with vocabulary (Chapter 3) and argument (Chapter 11) tell 
students to think of the maps like a zoom lens on a camera or the zoom-in on a computer or tablet. Instead 
of seeing the whole text or paragraph, we are zooming-in on specific details. Vocabulary maps focus on a 
specific vocabulary word. The word (main idea) is presented in the center, and the major details 
(definition, synonym and/or antonym, part of speech, pronunciation, use in a sentence) are all used to 
support the word introduced. Argument maps focus only on the argument being presented. The center 
point is the argument’s conclusion, or point of the argument. The branches connecting to it would be the 
major details or reasons supporting the argument. Since students are very familiar with mapping by this 
point, this will make it easier for students to understand the concept of arguments.   
 
For more resources related to mind mapping, like Web sites that help you to create mind maps, go 
to the Instructor Companion Site to access a list of free classroom resources that encourage active 
learning.  
 
Creating and Facilitating Effective Groups 
 
Group work is a way to engage students in active learning. Students who are engaged learn more, are 
more satisfied, are more likely to become independent learners, persist in college longer, and have higher 
levels of productive participation in the economy. Since the brain is highly social, making learning social 
whenever possible enhances learning. 
 
Group learning allows students to: hear how others think, have the opportunity to explain class 
concepts to others, keeps students motivated and on their toes, engages students in active learning in 
otherwise passive modalities of instruction (such as during lectures), allows students to construct 
meaning/experience disequilibrium, promotes inquiry and argumentation, promotes productive talk 
(which leads to quality thinking), teaches students leadership skills, promotes student interaction and 
friendships, promotes retention of course information, exposes students to more than their own way of 
thinking and points of view seen through global eyes, and promotes effective classroom assessment. 
 
Also, group learning will help instructors make adjustments in their teaching and their rate of 
teaching. Instructors will see what students have learned. Some instructors want to use group work, but 
for lack of guidance fall into the traditional pattern of “get in groups and discuss.” Many of the activities 
in Science and Strategies have been carefully designed to promote learning while providing an 
opportunity for group interaction. 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
20
Effective group work requires explicit guidance and monitoring. If done correctly, group work is 
a way to engage students fully in learning new material. Additionally, group work allows students to 
think outside the box; however, to think that way effectively, students need to know what’s “inside the 
box.” They need to understand information fully before they can get creative. Group work allows both the 
understanding and the creativity to happen.  
 
How to Create Effective Groups 
 
It is important not to let students create their own groups. Students tend to stick with students who think 
alike, which defeats the purpose of groupthink. The best size for most groups is between four to six 
students; the task will often determine the group size. The Change-Up group activity type works well with 
just two students.  
 
Make certain you assign explicit roles to each group. Individual student roles can change each 
time groups meet so that every student experiences every role. Each group will require a leader. A leader 
is someone who keeps the group focused on the task. If the conversation starts to drift to another topic, 
the leader brings the group back. A note-taker is critical. This person will take notes of the group’s 
discussion, making sure to list all key points made by the group. A timer is needed to make certain that 
the group is aware of how much time is left. It helps to keep them focused. And, every group requires a 
presenter to serve as the spokesperson for the group. If you have a group of five or six, one or two 
students may not have a role for one session, however, all students are expected to participate. Make 
certain that your directions are clear and that students understand what is expected of them. 
 
Here are some suggested methods for creating groups within your class:  
 
• 
Human Likert Scale. Have students line up in the middle of the room. You will share several 
statements with students (see following suggestions for statements). If they completely agree, 
they are to move to the right side of the room. If they completely disagree, they are to move to the 
left side of the room. If they have no opinion, they stay in the middle. If they agree, a little, they 
move a little to the right and so forth. The goal is for students to watch fellow students who seem 
to be moving with them, and to watch for those who always seem to be on the other side of the 
room. The goal is to have students pair up with someone who moves with him/her, and two who 
seem to move on the opposite side of the room. This creates a diverse group. 
 
Some suggestions for statements you can use are: 
 
Enjoy reading romance novels 
 
Prefer lectures 
 
Enjoy statistics 
 
Read science fiction 
 
Read poetry 
 
Read business news 
 
Create daily to-do lists 
 
Support euthanasia 
 
Like to watch sports 
 
Prefer books on tape to reading 
 
Like to eat chocolate 
 
Like classical music 
 
Like the holiday crowds 
 
Like math 
 
Like (or prefer) dogs 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
21
 
Like (or prefer) cats 
 
Prefer written directions 
 
Like to play sports 
 
• 
Numbering. Have students call off numbers 1–5. Have the ones form a group, the twos, threes, 
and so forth. This isn’t as effective, but if time is an issue, it at least breaks up people who sit 
together from forming a group. 
 
• 
Learning Styles (Traditional). Currently, there are mixed thoughts regarding the value of 
teaching the traditional concept of learning styles, as they can change depending on the students’ 
comfort level with the information they are learning. However, the North Central Association of 
Colleges and Schools’ Higher Learning Commission (HLC) does require colleges to address this 
issue. Therefore, the concept of learning styles has been included in this Instructor’s Manual. The 
traditional learning styles concept does allow students to think differently about how they learn, 
and may give them some great ideas on ways to more effectively learn new information. Mix 
groups with different learning style preferences; everyone in the group can learn different 
learning strategies. Possible pairings: visual and auditory learners, auditory and kinesthetic, 
kinesthetic and visual, and kinesthetic and auditory. If you are familiar with multiple intelligences 
and use them in your classroom, you can consider mixing groups with different intelligences to 
experience multiple points of view. 
 
Use the inventory provided on the following page, or have students complete an inventory at one 
of the following Web sites: 
 
Online Self-Tests: 
● http://www.vark-learn.com/english/page.asp?p=questionnaire 
● http://www.learning-styles-online.com/inventory 
● http://www.educationplanner.org/students/self-assessments/index.shtml 
● http://people.usd.edu/~bwjames/tut/learning-style/ 
● http://www4.ncsu.edu/unity/lockers/users/f/felder/public/ILSpage.html 
● http://appl003.lsu.edu/cas/learningjourney.nsf/StudentHome?OpenForm&ID=96490 
● http://www.ldpride.net/learning-style-test.html 
Printable Self-Tests: 
● http://www.harding.edu/ARC/PDF/CITE.pdf 
● http://www.agelesslearner.com/dl/alcls011008.pdf 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
22
What's Your Learning Style? 
 
Learning styles refer to the ways you prefer to approach new information. Each of us learns and processes 
information in our own special ways, though we share some learning patterns, preferences, and 
approaches. Knowing your own style also can help you to realize that other people may approach the 
same situation in a different way from your own. 
 
Take a few minutes to complete the following questionnaire to assess your preferred learning 
style. Begin by reading the words in the left-hand column. Of the three responses to the right, circle the 
one that best characterizes you, answering as honestly as possible with the description that applies to you 
right now. Count the number of circled items you had in each column and write your total at the bottom 
of that column. Your answers and totals will offer insight into how you learn. 
 
1.  When I try to 
concentrate… 
I grow distracted by 
clutter or movement, 
and I notice things 
around me other people 
don’t notice. 
I get distracted by 
sounds, and I attempt to 
control the amount and 
type of noise around 
me. 
I become distracted by 
commotion, and I tend 
to retreat inside myself. 
2.  When I 
visualize... 
I see vivid, detailed 
pictures in my 
thoughts. 
I think in voices and 
sounds. 
I see images in my 
thoughts that involve 
movement. 
3.  When I talk 
with others... 
I find it difficult to 
listen for very long. 
I enjoy listening, or I 
get impatient to talk 
myself. 
I gesture and 
communicate with my 
hands. 
4.  When I contact 
people... 
I prefer face-to-face 
meetings. 
I prefer speaking by 
telephone for serious 
conversations. 
I prefer to interact 
while walking or 
participating in some 
activity. 
5.  When I see an 
acquaintance... 
I forget names but 
remember faces, and I 
tend to replay where we 
met for the first time. 
I know people’s names 
and I can usually quote 
what we discussed. 
I remember what we 
did together and I may 
almost “feel” our time 
together. 
6.  When I relax... 
I watch TV, see a play, 
visit an exhibit, or go to 
a movie. 
I listen to the radio, 
play music, read, or 
talk with a friend. 
I play sports, make 
crafts, or build 
something with my 
hands. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
23
7. When I read... 
I like descriptive
examples and I may 
pause to imagine the 
scene. 
I enjoy the narrative 
most and I can almost 
“hear” the characters 
talk. 
I prefer action-oriented 
stories, but I do not 
often read for pleasure. 
8. When I spell... 
I envision the word in
my mind or imagine 
what the word looks 
like when written. 
I sound out the word, 
sometimes aloud, and 
tend to recall rules 
about letter order. 
I get a feel for the word 
by writing it out or 
pretending to type it. 
9. When I do
something new...
I seek out 
demonstrations, 
pictures, or diagrams. 
I want verbal and 
written instructions, 
and to talk it over with 
someone else. 
I jump right in to try it, 
keep trying, and try 
different approaches. 
10. When I
assemble an
object...
I look at the picture 
first and then, maybe, 
read the directions. 
I read the directions, or 
I talk aloud as I work. 
I usually ignore the 
directions and figure it 
out as I go along. 
11. When I
interpret
someone's
mood...
I examine facial 
expressions. 
I rely on listening to 
tone of voice. 
I focus on body 
language. 
12. When I teach
other people...
I show them. 
I tell them, write it out, 
or I ask them a series of 
questions. 
I demonstrate how it is 
done and then ask them 
to try. 
TOTAL 
VISUAL: 
AUDITORY: 
TACTILE/ 
KINESTHETIC: 
The column with the highest total represents your primary learning style. The column with the 
second-most choices is your secondary style. 
Your primary learning style:  
_______________________ 
Your secondary learning style:  
_______________________ 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
24
Now that you know which learning style you rely on, you can boost your learning 
potential when learning more.  
 
If your primary learning style is visual, draw pictures in the margins, look at the graphics, 
and read the text that explains the graphics. Envision the topic or play a movie in your thoughts 
of how you’ll act out the subject matter. 
Visual Learner 
• 
Is good at recalling visual images 
• 
Uses outlines, mapping, graphing, pictures, and charts 
• 
Finds comparison charts helpful 
• 
Color codes information 
• 
Highlights details and information 
• 
Prefers to see what is to be learned 
• 
Is an observer and a reader 
• 
Prefers to study alone 
• 
Likes puzzles and workbooks 
 
If your primary learning style is auditory, listen to the words you read. Try to develop an 
internal conversation between you and the text. Don’t be embarrassed to read aloud or talk 
through the information. 
Auditory Learner  
• 
Prefers to learn through oral discussion 
• 
Needs to think out loud during study to remember information 
• 
Enjoys brainstorming 
• 
Studies by stating and restating information over and over 
• 
Is a listener and a talker 
• 
Learns well in study groups 
• 
Enjoys stories, plays, poems, and music 
• 
Learns through media 
• 
Likes to study with noise in the background 
• 
Enjoys social activities 
 
If your primary learning style is tactile/kinesthetic, use a pencil or highlighter pen to 
mark passages that are meaningful to you. Take notes, transferring the information you learn to 
the margins of the book, into your journal, or onto a computer. Doodle whatever comes to mind 
as you read. Hold the book in your hands instead of placing it on a table. Walk around as you 
read. Feel the words and ideas. Get busy—both mentally and physically. 
Tactile/Kinesthetic Learner 
• 
Prefers to learn by doing 
• 
Studies and remembers best by rewriting lecture notes 
• 
Uses a computer to enter and recall notes from class 
• 
Often doodles while listening 
• 
Learns most from field trips about the topic being studied 
• 
Needs to get up and move around in order to process information 
• 
Enjoys using a board to write out and review information 
• 
Good at acting, sports, mechanics 
 
(c) Marcia L. Conner, 1993-2008. All rights reserved. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
25
Strategies for Facilitating Group Work 
 
Once students have been placed into groups that foster optimal learning, the next step is to facilitate group 
work. Here are several group strategies with which you can experiment:  
 
• 
Change-Up Method (also known as the Pair-Up Method) 
Lectures are considered the most passive form of learning for students, yet sometimes lectures are 
necessary when introducing new topics. However, lectures can be turned into active learning 
opportunities with the use of the Change-Up Method. Twenty minutes into your lecture, direct 
students to pair up with one other student. You may do one of the following: 
o give the pairs of students a question to answer 
o have each pair develop a question regarding the lecture  
o summarize what’s already been presented in the lecture 
 
Give students a specific amount of time to complete the task. At the end of the allotted time, 
have students submit their responses in writing, report their answers to the class, or have each pair 
of students connect with one other pair to share responses or answer each other’s questions. This 
method, if used consistently, keeps students on their toes during lectures. They stay focused and 
engaged with what is being said, knowing that they will be accountable for the information. 
 
• 
Chips Method 
This method ensures equal participation between all members of the group. All members are 
given the same number of chips (you use an alternative, like index cards, pencils, or tabs). Each 
time a member speaks, he or she tosses a chip into the center of a table. Once a person’s chips are 
used up, a member can no longer speak. The discussion proceeds until all members have used all 
of their chips. This prevents the talkers from taking over and using up the time, and it also 
encourages the quiet students to share their thoughts with the group. Students at the end of the 
rounds may come to consensus on what were the best three responses. 
 
• 
Circle of Knowledge 
The instructor asks a question that can have multiple answers. Students in each group take turns 
giving answers, which the note taker writes down. When time is called, teams take turns reporting 
answers/lists. This is usually a good format for brainstorming solutions. All the answers are 
recorded on paper and all are valid. The group can review their responses and select their top one 
or the top two or three before they share with the class. Everyone has a voice and contributes.   
 
• 
Fish Bowl 
A group is given a scenario or information to discuss and they work through the posed problem 
by demonstrating solutions or stating their opinions and interpretations to the rest of the class. 
Each group acts out the scenario or reports information back discussing only with their group 
members, while the rest of the class looks on. The class observes like they are looking at the fish 
in a bowl. Each group takes a turn going through the process. 
 
• 
Jig Saw 
Each group is assigned a piece of instruction to learn. For example, when you assign a reading, 
for instance, a reading selection from Science and Strategies, have students get into groups. 
Assign each group a specific section of the reading. Have them identify the main idea and 
supporting details and summarize their section. Then, after a designated amount of time, call the 
class back together. Each group is the expert for their assigned section and now teaches their 
section to rest of class. Once each group has had time to read and learn their section, they then 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use.
26
teach it to the rest of the class. They provide the main idea, supporting details, and a summary of 
their section. Students like this because an entire reading doesn’t overwhelm them. And, they get 
the input from others in the group to confirm their thinking regarding the main idea and 
supporting details.   
Variation: Each group is given a full reading assignment. Each member in the group takes a piece 
of the reading. The pieces are divided before students get into a group, so a group member can 
take piece 1. Piece 1 will be the same, no matter what group a student is in. All of those with 
piece 1 meet and become experts. All of them decide what the important main idea and 
supporting details are, and summarize piece 1. Each student goes back to his/her group to teach 
this assigned piece. Each section is identified and assigned an expert. Each person in the group 
will serve as an expert. 
•
Problem Posing
This activity was developed by John Bean. Direct students to work in groups. Give each group a
reading question/problem framed as an open-ended question to which students must propose and
justify an answer. Give groups a set amount of time to answer the problem, and then have them
summarize their answers by using a one-sentence response. Examples:
o
In what way is the brain similar to a computer?
o
Why is the brain not like a computer?
o
Can internal distracters ever be useful?
o
How is learning like discovering new information?
o
How is learning the same as creating knowledge?
•
Send Along a Question
After a lecture, or after a reading assignment, the class is directed into groups. Each group creates
a set of questions based on a current lecture or reading assignment. Each person in the group
writes down a separate question on a card. When finished writing the questions, then each group
exchanges their stack of cards with another group. Each member of the receiving group selects a
card, reads it, and writes a response. Each person shares his or her response with the group. The
group comes to consensus regarding each one’s answer. When all groups have answered all
questions, the class debriefs and shares all responses. This is a hybrid of the Pair-up and Change-
Up Methods.
•
Where You Are Stuck
Fifteen minutes before you begin a new lecture, or the last 15 minutes, direct students into their
groups. Each group member has two minutes to tell fellow group members where he or she is
stuck and what is confusing. The group can discuss. The note taker needs to submit the notes to
the instructor. Information can be used at the next class. This is similar to the Muddiest Point
CAT, which requires students to write a brief paragraph, identifying the points of the class that
were unclear. It’s also similar to the Minute Manager CAT, which asks students to write as
briefly as possible the key points learned or highlights of the class.
•
Group Mapping or Picture
This strategy is effective for relating concepts. Each group takes a piece of reading and creates a
collective mind map or picture of the information. Each group shares and explains its finished
product to the class.
•
Toss a Question
At the beginning of class (recall from previous class), in the middle of a lecture (focus on current
class), or at the end of a lecture (review of class), throw a soft ball or beanbag to someone in the
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
27
class. The person that catches the ball has to answer a question. The student who catches now has 
to develop a question and throw it to someone else. Or, the ball is always thrown back to you and 
you always ask a question. Or, a team of students throws the ball each time and comes to class 
prepared with questions.  
 
Variation: Purchase a beach ball. In each color, write down one number on each color section, 1–
6. On a sheet of paper have a set of six questions. When you throw the ball, whatever question is 
under the catcher’s right thumb is the question the catcher has to answer. 
 
Creating study groups outside of the class is very important as well as establishing effective in-
class groups. Many students say that they don’t like working in groups because they don’t know how to 
work effectively as a group member. After you have introduced learning styles, give students the 
Creating Effective Study Groups handout found on the next two pages to encourage them to continue to 
work in groups outside of class. The information reinforces effective groups inside the classroom as well.  
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
28
Creating Effective Study Groups 
  
A study group is when two or more students study together. It’s an opportunity for you to review common 
problems, answer each other’s questions, fill in gaps of missed information, share notes, and test each 
other to help prepare for upcoming exams. Working together should help you go beyond the literal level 
of course information. The group can and should help you to apply what you’ve learned in class by 
creating questions and scenarios. It’s a way for you to practice specific course concepts. Two or more 
students working together can figure things out more effectively than one student trying to study alone. 
This is why group work is so effective in the classroom as well. You are able to hear other students’ 
thinking. It may add to your thinking or help others to develop their thoughts regarding a topic. Studying 
and learning in groups is worth the time and effort. 
 
The Benefits of Studying in Groups 
 
There are many benefits to studying in a group, some of which include: 
 
• 
Group study allows you to hear the material covered in class, outside of class.  
• 
Group study provides you an opportunity to hear how others analyze and problem solve. 
• 
In a group, you have an opportunity to explain class concepts to others this is a good way to 
understand how much you really know. 
• 
Group study keeps you current and motivated. 
• 
You may develop new friendships and find some study partners for future classes. 
• 
Once the group gets used to working together, you can get a lot accomplished in a short amount 
of time. A useful tool in planning your study time is to create a weekly schedule form. Sticking to 
a schedule can often make an “impossible” semester become possible. 
• 
Most employers are looks for employees who can work well in teams. Group work gives you 
team-building experiences. 
 
Ways to Create a Study Group 
 
You have the option of forming a group on your own, or asking for the assistance of the learning support 
staff at your college/university. Sometimes, if you ask, instructors will help you create a study group. 
 
• 
If you’d like to form your own study group, look for students who ask questions in class, who 
come prepared, and never miss class. Exchange emails and try to set-up a schedule to meet. 
• 
Most colleges and universities will be glad to assist you in finding a study group. Go to your 
tutoring center and speak with the lead tutor or the program coordinator. Explain what you want. 
Usually, they are happy to help organize a space and time for you to meet. They may be able to 
provide you with a tutor to help coordinate the study session. Having a tutor attend is a great idea. 
A tutor will know how to help you effectively prepare for exams, as they have been through the 
course. 
• 
Some instructors form study groups as a part of the class. Others may help, if you ask directly for 
assistance with forming a study group. You may want to talk with your instructor before or after 
class or during scheduled office hours. You may be surprised how helpful faculty can be. Most 
are very passionate about what they teach and will become inspired by your commitment. They 
may be willing to make an announcement in class to recruit study group members, recommend a 
tutor, or recommend additional resources for your study group. Some may even offer study 
guides. 
 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
29
Creating Effective Study Groups Handout (continued) 
Get Your Questions Answered in a Study Group 
•
Become actively involved in the study group by being prepared for each session. Don’t attend
unless you do the upfront work that is needed in order to have a successful study session. Create a
list of questions/concerns/areas in need of clarification. Coming prepared will make your review
session productive. You’ll get the information you need, and by having a list with you, you won’t
forget to ask questions that you have. You don’t want to leave a study session with unanswered
questions.
•
Make certain that you and each member of your group are on the same page. You need to know
that everyone attending is going to give 100%. Discuss the amount of time you’ll meet, agree on
the chapter(s) to be covered, estimate the amount of time to be spent on each topic. Allow for a
short review at the end. Don’t let one person hog the entire study session. Make sure that
everyone gets a turn to ask a question.
•
When you are together, it’s important that all of you work together to clarify and answer
questions and problems. Everyone needs to participate and provide input. There is power in
numbers.
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
30
Using Journals with Science and Strategies 
 
Journaling is a perfect tool to use with Science and Strategies because it optimizes the brain’s ability to 
learn. Responding in writing to instructor-created prompts yields self-reflection in students. The brain 
quickly recognizes this question-response pattern, and when used consistently, students begin to produce 
high-quality results. Journaling trains the brain on how to connect ideas, clarify thoughts, and discover 
meaning. 
 
 
Journals benefit instructors because they open lines of communication between themselves and 
students. Journals benefit students because they become metacognitively more aware. Metacognition is at 
the heart of Science and Strategies. When students become aware of how they learn (metacognition), they 
can direct their learning toward better outcomes. Science and Strategies offers students the brain theories 
behind learning and reading strategies. Metacognition is the foundational theory of all the strategies 
presented in this book. Journaling is one strategy where metacognition is very transparent.     
 
 
On another level, journals help build trust between student and instructor. You may be tempted to 
forgo the journal because of the extra work it involves, however, the benefits of the journal to instructors 
and students outweigh the work. Journals add a personal component to the classroom that not only helps 
the relationship between instructor and student, but it also promotes confidence in students.  
 
Using journals invites regular dialogue between instructors and students. With dialogue, 
instructors and students can synchronize the teaching and learning experience. You discover what 
teaching strategies affect positive change in your students, and students become aware of how they learn. 
You want to lead your students though a dynamic learning process, but you may not always know how to 
motivate each individual student. Journals provide the valuable, individual feedback you need along the 
way. Some students lack necessary background knowledge. Others face social obstacles that make 
learning more of a struggle. Some teaching plans just do not work with some students. In a half page or so 
of a journal entry, you can quickly decide if students are moving along at the same rate as instruction or if 
you need to make changes in your teaching plan.   
 
 
Journals also provide a forum for students to explore ideas. A journal offers a safe place for 
students to think through an idea, ensure comprehension of an author’s ideas, and refine their learning 
strategies depending on the prompt given. Students really begin to analyze how they learn. Knowing how 
you learn, metacognition, is core to Science and Strategies. When students realize they can choose 
strategies to improve their learning, they become motivated and more active in their learning experience. 
Journaling helps students come to this realization. While journaling is introduced in Chapter 1, it’s 
appropriate for use with every chapter.   
 
 
A journal prompt is a question designed to get students to think about what they are learning and 
how they are learning it. You could use the following standard journal prompts at regular intervals 
throughout the semester: What have I learned? What is still unclear to me? How have I learned . . . what 
strategies work best? What else do I know about the topic? What reading or study problems do I still 
face? Or, you could use the different features in Science and Strategies as journal opportunities. At the 
beginning of each chapter, students read the Student to Student feature. This personal account of another 
student’s experience could spark self-reflective ideas in your students. Take advantage of this and ask as a 
journal prompt: What success or failure is the student describing? How can you relate to this issue? The 
Making Connections feature includes questions that encourage students to reflect on their background 
knowledge of a subject. Instead of having students just think about their answers, ask them to write the 
answers down in their journals. The Comprehension Check feature occurs throughout the chapters and 
asks students to think about how they think. These Comprehension Checks could easily be used as journal 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
31
prompts. Other features that naturally lend themselves to journaling are Tips from the Brain Doctor (How 
did this tip help you?) and Practice with a Reading Passage (Did you use the strategies from the chapter 
on this reading passage? What worked? What didn’t?)   
Journal assignments should occur after each chapter as a minimum. You may want to add an 
additional journal assignment in the middle of particularly difficult or long chapters such as memory or 
argument. Use the features in Science and Strategies as journal starters or create your own based on 
student need and interest. Create different prompts for specific reading concepts, for example, What 
vocabulary strategies work well in my classes? What visuals are most useful in biology? How can I use 
Bloom’s Taxonomy to understand my political science readings? You could also change some of the 
activities in the book into journal assignments. For example, in Chapter 6, Activity 6G, on pages 265-266 
directs students to describe a time when they knew someone was angry or upset with them even though 
that person never said a word. This activity could easily be a journal assignment instead. As a journal 
assignment, you could also ask how students could use inference skills when reading. With the freedom 
that a journal provides, students could not only have learned about the steps involved in inferring 
someone’s mood, but could also have made the transfer of those skills to a college reading situation.   
Students can use spiral notebooks as their journals and instructors can collect these notebooks 
periodically throughout the semester. Some instructors find spiral notebooks too cumbersome to carry 
around and instead ask students to make journal entries on loose-leaf paper. When journals are to be 
collected, students staple journal entries together, and then turn them in. Journals should be collected 
more frequently in the beginning of the semester so instructors and students can benefit immediately from 
the journaling experience. You may want to collect them less frequently as the semester progresses and as 
other class assignments come to the forefront. 
Because journals are written explorations of ideas, they should be assessed for quality of thought, 
not for adherence to grammar and spelling rules. Did the student answer the question? Is there at least a 
half of a page of ideas on the page? Did the student explore the question honestly? Many courses use a 
point system for grading so if an instructor assigns 200 points to the journals and gives 20 journal 
assignments, then each journal is worth 10 points. If students make an effort to explore their learning in 
their journals, full points should be given. Instructors will find that when students realize that their journal 
entries are being read and their thoughts are taken seriously, they honestly share their learning 
experiences. Both students and teachers are pleasantly surprised by the outcomes.  
When providing feedback on the journals, aim to ask one question and make one positive 
comment on each student’s journal entry. The comments and questions can be written in the margins or at 
the end of the journal entry and can be short: What a revelation! I can see why that is a struggle. I had the 
same thought when reading that article. What other strategy might work? Why do you think that 
happened? What is your goal here? Underlining the students’ text counts as an additional, positive 
response to a journal entry. Students can see from your underlining what struck you as important in their 
journals. The old teacher rule of not using a red pen does apply. Red-pen marks can connote criticism and 
you may want to avoid this. The goal of the journal is to encourage students to reflect honestly on their 
learning. Students will do this if they feel safe. 
Sample Syllabi 
The syllabus provided here can serve as a template for any college reading course using Science and 
Strategies. Each week’s work is tied to course competencies; this syllabus can be modified to include 
your course’s or institution’s specific course competencies. You will want to add the necessary omitted 
information such as instructor’s name, section, and room. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
32
Course Syllabus 
 
Instructor: 
  
  
  
Section: 
  
  
Meeting Days/Times: 
  
  
 
Room: 
  
  
  
Instructor's Office: 
  
  
  
Instructor's Office Hours: 
  
  
  
Instructor's Office Phone: 
  
  
  
Instructor's E-mail: 
  
  
  
Non-Discrimination Policy: 
It is the policy of 
_______College that no person 
shall, on the basis of race, 
color, national origin, gender, 
age, marital status, creed, or 
disability, be excluded from 
participating in, be denied 
benefits of, or be subjected to 
discrimination during any 
program or activity or in 
employment. 
Course:  
Critical Reading and Thinking Applications 
(4 - 0) 4 Cr. Hrs.  
  
Text: 
College Reading: The Science and Reading Strategies of Expert Readers 
 
Additional Materials: 
3-Ring Binder with Separators  
Packet of Scantrons - One for Each Test  
Dictionary  
3 x 5 cards  
  
Course Description:  
This course is designed to prepare students to successfully handle 
college-level reading assignments. Reading comprehension techniques 
and vocabulary development strategies are emphasized using a variety of 
materials. Techniques will be applied to selected materials and textbooks 
students are currently using. 
  
Prerequisites:  
Appropriate Reading Placement Score 
 
Core Abilities:  
Core abilities are broad outcomes or skills that every graduate of 
______College is expected to achieve. These skills go beyond the context 
of a specific course or program, are important in every area of learning, 
and are the skills employers and other stakeholders indicate are essential. 
______College requires candidates for all associate degrees to 
demonstrate competency in eight core abilities: communicate effectively, 
think creatively and critically, use technology effectively, use 
mathematics, manage information, work cooperatively, act responsibly, 
and demonstrate social and cultural awareness. 
 
The following core abilities have been identified as important in this 
course:  
  
1. Communicate effectively. 
 
2. Think creatively and critically. 
 
3. Manage information. 
 
4. Demonstrate social and cultural awareness. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
33
Competencies: 
Upon successful completion of the course, the student should be able to: 
 
1. Identify main idea and relevant details in college textbooks and essays. 
2. Differentiate appropriate reading strategies for various types of text. 
3. Identify appropriate inferences. 
4. Analyze vocabulary words utilizing context and word structures. 
5. Explore the question-and-answer relationship in reading and test preparation. 
6. Develop critical reading strategies for college reading material. 
7. Initiate the use of appropriate organizational techniques to consolidate information. 
8. Demonstrate appropriate test-preparation techniques. 
9. Investigate test-taking strategies.  
10. Diagnose reading errors. 
11. Summarize essential elements of an argument and evaluate the strength of arguments. 
12. Identify author’s pattern of organization. 
13. Describe the memory process. 
 
Methods of Instruction: 
Any combination or all of the following may be used in this course: 
 
Delivery of Course Content: 
Lecture, Electronic Presentation, Demonstrations, Video/Audio Presentations, Case Studies, Field Trips, 
Web site(s), Course Books, Articles, Other Resources 
 
Assessment: 
Practical Application, Quizzes and Tests, Papers and Presentations, Discussion, Brain Strength Options 
 
Communication: 
Lecture, Collaborative Discussion, Group Projects, Electronic Communication, Course Website  
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
34
Student Schedule 
Week 
Topic 
Related Competency 
Week 1 
Introduction to course 
Chapter 1: Making Brain Connections to Become an 
Expert Reader 
Pre-reading survey 
Introduction to reading 
Making connections in your brain 
Journal #1 
Active/inactive learning 
Distractions 
Learning is state dependent 
Create groups 
Journal #2 
Differentiate appropriate reading 
strategies for various types of text. 
 
Diagnose reading errors. 
 
Explain how the brain learns. 
Week 2 
Chapter 2: Remembering What You Read  
The memory process 
Journal #3 
Application of strategies that facilitate stages of memory  
Making connections in your brain 
Journal #4 
Bring Journals for Review 
Homework Book Check 
Differentiate appropriate reading 
strategies for various types of text. 
 
Explain how memories are encoded. 
 
Describe the memory process. 
Week 3 
Chapter 3: Developing Your College Vocabulary 
Making connections in your brain 
How does developing your vocabulary increase your 
ability to read? 
Word parts 
Context clues 
Vocabulary building strategies 
Word maps 
CRS system 
Journal #5 
Exam covering Chapters 1, 2, and 3 
Homework Book Check 
Analyze vocabulary words utilizing 
context and word structures. 
Week 4 
Chapter 4: Locating Main Ideas 
Strategies for understanding main ideas 
Making connections in your brain 
Mapping 
Application 
Journal #6 
Bring Journals for Review 
Homework Book Check 
Identify main idea and relevant details in 
college textbooks and essays. 
 
Explore the question-and-answer 
relationship in reading and test 
preparation. 
Week 5 
Chapter 5: Finding Supporting Details 
Making connections in your brain 
Big picture and details 
Major and minor details 
Clue words 
Application 
Journal #7 
Homework Book Check 
Identify main idea and relevant details in 
college textbooks and essays. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
35
 
Week 6 
Chapter 6: Using Inference to Identify Implied Main Idea 
Making connections in your brain 
Making an inference 
Inference strategies 
Journal #8 
Knowing how much to infer 
Application 
Journal #9 
Bring Journals for Review 
Homework Book Check 
Identify appropriate inferences. 
Weeks 7 
Application – Test 
Part 1 
Part 1I Group Test 
Identify main idea and relevant details in 
college textbooks and essays. 
 
Identify appropriate inferences. 
Week 8 
Chapter 7: Recognizing Patterns of Organization 
Making connections in your brain 
Journal #10 
Finding patterns 
Types of patterns 
Clue words 
Application 
Journal #11 
Homework Book Check 
Identify authors’ patterns of 
organization. 
Week 9 
Chapter 8: Using Preview, Study-Read, and Review (PSR) 
Making connections in your brain 
Preview, study-read, review 
Stages 
Cross referencing 
Flipping 
Application 
Journal #12 
Bring Journals for Review 
Homework Book Check 
Identify main idea and relevant details in 
college textbooks and essays. 
Week 10 
Chapter 9: Taking Control of Your Textbook 
Making connections in your brain 
Parts of a textbook 
Application of what you’ve learned – using it to mark 
your textbooks  
Journal #13 
Homework Book Check 
Take Home Exam: Textbook Marking 
Differentiate appropriate reading 
strategies for various types of text. 
 
Explore the question-and-answer 
relationship in reading and test 
preparation. 
 
Initiate the use of appropriate 
organization techniques to consolidate 
information. 
Week 11 
Chapter 10: Using Visuals to Increase Your 
Understanding of Textbooks 
Making connections in your brain 
Reading visuals 
Creating visuals 
Application 
Journal #14 
Identify main idea and relevant details in 
college textbooks and essays. 
 
Understand the purpose and types of 
visuals. 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
36
 
Week 12 
Chapter 11: Understanding and Creating Arguments 
Making connections in your brain 
Introduction to argumentation 
Journal #15 
Parts of an argument 
Opinions/facts 
Application 
Journal #16 
Bring Journals for Review 
Develop critical reading strategies for 
essay and argument. 
 
Summarize essential elements of an 
argument. 
Week 13 
Chapter 12: Reading Arguments Critically  
Making connections in your brain 
Inductive and deductive arguments 
Journal #17 
Detecting fallacies 
Evaluating arguments 
Application 
Journal #18 
Homework Book Check 
Bring Journals for Review 
Develop critical reading strategies for 
essay and argument. 
Week 14 
Chapter 13: Reading Beyond the Words 
Making connections in your brain 
Journal #19 
Bloom’s Taxonomy levels 
NHLP 
Clue words 
Application 
Journal #20 
Bring Journals for Review 
Homework Book Check 
Identify main idea and relevant details in 
college textbooks and essays. 
Week 15 
Post-Reading Survey 
Review – best of Brain Strengths Options 
Review 
Final Exam 
Diagnose reading errors. 
 
 
The Faculty Guide provided here illustrates how instructors might conduct a reading class using the 
Course Syllabus provided. Instructors, even seasoned ones, may benefit from at least reviewing this guide 
as it provides a detailed plan of instruction specific to Science and Strategies. 
 
Faculty Guide 
 
Week 1: Chapter 1: Making Brain Connections to Become an Expert Reader 
• 
Course introduction 
• 
If desired, do an icebreaker activity of your choice (several listed in Instructor’s 
Manual). 
• 
Review syllabus. 
• 
Go over course schedule, requirements, assessments, and materials. 
• 
Share any personal suggestions or expectations for the course. 
• 
Ask students why they are here or why it is important to study college reading. 
• 
Share and discuss answers. 
• 
Have students complete Activity 1a: Complete a Reading Survey (Note: you may need paper 
copies since students may not have the textbook yet). 
• 
Have students discuss and compare answers of expert readers to their own. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
37
• 
Have students answer the Making Connections questions (either as inner reflection, 
journaling, group discussion, on paper, or as class discussion). 
• 
Discuss What Is Reading?  
• 
Define what reading is and is not. 
 
What do good readers do? 
• 
Define critical reading. 
• 
Define metacognition. 
• 
Explain journals and assign Journal #1. Sample prompts: How do you know when you’re 
reading well? What is a good reader? Describe three things you think an expert reader 
does. 
• 
Define active vs. passive reading. 
• 
Discuss distracters. 
• 
Discuss the importance of making connections (because it optimizes learning). 
• 
Have students complete Activity 1c: Identify Active and Passive Reading Strategies (Note: 
you may need paper copies since students may not have the textbook yet). 
• 
Discuss The Natural Human Learning Process (NHLP). 
• 
Have students complete Activity 1e: See the NHLP in Action.  
• 
Discuss Managing Your Attention. 
• 
Have students complete Activity 1f: Learn About Yourself.  
• 
Discuss Fighting Distracters.  
• 
Have students complete Activity 1g: Discover Your Distracters.  
• 
Internal vs. external distracters. 
• 
Use of a daily reading plan. 
 
Demonstrate how to complete. 
• 
Discuss Create Your Learning Environment.  
• 
What impacts learning in the environment? 
• 
Describe and demonstrate Habits to Enhance Your Reading.  
• 
Skimming 
• 
Rereading or regression 
• 
Subvocalization 
• 
Pacing 
• 
Practice with a Reading Passage 
• 
Homework options (at instructor's discretion): 
• 
Journal #2. Sample prompts: How can you be more active in your reading? Why are 
students tempted to be passive as they read? What effective reading habits do you 
practice already? 
• 
Get books and course materials. 
• 
Review syllabus. 
• 
Come prepared to next class with questions. 
• 
Select specific pages for focus of course. 
• 
Post Test, Part 1 and Part 1I 
• 
Brain Strengths Options 
• 
Possible activities: 
• 
Group Discussion: share passive learning habits and how to change them. 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
38
Week 2: Chapter 2: Remembering What You Read 
• 
Begin with Making Connections so that students can connect new material to their existing 
knowledge. 
• 
Discuss The Memory Process.  
OO  Sensory input 
OO  Working memory 
 
Rehearsal and repetition 
 
Chunking 
OO  Encoding 
 
Rehearsal and repetition 
 
Chunking 
 
Mnemonics 
 
Reformatting 
 
Associations and connections 
OO  Long-term memory 
• 
Journal #3. Sample prompts: Why is it important to think of memory as a process? How does 
knowing about memory help your reading? 
• 
Have students complete activities on memory techniques (at instructor’s discretion). 
OO  Activities 2d – 2m 
• 
Discuss memory and reading connection. 
• 
Group work: Practice with a Reading Passage  
• 
Homework options: (at instructor's discretion) 
OO  Post Test (individual work) 
OO  Brain Strengths Options 
OO  Journal #4. Sample prompts: Why do you think you sometimes forget what you read? 
Why is it helpful to connect new information with information you already know on 
the subject? 
OO  Collect journals. 
 
Week 3: Chapter 3: Developing Your College Vocabulary  
• 
Address Making Connections questions. 
• 
Discuss Why study vocabulary? or Why is vocabulary important? 
• 
Emphasize importance of strong vocabulary for future success. 
• 
Review of NHLP:  We learn by making connections. 
• 
When learning vocabulary, this is key: 
 
Learn new words in context. 
 
Identify word parts we know. 
• 
Discuss and demonstrate use of context clues (Activities 3a - 3c and others at instructor's discretion). 
• 
Types of context clues: 
 
Punctuation 
 
Synonyms 
 
Antonyms 
 
Definitions 
 
Examples 
 
Personal experiences, opinions, knowledge 
• 
Discuss context clues in textbooks and other college reading (Activities 3d and 3e or other 
realistic readings of instructor's choice). 
• 
Define and provide examples of common word parts.  
• 
Prefix 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
39
• 
Suffix 
• 
Root 
• 
Practice identifying and learning word parts in class and as homework at instructor's 
discretion.  
• 
Activities 3f - 3n 
• 
Discuss specialized vocabulary. 
• 
Different fields of study 
• 
Exam terminology 
• 
Discuss and demonstrate methods for learning vocabulary. 
• 
Vocabulary cards (Card Review System) 
• 
Word maps 
• 
Journal #5. Sample prompts: Why is it difficult to remember what you don’t really 
understand? What vocabulary strategies will help you best this semester? 
• 
Homework options:  
• 
Complete Activities (suggested: 3f-3r) from Chapter 3 at instructor's discretion. 
• 
Read all or parts of Chapter 3. 
• 
Create word maps or vocabulary cards (by hand or using Quizlet.com). 
• 
Vocabulary worksheets of instructor's choice. 
• 
Post Test Part 1 and/or Part 1I. 
• 
Brain Strengths Options 
 
(Note: Instructors are encouraged to use this as a jumping off point for vocabulary development and to 
revisit this topic periodically. Point out use of context clues when doing other activities, do activities to 
reinforce students’ study of word parts, and provide practice tests or activities as time allows. Vocabulary 
development is reinforced throughout the textbook.) 
 
Vocabulary Test to come later in semester at instructor’s discretion  
Homework/Lab - assigned and graded at instructor’s discretion  
 
Week 4: Chapter 4: Locating Stated Main Ideas 
• 
Address Making Connections questions. 
• 
Ask: How do you know what is important when you read?   
o What is a topic or theme?  
o What is a (stated) main idea? 
o What are details? 
o Practice locating topic and stated main idea in paragraphs.  
 
Activity 4c 
 
Other practice readings at discretion of instructor and creating mind maps. 
• 
Practice locating topic and stated main idea in longer passages. 
 
Textbooks and essays 
 
Previewing 
 
Use of headings 
• 
Introduce reading with pencil in hand and underlining main ideas while reading. (Great 
opportunity for group work/share and discuss.) 
o Part of being an active reader (think while you read) 
o Using color (green highlighting) to identify main ideas  
 
Study/memory aid 
• 
Review ways to locate topic, main idea, and details. 
o Questioning self while reading 
 
Activity 4d 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
40
o Looking in usual spots  
 
Sample paragraphs in text 
o Using word clues  
 
Activities 4e and 4f 
o Categorize ideas (points made by author) 
 
General versus specific 
• 
Complete additional practice activities of locating and mapping main ideas. 
o Activities 4h and 4i 
o Additional paragraphs and essays of instructor's choice 
o Mapping of articles selected by students (collaborative) 
o Mapping of an important event or person in student’s life (see example) 
and work collaboratively to reassemble 
• 
Practice with a Reading Passage 
• 
Journal #6. Sample prompts: How can chapter titles help you understand main ideas? How 
are main ideas different from topics? 
• 
Homework options:  
o Activities from text of instructor’s choice 
o Additional reading passages/worksheets of instructor's choice 
o Using a study guide to take notes while reading: 
 
Look for topic of each chapter. 
 
Identify main ideas and details in each chapter. 
 
Create outlines or maps of each chapter. 
o Read all or parts of Chapter 4. 
o Locate a short article to share with a partner and identify topic and main idea. 
o Post Test, Part 1 and/or Part 1I 
o Brain Strengths Options 
o Collect journals. 
 
Week 5: Chapter 5: Finding Supporting Details 
• 
Address Making Connections questions. 
• 
Discuss and demonstrate strategies for finding supporting details in paragraphs and essays. 
• 
Major versus minor details 
 
Activities 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5i, 5j 
• 
Asking questions 
 
Activity 5e 
• 
Word clues 
 
Sample reading in text 
 
Activities 5f, 5g, 5h 
• 
Discuss and demonstrate mapping and outlining of supporting details. 
• 
Activity 5l 
• 
Show relationship between outlining and mapping. 
• 
Journal #7. Sample prompts: How can you tell details from main ideas? Why do students 
sometimes get stuck on details and miss the main points?   
• 
Additional practice exercises: 
• 
Practice with a Reading Passage 
• 
Extra paragraphs and essays of instructor’s choice 
 
Create outlines of selected readings. 
 
Create mind maps of selected readings. 
• 
In pairs, interview and create mind maps or outlines of main ideas and supporting 
details about classmates collected through interview. 
 
Family/friends 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
41
 
Interests/hobbies 
 
College plans/career goals 
• 
Homework options:  
• 
Read all or parts of Chapter 5. 
 
Highlight main ideas in green and details in yellow. 
• 
Locate a short article to share with a partner and mind map or outline main idea and 
details. 
• 
Post Test, Parts I and/or Part 1I 
• 
Brain Strengths Options 
 
Week 6: Chapter 6: Using Inference to Identify Implied Main Ideas 
• 
Address Making Connections questions. 
• 
Introduce making inferences and have students figure out implied main ideas using songs. 
• 
Activity 6a and 6c 
• 
Group activity – Activity 6d 
• 
Author’s Purpose 
• 
Create a PowerPoint showing pictures of different types of writing and have students 
determine the author’s purpose for each. Examples of pictures are: recipe, poem, love 
letter, screen of an iPod, ingredients label on a can of soup, a tweet, a text, a jury 
summons. 
• 
Comparisons and implied similarities 
• 
Explore comparisons using lyrics that students supply.  
• 
Activity 6f 
• 
Author’s tone 
• 
Activity 6g 
• 
Detecting bias 
• 
Information gaps 
• 
Group activity – Activities 6l and 6m 
• 
Journal #8. Sample prompts: How does your prior knowledge on a subject help you infer 
from what you read? If an author is biased, does that mean what he or she says doesn’t have 
merit? Why or why not? 
• 
Discuss inferring too much from situations.  
• 
Create scenarios with an inference. Examples of scenarios are: 1. If you sit in the 
front row of your class, can you infer that your instructor will call on you the most? 
Why or why not? 2. If a person opens the door for you at the post office, can you infer 
that she will let you go ahead of her in line? Why or why not? 3. If you raise your 
hand first in class, can you infer that your instructor will call on you immediately? 4. 
If you buy a song on iTunes, can you infer that you will be able to hear it soon after?  
• 
Activity 6n 
• 
Homework options:  
• 
Journal #9. Sample prompts: How do you know when you’ve inferred enough from a 
reading? How do you know if you’ve inferred too much? 
• 
Practice with a Reading Passage – Complete as a group. 
• 
Post Test, Part 1 and Part 1I 
• 
Brain Strengths Options 
• 
Extra paragraphs and essays (instructor's choice) 
• 
Collect journals. 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
42
Week 7: Tests 
• 
Test 
• 
Part 1 
• 
Part 1I: Group Test 
 
Week 8: Chapter 7: Recognizing Patterns of Organization 
• 
Address Making Connections questions. 
• 
Discuss grocery store analogy. How do patterns help us in life? 
• 
Discuss Activity 7a and Tip from the Brain Doctor that follows. What “patterns” do you have 
committed to memory?   
• 
Journal #10. Use standard prompts or others such as: What patterns do you follow every day? 
What patterns do you recognize when you read? 
• 
Discuss patterns of organization and word clues.   
• 
Listing 
• 
Analysis (whole into parts) 
• 
Cause/Effect 
• 
Compare/Contrast 
• 
Definition/Example 
• 
Sequence 
• 
Complete Activity 7b as a class, Activity 7c individually, and Activity 7d in pairs. 
• 
Complete Activity 7f individually and Activity 7g in groups. 
• 
Complete Activity 7h, Activity 7i, and Activity 7j individually and Activity 7k in pairs. 
• 
Read Mixed Patterns and ask questions leading students to the main idea and overall pattern 
of organization.   
• 
Activity 7l and Activity 7m in pairs. Discuss as class. 
• 
Extra paragraphs and essays (instructor's choice) 
• 
Homework options:  
• 
Journal #11. Sample prompts: What is the most difficult part of identifying patterns in 
your reading? How does identifying an author’s pattern help you uncover the 
author’s main idea? 
• 
Practice with Reading Passage 
• 
Post Test, Part 1 and Part 1I 
• 
Brain Strength Options 
 
Week 9: Chapter 8: Using Preview, Study-Read, and Review (PSR) 
• 
Address Making Connections question. 
• 
Complete Activity 8a in class. 
• 
Introduce the PSR method. 
• 
Preview: As a class, offer examples of previewing (reading movie reviews online, 
menus) and practice attaching prior knowledge to previewed material. 
• 
Activity 8b and 8c; Activity 8d in pairs 
• 
Study-Read  
• 
Activity 8e as a class, modeling the question and answer aspect of study-reading for 
students 
• 
Review  
• 
Activity 8g  
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
43
• 
Homework options:  
• 
Practice with Reading Passage in groups 
• 
Post Test, Part 1 and Part 1I 
• 
Brain Strengths Options 
• 
Journal #12. Sample prompts: What is “firing” and “wiring” my brain? How does PSR help 
me do this? 
• 
Collect journals. 
 
Week 10: Chapter 9: Taking Control of Your Textbook: Marking and Note Taking 
• 
Address Making Connections questions. 
• 
Class discussion: Ask students questions about Science and Strategies and have them find 
the answers in the book. Sample questions are: What does [a key term] mean? In what 
chapter can you find [a heading from the table of contents]? What if you wanted to do more 
reading on [topic]? Where would you find additional books and articles?   
• 
Textbook marking: Have students preview and study-read Plato and Aristotle reading 
independently.  
• 
Complete highlighting together as a class, modeling how to identify the main idea 
and major supporting details. 
• 
Activity 9c in pairs 
• 
Have students offer margin notes ideas and have class discuss which ones work best. 
• 
Complete Activity 9d in groups and then Activity 9f individually. 
• 
Focused Notes 
• 
Complete Activity 9g in individually. 
• 
Homework options:  
• 
Journal #13. Sample prompts: What does it mean to take control of your textbook?  
How can you “tell” your brain what’s important? (See first Brain Tip for clues.) 
• 
Practice with a Reading Passage – Complete as a group.  
• 
Post Test, Part 1 and Part 1I 
• 
Brain Strengths Options 
 
Week 11: Chapter 10: Using Visuals to Increase Your Understanding of Textbooks 
• 
Address Making Connections questions. 
• 
Demonstrate using PSR with visuals on PowerPoint – the funnier the visuals, the better.  
Discuss what it means to say, “A picture is worth a thousand words.” 
• 
Activity 10a in pairs 
• 
Assign pairs of students one type of visual to explain to the class. Make sure each pair defines 
the visual and describes how to read it. 
• 
Activities 10b – 10k  
• 
Ask the class what visuals they already use. Which ones do they create? Why do they create 
some kinds of visuals (for example, charts) and not others (geographic map)? 
• 
Activity 10l 
• 
Activities 10m – 10p then share with one other person. Show the person the visual 
first, and then have that person read the visual. Double-check accuracy with the 
actual reading that the visual was drawn from. Each person can critique the created 
visuals using the readings as criteria.   
• 
Activity 10q 
• 
Homework options:  
• 
Practice with a Reading Passage – Complete in pairs. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
44
• 
Journal #14. Sample prompts: How are “reading” visuals a type of rehearsal? How 
do you know what visual to create from your reading?   
• 
Post Test, Part 1 and Part 1I 
• 
Brain Strength Options 
 
Week 12: Chapter 11: Understanding and Creating Arguments 
• 
Address Making Connections questions. 
• 
Define argument and have students offer opinions they hold. Prompt them to supply at least 
one reason for their opinion. 
• 
Journal #15. Use the Making Connections part of this chapter as journal prompts.   
• 
Complete Activity 11a as a class.  
• 
Parts of an argument: Write down the opinions that students provided earlier and then list the 
reasons they provided in this format: 
Conclusion: 
Reason 1:   
• 
Activities 11b – 11d  
• 
Discuss word clues.  
• 
Activities 11e and 11f  
• 
Complete Activity 11g as a class. 
• 
Use Teaching Tip before Distinguishing Fact from Opinions to illustrate the difference. 
• 
Activities 11h – 11j independently 
• 
Use Teaching Tip that precedes Hidden Assumptions. 
• 
Complete Activity 11k as a class 
• 
Using Teaching Tips that precede Making Sense of Visual Arguments. 
• 
Activity 11l – 11o 
• 
Journal #15. Sample prompts: How do you know what an argument is when you’re reading?  
Is it possible to write an argument without having hidden assumptions imbedded in it? Why 
or why not? 
• 
Homework options:  
• 
Practice with Reading Passage – Complete in pairs. 
• 
Post Test, Part 1 and Part 1I 
• 
Brain Strengths Options 
• 
Collect journals. 
 
Week 13: Chapter 12: Reading Arguments Critically 
• 
Discuss as a class the answers to the Making Connections.  
• 
Discuss inductive arguments, using the second Teaching Tip in this chapter (about student 
socks) to illustrate what inductive arguments are. 
• 
Activities 12a and 12b 
• 
Use the fortune cookie Teaching Tip to illustrate deductive arguments. 
• 
Activities 12c – 12e 
• 
Journal #17. Use Comprehension Check after Activity 12h. 
• 
Evaluating an argument: discussion and exercises 
• 
In groups, have students create arguments that contain at least one fallacy.  
• 
Activities 12i – 12k  
• 
Using argument maps, discuss as a class how to evaluate arguments. 
• 
Activity 12l in pairs 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
45
• 
Assign Evaluating Information on the Internet as homework.  
• 
Activity 12m  
• 
Journal #18. Sample prompts: Why is it necessary to know the difference between inductive 
and deductive arguments? How do I know an argument is good?   
• 
Homework options:  
• 
Practice with Reading Passage – Complete in pairs. 
• 
Post Test, Part 1 and Part 1I 
• 
Brain Strengths Options  
 
Week 14: Chapter 13: Reading Beyond the Words 
• 
Address Making Connections questions. 
• 
Levels of questions (Bloom's Taxonomy): discussion and exercises 
• 
Complete Activity 13a as a class. 
• 
Journal #19. Activity 13b and then later 13d 
• 
Complete Activities 13c – 13l 
• 
Discuss NHLP.   
• 
Activity 13m in groups 
• 
Journal #20. Sample prompts: What do you know about how people learn naturally? What is 
higher-level thinking? 
• 
Homework options:  
• 
Practice with a Reading Passage – Complete individually. 
• 
Post Test, Part 1 and Part 1I 
• 
Brain Strength Options 
 
Class Review: Culminating reading assignment  
• 
Provide three articles (2 arguments, 1 expository; perhaps even a brief textbook excerpt) on 
given topic. Students will: 
• 
Read and mark-up. 
• 
Identify patterns of organization. 
• 
Map main ideas/conclusions and supporting details/reasons based on appropriate 
pattern. 
• 
Possible mini (25-point) quiz based on the readings (This is a realistic application of 
the type of work they will ultimately do in a college class: have readings, study them, 
and take quiz). Possible topic: Organ donation 
 
Homework/Lab required and graded: specific requirements at instructor's discretion 
 
Week 15: Review and Tests 
• 
Post-Reading Survey 
• 
Review – Best of Brain Strength Options 
• 
Final Exam  
• 
Post Test, Parts I and II 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
46
FEATURES, TEACHING TIPS, AND TESTS 
 
CHAPTER 1: MAKING BRAIN CONNECTIONS TO BECOME AN EXPERT READER  
 
AUTHOR SPOTLIGHT 
 
• From the Desk of Janet Zadina 
Student to Student – Terry Clark 
The purpose of the Student to Student feature is to provide for many aspects of brain-compatible learning: 
real-life situations, social learning, and modeling. They are meant to provide supporting information from 
peers as opposed to solely from authors and instructors. Terry was chosen to open the book for several 
reasons. First, he is an older student looking back at his attitude toward reading when he was in college 
and how it changed over the years as his attitudes, needs, and motivation changed. He is sending a 
message to students that you need reading for many aspects of your later life that may not occur to 
students now. In addition, the brief biography of Terry shows that he has many talents and these make up 
a person who needs to read. It is hoped that students will identify with one of his strengths and see that 
learning to become a better reader does apply to real life. They may identify with his former attitude 
about reading but see how it does affect being successful in life later, even if you are in a job that doesn't 
require a great deal of reading. It is a real life skill. 
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Activity 1a – Reading Survey 
Activity 1a was designed by investigating the skills and strategies successful students use, and it is also 
the result of working with developmental readers in reading courses. Some students come to reading 
classes using a limited mix of effective skills and strategies while others haven’t tried or learned most of 
them. The impetus for developing this survey was to differentiate those skills and strategies students are 
using effectively from those they have not yet learned. It gives instructors insight regarding what students 
already know and what they can or should focus on in Science and Strategies to help their students 
become better readers.  
 
The reading survey is suggested as a way to introduce students to your reading course. Students 
won’t change the way they read or study unless they see the need to change. Most students who are 
coming to your class directly from high school have not had to read much, and haven’t been accountable 
for their reading up to this point. So, they believe that they are reading well enough, and most don’t 
realize that reading is a lifelong activity. They think that once they finish this class, they will never have 
to read for main ideas, supporting details, or implied main ideas again. They are surprised to learn that 
they will probably be taking reading tests and asked to do a great amount of reading when they enter the 
workforce. This is an excellent time to engage older, returning students into a class discussion regarding 
reading in the work place. They will be able to reinforce what you are saying, and can attest to the fact 
that reading and pay rate are highly correlated.  
 
Activity 1a requires students to evaluate and be reflective regarding their current reading skills 
and abilities. It serves as a starting point in self-regulation and metacognition; this is critical, if 
substantive change is to occur. Once students realize that their own specific reading challenges will be 
addressed, they are usually more willing and more motivated to do the work. I wouldn’t require students 
to share their survey results with the class unless they choose to share. Reading, like writing, is personal 
and trust needs to be developed first. 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
47
• From the Desk of Rita Smilkstein 
The Natural Human Learning Process & Activity 1e – See the NHLP in Action 
This research is the critical activity to introduce students to invaluable metacognitive knowledge about 
how human beings learn, about how they themselves learn, and about them being natural-born learners. 
Teaching this material and Activity 1e is most effectively done during the first class because it 
immediately creates confidence in both the teacher and students about the students’ ability to be 
successful learners. Its effect is immediately noticeable and persists throughout the term. 
 
With every one of the hundreds of groups and thousands of participants who have done this activity, 
the results have been consistent with the results shown in this chapter. (See also Smilkstein, We’re Born 
to Learn: Using the Brain’s Natural Learning Process to Create Today’s Curriculum, 2nd ed., 2011, 
Corwin Press.) Teachers need to keep in mind that the directions in the chapter have been used 
successfully with every class or group, and therefore, they should follow these directions exactly as listed. 
 
• From the Desk of Nancy Anter 
Write in a Journal 
I use journals with my students both as a means of communication between my students and me, and as a 
metacognitive tool. Early in the semester, I give small writing prompts that help students think about 
themselves as learners. I ask questions such as: “What college subjects most interest you? What makes 
them interesting to you? What college subjects prove very challenging? Why?” I also invite students to 
share their hesitations about reading and college in general.  
 
As the semester progresses, I ask students to write in their journals after reading an assignment. I 
ask them to connect information they already know with information they just learned from the reading. I 
also ask them to write questions about anything that was unclear to them in the reading. I use these 
questions to focus my instruction for the next class session. At other times, I ask students to write about 
their experiences with the different reading strategies presented in Science and Strategies. I ask them 
which ones worked and which ones didn’t. When students write about using reading strategies, they are 
more vocal during class discussions that involve reading strategies. Another very helpful use of the 
journal is to ask students to write after they have their tests handed back and, as a class, we have gone 
through the correct answers. They write an assessment of their performance and develop a specific plan 
for improvement, if necessary. Having them come up with a plan for improvement encourages them to 
own their learning experience.  
 
I collect the journals about once a week and write back to the students. I don’t grade the journal 
content, just the effort. Once students realize that I actually read what they write and respond to them 
personally, they often write more honestly. 
 
• From the Desk of Nancy Anter 
Use the Checkmark Monitoring System 
Using the checkmark monitoring system, students analyze their concentration efforts and learn what 
enhances and inhibits their concentration. They also notice differences in their concentration level as they 
read for different subjects. This analysis allows student to become more self-aware and motivates them to 
make positive changes to their current learning environment.  
 
The checkmark monitoring system allows you as the instructor to see when and how often 
students lose concentration. It makes an invisible process visible to both student and instructor. Usually, 
instructors will ask if students have good concentration or not, and most don’t know. This awareness of 
losing concentration and getting back on track is an important step for the development of metacognition 
(self-regulation) skills.  
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
48
To introduce the checkmark monitoring system, I explain it explicitly and then I do the 
Concentration Activity described in the activities that follow. After students realize they can direct their 
concentration, they understand how the checkmark monitoring system serves as a reading tool. 
 
 
ACTIVITIES 
 
ACTIVITY 1: Concentration 
 
Goal 
This activity teaches students that purposeful attention is a skill that can be taught, and when applied, 
increases comprehension. It introduces and makes the checkmark monitoring system relevant. 
 
Materials 
• 
any reading selection (you could use Chapter 1 of Science and Strategies) 
• 
stapler 
• 
two hardcover books  
• 
any collection of three items one would not normally see in a classroom (e.g., a roll of toilet paper, a 
rubber snake, salt-and-pepper shakers, a trowel) 
  
Directions 
1. 
Briefly describe the checkmark monitoring system to the class. (The checkmark monitoring system 
is way to monitor concentration. To use it, students begin reading and when they lose their 
concentration, they put a checkmark in the margin of their reading assignment.) 
2. 
Direct students to read the assigned reading selection for ten minutes and put a checkmark in the 
margin each time they lose their concentration. 
3. 
After ten minutes, tell students to stop reading and ask them to total their checkmarks. Discuss the 
results with the class. Ask individual students how many checkmarks they have. Ask why they think 
they lost concentration at those points in their reading. They can look at the text next to their 
checkmark to see if the content caused them to lose concentration, or they can speculate about other 
reasons. 
4. 
Explain to the class that one way to combat the loss of concentration is to purposely attend to what 
they are reading and purposely block out everything else. They can control what they concentrate on 
through focused intent and mental effort. 
5. 
Tell students that you will time their reading again, this time for fifteen minutes. Ask them to 
purposely attend to their reading and block out any distracters. They should put a checkmark in the 
margin any time they lose their concentration. 
6. 
Begin timing them. After about seven minutes, slowly create a little noise. Staple some paper 
together. Wait a minute. Then, take the two hardcover books out of your bag. Monitor students’ 
behavior. Some may notice your activity but will quickly get back to work. If they do so, continue 
to provide distractions, allowing a minute or so of quiet in between each distraction. If students are 
easily distracted, wait a few more minutes before creating another distraction. Some examples of 
distractions that work well are: 
• 
Walk to the door. Close it if it is open; open it if it is closed. 
• 
Walk to the other side of the room and inconspicuously slip off one shoe and leave it there. 
Then walk back to your desk and inconspicuously take off your other shoe and place it 
quietly on your desk. 
• 
Carefully and quietly put the roll of toilet paper somewhere in the room. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
49
• 
Continue placing objects in the room, making sure that students do not notice you and that 
you space out your distractions so that a lot of activity does not occur at once. 
7. 
End the timed reading after fifteen minutes, making sure that you are behind your desk. Have 
students total their checkmarks for this timed reading and compare their results with the totals of the 
last timed reading. Discuss. Many students will have fewer checkmarks for the second timed 
reading even though the time was longer and the distractions increased. 
8. 
Emphasize the point that concentration can be controlled. Ask how many students heard you staple 
the paper together. Most will raise their hands. Ask how many heard you take books out of your 
bag. Some will have heard this but might say that they quickly went back to their reading. Ask 
about the door closing. Ask how many students saw you take off your shoes. (A showing of bare 
feet at this point usually results in a laugh from students.) Show students where you put your shoes. 
Ask how many saw you place the toilet paper roll in the room. Continue until you have identified all 
of the objects you placed in the room. 
9. 
Remind students that even though the second timed reading was longer and you were purposely 
adding distractions to the environment, most of them were able to block the distracters out, even the 
outrageous ones. 
10. Reiterate the point: Concentration can be controlled. It’s a mind game. They can play it to their 
advantage. 
 Benefit to Students 
This activity emphasizes the need to concentrate and that students can learn how to develop 
concentration. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
Students like this activity because it’s a little different, but it’s a concrete way to demonstrate the need to 
develop concentration. Many students believe you either have the ability to concentrate or you don’t, but 
they do not realize it can be learned and developed. 
 
 
ACTIVITY 2: Making Connections 
 
Goal 
This activity will allow students to see connections among ideas. 
 
Directions 
This is a twist on a group sentence-making activity where one person says a word and then the next 
person adds the next word with the process continuing until the whole class has participated. In the end, 
sentences have been created that are logically connected by topic and grammar.  
 
Start this activity using the word students and then let the first student add the next word (for 
example, like, bring, or think) and have the other students participate one at a time, each adding one word. 
Direct students to make logical sense as they go and maintain good grammar.  
 
After about three sentences have been created, stop the activity and ask students to describe how 
they thought up their word. What rules did they use while searching for a word? What did the sentences 
end up being about? Then, explain how this sentence activity illustrates the concept of making 
connections in Science and Strategies. The idea (which started off as one word, students) grew in 
meaning as each student added and connected a new word. Likewise, in reading, your ideas will grow 
when you add logically related information that you already know to the new information that you are 
reading.  
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
50
Demonstrate how this works by reading aloud the heading of a section in Chapter 1, for example 
“Critical Reading and Metacognition.” Ask one student to add a sentence (not a word this time) that is 
related to this subject. Read a paragraph and then ask two other students to add a sentence. Continue on, 
alternating reading aloud with sentences from students until the section is done. Encourage students to ask 
a question instead of a sentence, especially if something in the reading is unclear. Ask them to make some 
of the sentences examples of the subject of the reading. Guide students through reader-author dialogue. 
When you are done, ask students how their sentences/questions helped the class understand the reading.  
 
Benefit to Students 
Students practice connecting ideas and they see how connecting new information with other information 
(prior knowledge, questions, examples) grows their knowledge. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
Instructors can see how easily students are able to connect information to what they are reading. You can 
decide to remediate, if necessary. 
 
 
ACTIVITY 3: Active versus Passive 
 
Goal 
Students discover how active activities differ from passive activities and why that knowledge is important 
to learning. 
 
Materials 
• 
The Chapter 1, Activity 3 Handout: Active versus Passive found on the next page (Instructors could 
create a PowerPoint using active and passive pictures instead of using the handout.) 
 
Directions 
Give every student the handout and ask them to figure out the difference between the lists. You can 
prompt students by asking questions such as, “What is the topic of both lists? How are the lists similar?” 
And then ask, “In which list are the people doing the most physical work?” “How are the lists different?” 
The goal of the questioning is to lead students to realize that one list contains active situations and the 
other list has more passive ones. Now ask about List A. “What does it mean to be actively involved in a 
sport?” What do you think it means to be actively involved in reading?” “Who do you think gets more out 
of reading: passive readers or active readers? Why?”  
 
Benefit to Students 
Students infer from the lists what active participation is. This inference activity helps students see the 
difference between active and passive reading. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
Instructors guide students through the discovery of active versus passive participation. This activity 
makes explicit the idea that reading should be active to be beneficial. You can reference back to this 
activity when teaching Chapter 6 about inference and implied main idea to show students that they do 
have experience with the skill of inference. 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
51
Chapter 1, Activity 3 Handout 
Active versus Passive 
 
 
List A 
List B 
• The swimmer finished first in the 200-
meter backstroke. 
• The sprinter ran his personal best but 
came in second in the race. 
• The gymnast performed her routine 
perfectly. 
• Water polo athletes tread water during 
the entire match. 
• In an average basketball game, players 
run about three miles. 
• The teens stood in line at the 
concession stand. 
• The audience waited silently. 
• The coaches watched the match.  
• One man checked the time on his phone 
during the race. 
• Sitting at the stadium for a long time 
can get uncomfortable. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
52
CHAPTER 2: REMEMBERING WHAT YOU READ  
 
 
AUTHOR SPOTLIGHT 
 
• From the Desk of Janet Zadina 
 
The Memory Process and Figure 2.1 
Figure 2.1 in Chapter 2 was created to help students follow the stages of the memory process as they 
learn about it. When teaching the process, referring to Figure 2.1 throughout will help students follow 
along and see how what they are learning fits into the bigger picture of memory. The figure can also 
become a handy reference when photocopied and kept handy when studying other materials in other 
classes. It reminds students of all the steps that they can take to encode their memory of material in such a 
way that they can use it later, for a test or in life. 
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Activity 2j – Try to Understand What You Don’t Know 
Activity 2j illustrates how important comprehension is to memory. If students don’t understand what they 
are reading, they will have difficulty remembering the content. It’s important for instructors to make 
certain students truly understand a reading and not assume it, just because they can answer the questions 
following it.  
 
More importantly, it’s important for students to realize the need to fully comprehend what they 
are reading, or they aren’t learning the material. Activity 2j drives home the point to students that if they 
don’t speak the language of the reading, they are simply looking at the words, not reading them. (Go back 
to the definition of reading from Chapter 1.) Ask students how they would do on a quiz on this reading. 
Most would say they wouldn’t do well because they don’t understand the language. Ask them how this is 
different from reading a textbook written in English that they don’t understand.  
 
Students have become gifted at searching for context clues to answer questions attached to 
readings. The questions in Science and Strategies were selected to force students to dig deeper, which will 
let instructors know if students understood what they were reading. Students need to learn that it’s 
unlikely that they will perform well on exams if they don’t understand the language or content presented. 
They may be able to answer some objective questions, but will find it next to impossible to answer essay 
questions, which require students to evaluate information. Teach them to test their understanding of the 
textbook information by questioning it, predicting additional information, and connecting it to what they 
already know. 
 
 
ACTIVITIES 
 
ACTIVITY 1: Recency Effect 
 
Goal 
Teach students that to remember new information effectively, material has to be organized and related to 
something they already know. This activity demonstrates the concept of chunking that is discussed in 
detail in Chapter 2. This activity is adapted from Frank Smith’s Reading Without Non-Sense. Students are 
introduced to the Recency Effect; students remember the beginning and end of a chapter but forget 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
53
everything in the middle. They haven’t learned strategies yet to help them organize and remember the 
information.  
 Directions  
Copy the following three pieces of text into three PowerPoint slides.  
 
Slide 1  
A S W C R L O Q T P F L 
 
T K E T H D S R O E D 
 
N A S I L H N P L E I F 
 
Slide 2 
KING EGG RAIN SESSION LAUGHED 
 
TOES CERTIFICATE KINESTHETIC 
 
Slide 3 
THE KING LAUGHED 
 
WHEN HE NOTICED THE PURPLE 
  
FEATHERS IN HER HAIR 
 1. Introduce the activity by explaining to students that Chapter 2 addresses memory and demonstrates 
how memory, learning, and reading are linked.  
2. Show students Slide 1. It’s important that you give them no more than thirty seconds to view it and 
provide no learning prompts. After thirty seconds, ask them to recall as many letters as they can 
remember. (There are a total of 35.) 
3. Next, show them Slide 2. Again, only allow student thirty seconds to view it and ask them to recall as 
many letters as they can. Chances are they will remember more because the letters are now organized 
into words. Most students will remember at least two words. Total the number of letters in the words 
they remember, but still do not discuss the activity. (There are a total of 51.) 
4. Finally, show students Slide 3 for only thirty seconds and then ask them to recall as many letters as 
they can. Most students will remember 100% of the letters because they are organized into words and 
the words are organized into a meaningful sentence. (There are a total of 53 letters.) 
5. Now, ask students why they believe they couldn’t remember the letters in Slides 1 and 2 as easily. 
Their responses might include the following: 
• 
Not enough time 
• 
No reason to remember it 
• 
Not relevant 
• 
Not concentrating 
• 
Frustration with exercise 
• 
Not intending to learn or a “so what?” attitude (This is a very important issue that is addressed in 
Chapter 2. Students need to know that their desire or intent to learn significantly impacts their 
ability to remember what they read. Thinking, learning, and remembering go hand-in-hand.) 
6. Now, ask students to discuss why they could remember more letters in Slide 3. Their responses might 
include the following: 
• 
The letters were organized into words. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
54
• 
The words were organized into a sentence. 
• 
There were fewer separate items to remember. 
• 
They could remember the words more easily than the individual letters.  
7. After a few minutes of discussion, you can introduce the idea of organizing information and creating 
systems to help with memory. Slide 1 showed a number of isolated letters. They weren't related so it 
was hard to memorize them individually. The letters in Slide 2 were organized into meaningful 
chunks, or words, which made it easier to remember more of them, even though the group of words 
didn't make sense – were not well organized. Finally, the letters in Slide 3 were organized into words, 
and the words were organized into a meaningful sentence. By remembering the words in the sentence, 
students could easily remember all of the letters. Explain that many students study their course 
material as if what they are reading consists of isolated and unrelated pieces of information (Slide 1). 
Stress how important it is for them to become engaged and actively involved with new information, 
and to learn how to organize new information so they can remember it more efficiently. The focus of 
Chapter 2 is to show that most people actually have good memories, they just have a lot to remember 
and don’t have a good system. Chapter 2 explains the barriers to remembering information and 
provides many strategies for overcoming those barriers and remembering information more 
effectively. 
 
Benefit to Student 
Students should begin to understand why they forget information from their reading, if they try to read 
straight through. This activity addresses ways to improve their memories. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
This activity is very effective in teaching students the need to organize information in a meaningful way. 
 
 
ACTIVITY 2: Remember by Making Associations with Visualization 
 
Goal  
The goal of this activity is to introduce one of the concepts of memory and to demonstrate that using 
strategies, such as creating associations, can help to increase your recall of new information. 
 
Directions 
1. Ask students to take out a piece of paper and a pencil. Tell them not to write anything down until you 
ask them to do so. 
2. Tell students you will be reading out a list of words (following here) and want them to remember as 
many items as they can: 
• 
hamburger 
• 
feather   
• 
gate 
 
• 
closet 
• 
tree  
 
• 
marshmallow  
• 
religion 
• 
fish  
 
• 
men  
 
• 
beaks   
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
55
3. Now ask students to write down as many words as they can remember in the order you read them in 
one minute. Have students share their lists. Some will have used memory strategies they have 
developed to help them remember the items. Don’t have them share their strategies at this point. 
4. Ask students to turn their papers over and write the numbers 1 through 10, and then put their pencils 
down and listen as you read the list again. 
5. Tell students to close their eyes and try to see the pictures you will create for each word. As you read the 
list again, provide an association for each word. Use associations that are strange or silly or rhyme. 
(Yes, even silly! The stranger the connections are, the more likely students will be able to remember the 
list of words.) Provided here are possible descriptions you could use, but feel free to create your own. 
• 
One - BUN for a hamburger. One enormous hamburger on the largest bun I’ve ever seen. 
Hamburger. 
• 
Two - SHOES with a feather. Two fun shoes dancing with feathers. Big shoes with blue 
feathers. Feather. 
• 
Three - KEYS for a gate. Three keys to open the gate. Don’t be late. Gate. 
• 
Four - DOOR as a closet. At four the door to your closet opens. Closet. 
• 
Five - HIVE in the tree. Five hives in the tree. Bzzzzzzzzzz, cut the tree. Tree. 
• 
Six - STICKS for marshmallows. Pick up six sticks to roast marshmallows by the campfire. 
Marshmallows. 
• 
Seven - HEAVEN for a religion. I see seven nuns flying to heaven; it’s my religion. Religion. 
• 
Eight - BAIT for fish. Eight pieces of bait to catch fish. Big wiggly bait for big slippery fish. Fish. 
• 
Nine - FINE men. My goodness! Nine fine men are here! Fine men are always welcome. Men. 
• 
Ten - HENS beaks. Ten hens are loose and poking with their beaks. Red hens’ beaks. Beaks. 
6. Have students open their eyes and try to recall and write down as many of the words in order as they can. 
7. When students have finished writing, ask them if it was easier to remember the list the second time. 
Most students find using the associations provided and visualizing them does improve their ability to 
remember the words. Connecting information to familiar items helps to facilitate the memory. Also, 
connecting words that rhyme helps to trigger memory. This activity is a helpful tool for proving the 
point that doing something with information is sometimes necessary in order to remember it 
effectively. Learning about and using strategies can be useful. If any students used different memory 
strategies, invite them to share their strategies with the class. 
 
Benefits to Students 
Students learn that there are strategies and steps to improving one’s memory. Memory can be enhanced when 
you know how the brain learns. This activity uses visualization, repetition, intent, and making connections. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
This is an engaging strategy to drive home a couple of key points regarding the memory. Students usually 
like this activity. The more connections students make with information, the more likely it is that they 
will remember it.  
 
 
ACTIVITY 3: Chunking Introduction 
 
Goal 
Students will understand how to chunk information and why it’s beneficial to memory. 
 
Materials  
• 
Box (size for a ream of paper works best, see if your copy center on campus can provide you one) 
• 
Towel to cover items 
• 
You can put anything in the box you want and create your own categories. Suggested items provided 
here, but have them all mixed up. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
56
 
 
Drinking Items 
Straw 
Paper cup 
Coffee mug 
Plastic glass 
Empty water bottle 
Sweeteners 
Packet of regular sugar 
Packet of sugar alternative 
Honey 
Brown sugar 
Food Items 
Candy bar 
Marshmallows 
Apple 
Banana 
Raisins 
Camping Items 
Map 
Flashlight 
Matches 
Can opener 
Bug spray 
Writing Materials 
Pen 
Pencil 
Chalk 
Crayon 
Marker 
Items Used to Hold Things Together 
Paper clip 
Safety pin 
Needle and thread 
Staple 
Chip clip 
 
Directions 
1. Bring out a box filled with items (see above list for ideas for items).  
2. Have students look in the box. Either they can come up and look in for a minute or you can walk 
around the class with the box. Students are not allowed to touch, but only to look at everything the 
way it is in the box.  
3. Have students list as many items from the box as they can remember on a separate sheet of paper.  
4. Have students share their lists. Ask why they didn’t remember all of the items. Some possible 
responses which you can use to connect with reading: 
• 
Items weren’t organized; didn’t know what was there 
• 
Hard to see items; they were all mixed together 
• 
No reason to remember all of the items; “So what?” “Who cares?” (This affects memory 
a great deal. Students need to learn that they need to intend to remember and establish a 
purpose for remembering.) 
• 
Too many to remember 
• 
Not enough time to remember 
5. Ask students how they could remember the items more effectively. Some possible responses: 
• 
Dump all the items out so that everything can all be seen. 
• 
Make sure you know what the items are. 
• 
Give yourself time for repetition and to remember. 
• 
Sort the items into like groups; establish categories. 
6. At this point, you can introduce the concept of chunking. Have students sort through the box and put 
the items into categories. Have students look at the items once again for a minute. Cover the items 
with the towel and now ask students to see how many items they can remember. 
7. Debrief. Ask students if chunking helped them to remember and then make the transition to relating 
chunking to reading. 
 
Benefit to Students 
This activity works very well for struggling learners. Students can manipulate the items and they are able 
to see and experience how organizing materials into categories makes a difference. 
 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
This is an engaging introduction into chunking items. It is an easy buy-in for students because they can 
experience chunking’s effectiveness. 
 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
57
CHAPTER 3: DEVELOPING YOUR COLLEGE VOCABULARY 
 
 
AUTHOR SPOTLIGHT 
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Activity 3d - Use Context Clues in a Passage 
This reading associated with Activity 3d—The Language Barrier—was selected for its high interest. 
Usually students enjoy reading about things they need to figure out. Also, students usually enjoy reading 
details about American Indians. In my class, students thought it was “cool” how the American Indians 
helped the U.S. win World War II through the use of their language. They find the code words interesting 
and compelling. The trick is to connect the skills of decoding English words with decoding Indian words 
in the reading—it is the same process. Students don’t realize that they are decoding and encoding all the 
time. Students begin to realize that challenging words, which at first seem impossible to decode, can 
usually be decoded by using specific strategies and knowing word parts. This activity serves as a great 
introduction to decoding and encoding. It usually generates an interesting discussion. 
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
The Card Review System 
When students are first introduced to the card review system (CRS), they tend to groan. The usually don’t 
want to go through all of the steps: writing the word, the definition, the sentence the word was used in, 
part of speech, etc. But, the truth is that a CRS is inexpensive, easy, and effective. As soon as students try 
it, they understand why it’s a useful tool. It’s best to introduce this system to the class and to complete the 
cards together so that you know as an instructor that everyone understands the method. You can use the 
marginal vocabulary words from the Practice with a Reading Passage. As you continue through Chapter 
3, remind students to practice using the CRS and sporadically question students about the words. Ask 
questions like, “What is the definition of hitherto? What part of speech is exuberance?” Before you assign 
the Practice with a Reading Passage, remind students again to use the cards for practice. Test students on 
the words after they complete the Practice with a Reading Passage. You can also let students know that 
there are flashcard apps for smartphone and tablets too, which can replace the CRS. It is more important 
that vocabulary words be practiced and interacted with, whether in a more modern way via an app, or the 
more old-fashioned way with a pencil and a note card. 
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Activity 3t - Use Pronunciation Keys 
Most students have not been taught how to read pronunciation keys, but dictionaries have them and so do 
some smartphone apps. This activity is worth the few minutes it takes to get acquainted with the keys. 
Knowing how to use pronunciation keys increase students’ confidence with using new words. The more 
students use new words, the more they will retain them and it increases the likelihood that they will 
become better readers. Learning how to use pronunciation keys gives students a handle on learning new 
words. Increasing one’s vocabulary increases students’ ability to read. 
 
Encourage students to install free vocabulary apps on their smartphone or tablets and share which 
ones are best and why. Many apps now have an audio component where students can hear the correct 
pronunciation from native speakers of English. The more instructors talk about vocabulary and available 
tools for building vocabulary, the more students realize how important it is.  
 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
58
ACTIVITIES 
 
ACTIVITY 1: Origin of Words 
 
Goal 
Students are exposed to origins of words. 
 
Directions 
Make copies of the Chapter 3, Activity 1 Handout: Origin of Selected Words found on the next page for 
students and hand it out to them. Because this may be challenging, you may want to direct students to 
work in groups. They can think through this activity together. Some students’ exposure to Greek or 
Roman mythology may be limited. 
 
Answers to Chapter 3, Activity 1 Handout: Origin of Selected Words 
1. Saturday 
Saturn 
2. Titanic 
Titans 
3. Morphine  Morpheus 
4. Erotic  
Eros 
5. Hypnosis  Hypno 
6. Chronic  
Chronos 
7. Atlas 
Atlas 
8. Echo  
Echo 
9. Cereal  
Ceres 
10. Lethal  
Lethe 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
59
Chapter 3, Activity 1 Handout 
Origin of Selected Words 
 
Many of the words in the English language come from Greek and Roman mythology. For example, the 
word martial comes from the Roman god of war, Mars. Use the clues provided to help you guess the 
word referred to in each sentence. Then, see if you can guess the mythological source from which it 
originated. This is intended to be fun, so don’t get discouraged. See how many words you can figure out. 
 
1. The sixth day of the week which comes from the Roman god of harvest. 
 
Word: ___________________________ 
Source: ___________________________ 
 
2. Something of great magnitude or very large. The source of the word comes from the great 
mythological Greek soldiers. 
 
Word: ___________________________ 
Source: ___________________________ 
 
3. A drug that is used to relieve one’s pain and usually administered in the hospital because it is 
considered very addictive. This word comes from the name of the Roman god of sleep and dreams. 
 
Word: ___________________________ 
Source: ___________________________ 
 
4. Something that is highly sexual and comes from the Greek god of love. The Roman god of love is 
Cupid. 
 
Word: ___________________________ 
Source: ___________________________ 
 
5. A highly suggestible, sleep-like state that comes from the Greek god of sleep. 
 
Word: ___________________________ 
Source: ___________________________ 
 
6. A condition that takes place over a long period of time and usually refers to a physical condition and 
originates from the Greek god of time. Another word originating from this god is chronology. 
 
Word: ___________________________ 
Source: ___________________________ 
 
7. A bound collection of maps whose source is from the Greek god who held up the world on his back. 
 
Word: ___________________________ 
Source: ___________________________ 
 
8. Sounds that are repeated or reverberated after the original sound has stopped; reflection of sound 
waves. This word originates from the Greek nymph who was only able to say words spoken by 
others.  
 
Word: ___________________________ 
Source: ___________________________ 
 
9. Breakfast food made from grain. The source is from the Roman goddess of agriculture. 
 
Word: ___________________________ 
Source: ___________________________ 
 
10. A word meaning fatal, which comes from the name of the Greek goddess of the underworld river of 
oblivion. A popular movie series starring Mel Gibson features this word in its titles.  
 
Word: ___________________________ 
Source: ___________________________
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
60
CHAPTER 4: LOCATING STATED MAIN IDEAS 
 
AUTHOR SPOTLIGHT 
 
• From the Desk of Nancy Anter 
Strategy Two: Look in the Usual Spots 
Science and Strategies use a football analogy in this particular section to help students see a hierarchy of 
ideas in their reading. Many students have played sports so they should be able to relate to the analogy. 
Football is a game with many objectives. The main objective or idea is to win the game. The entire game 
can be broken up further, though. The game has four quarters just like a reading may have several 
headings. Each quarter might have its own objective or main idea. The first quarter’s objective might be 
to score as many touchdowns as possible and the offense may use many strategies to achieve this. 
However, by the fourth quarter, the objective might be more defensive and to keep the other team from 
scoring.  
 
In reading, there is usually one main idea, but within the reading there are other ideas that can be 
main ideas to the several smaller ideas that support them. Another analogy that might also work with 
students could be the class they are in. The objective for the entire semester of class might be to earn an 
A. The first month’s main objective might be to write a paper and all the class activities during that month 
support that. The second month’s objective might be to take a midterm exam. The third month’s objective 
might be to complete a final project. All of the objectives support the main objective of earning an A but 
each month’s objective can also be seen as a main objective for that month with other smaller tasks 
supporting it. 
 
• From the Desk of Nancy Anter 
Mind Mapping with Main Ideas 
Mind mapping works especially well with students whose strength is visual learning and anyone who is 
intimidated by linear outlines. The mind maps start in the center with the topic, which is usually very easy 
for students to find. This allows them to experience some success right away. All of the material in a 
reading is either the main idea or supporting details. Students should be encouraged to group like ideas 
together and see what ideas the group supports.  
 
When introducing mind maps, it’s best to start in a class discussion with something very familiar 
to students like the topic college opportunities. Students can offer details and instructors can write these 
details in the appropriate spots in the mind map. As the mind map unfolds, ask students where ideas they 
come up with should go so they get the feel of thinking through a hierarchy of ideas. When complete, the 
mind map serves as an example of how to organize ideas.  
 
The next step should be to create a mind map with a reading the class has completed. Again, the 
instructor can begin with the topic and write that on the board. Students can help one another as they offer 
details and explain where they go. This thinking aloud about the relationships among ideas is good 
practice that students can repeat in small groups with other readings. Eventually, students will have 
learned the process well enough to do it on their own. 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
61
• From the Desk of Nancy Anter 
Practice with a Reading Passage: The Spider and the Wasp 
Students usually love this piece and that’s why we use it. It’s creepy enough to keep any reader’s 
attention, academic enough to be a rigorous read, and well-written enough to allow students to reason out 
the main idea. The vocabulary is challenging which gives students an opportunity to practice their 
vocabulary strategies.  
 
2. ACTIVITIES 
 
ACTIVITY 1: Cut and Paste for Main Ideas 
 
Goal 
It gives students an opportunity to apply the concept of locating main idea and supporting details. 
 
Directions 
Copy the Chapter 4, Activity 1 Handout: Cut and Paste for Main Ideas found on page 63 and cut along 
the lines so that each sentence is separate. Mix up the sentences and give each student his/her own group 
of mixed up sentences. Have students reassemble the sentences into one logical paragraph and discuss 
their results. Have students explain their choices of placement, especially if they are unconventional, and 
describe rhetorically preferred arrangements and the reasons behind them.  
  
Here is the original paragraph, intact:  
  
Caitlin makes the decision to sign-up for a tai chi class. She tugs at a piece of 
paper sticking out of her coat pocket, and writes down the phone number displayed 
beneath Chinese characters. She had recently read an article about tai chi in a magazine, 
and it resonated with her. Tai chi has many benefits. It is artistic, promotes balance, and 
is calming—exactly what she needs in her life right now. Her life has become like a seed 
under concrete. It keeps pushing and pushing. It will either find that opening or will die 
trying. Maybe tai chi will be that opening; she’ll find out after she calls.  
 
Benefit to Students 
Students get additional opportunities to practice locating main ideas and the physical aspect of the activity 
makes the concept concrete. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
This activity allows instructors an opportunity to see who is struggling with the concept of main idea. 
 
 
ACTIVITY 2: Most Important Points Matrix 
 
Goal 
This activity will strengthen students ability to locate the main idea and major supporting details. Initially, 
weak readers view all of the information as being equal in importance. This activity helps to differentiate 
main ideas from major and minor supporting details. 
 
Directions 
Make a copy of the Chapter 4, Activity 2 Handout: Most Important Points Matrix found on page 64. 
Using Chapter 4, ask students to identify the most important points of the chapter. First, each student is 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
62
required to fill in the first square with his/her own response. Then, each student needs to connect with five 
other students who will write his/her response in one of the five remaining/available squares. Each student 
should write what he/she believes is one of the most important points of Chapter 4. When all six squares 
are filled with responses on a student’s matrix, the student should be seated. When all students have a 
matrix with all of the squares filled, each student will not only have the one thing that he/she felt was 
important, but will also have five other points of view. Students will learn key points from each other. 
This matrix concept can be used with any reading/any presentation. 
 
Benefit to Students 
This activity helps weaker students to learn the skill of locating main idea and major details. Those 
students who have difficulty identifying key points can learn from other students. Students can learn how 
others think by reviewing the five other responses in their matrix. Students enjoy this activity because it 
takes the pressure off from having to figure it all out on their own when the concept of major and minor 
details is first introduced. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
Instructors are able to see who understands the concept, or not, and make changes in instruction, if 
necessary. 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
63
Chapter 4, Activity 1 Handout 
 
Cut and Paste for Main Ideas  
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
Maybe tai chi will be that opening;  
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  
Caitlin makes the decision to sign-up for a tai chi class. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
Tai chi has many benefits.  
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  
Her life has become like a seed under concrete. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
She tugs at a piece of paper sticking out of her coat pocket, and writes down the phone number displayed 
beneath Chinese characters.  
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  
she’ll find out after she calls. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
She had recently read an article about tai chi in a magazine, and it resonated with her. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
It keeps pushing and pushing. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
It will either find that opening or will die trying. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
It is artistic, promotes balance, and is calming—exactly what she needs in her life right now. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
64
Chapter 4, Activity 2 Handout 
 
Most Important Points Matrix Handout 
 
Name: _______________________________________________________ 
 
1) Your Response 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2) 
3) 
4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5) 
6) 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
65
CHAPTER 5: FINDING SUPPORTING DETAILS 
 
 
AUTHOR SPOTLIGHT 
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Activity 5c - Fill in the Missing Details 
This activity is based on a positive event and something with which all students are familiar—graduation. 
It’s an interesting way for students to begin thinking about details. It is intended to introduce the concept 
of details and to show students how critical details are to any reading. Without the details, you really 
haven’t got much of a story. My students have used this activity to help them write about the main idea 
and details. They learn the concept very easily when it is presented this way. I allow them to get creative 
with it by creating their own story. 
 
• From the Desk of Nancy Anter 
Activities 5d & 5h - Remember the Day’s Details: Parts 1 & 2 
This activity is student-friendly because students are writing about something they know—themselves. 
They should be able to come up with a lot of details very easily. Then, when you ask them specifically 
what details got them to class today, they immediately realize what ideas on their list are major (drove to 
campus) and what ideas are minor (stubbed my toe). One reason this activity works well is that it has a 
light cognitive load. Students don’t have to learn a story and then sort out the details. They already know 
their story so their brain has less to do. 
 
• From the Desk of Nancy Anter 
Practice with a Reading Passage: Letting Justice Flow 
The details in this essay are memorable so asking students to identify them usually works well. Some of 
the details push the boundaries of decency a bit, but not so much that readers are turned off. The 
narrator’s request is so basic, that readers are bound to understand her frustration. Also, the fact that the 
story unfolds in chronological order helps students easily see the writer’s organization.  
  
2. ACTIVITIES 
 
ACTIVITY 1: Main Idea and Supporting Detail Strips 
 
Goal 
Students will learn to differentiate between supporting details and the main idea. 
 
Directions 
This is another opportunity to use the sentence strip strategy to help students differentiate importance of 
sentences. This works well as a group activity. Copy a favorite paragraph from Science and Strategies. 
Make certain the paragraph you select has a stated main idea and at least two clearly stated major 
supporting details and some minor details. Cut the paragraph’s sentences into strips and put the strips into 
an envelope. Do this for the number of groups you would like to have in your class. For instance, if you 
have a class of 30, you would make six sets (teams of five). Each group of students will put their 
paragraph together, identifying the main idea and supporting details. If one group is done quickly, they 
can split-up and help other groups. Make it a contest; students thrive on competition. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
66
Benefit to Students 
This is an engaging activity. Students get to touch the main idea and details, making the concept more 
concrete. Most importantly, students can hear how other students think about the paragraph. They teach 
each other as they process. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
This activity is an excellent way to introduce concept, and works with learners’ strengths. All of the 
senses are used. Students can talk with each other or read strips aloud. Students can read and organize 
visually or manipulate the strips into an organized paragraph. 
 
 
ACTVITY 2: Tell Me a Story 
 
Goal 
Students learn to identify the main idea. 
 
Directions 
Pick a short, human-interest story from a newspaper that has a stated main idea, and read it aloud to the 
class. When you are done, have students identify the topic of the story. Then ask students for the main 
idea. When main ideas are offered, remind students that a main idea should be a complete sentence. Ask 
students who correctly identify the main idea, how they pulled it out from the article. Pick details from the 
story and ask why a particular detail is not the main idea. Have students offer reasons. 
 
Benefit to Students 
Having a story read aloud benefits those with preferences for auditory learning. Another benefit is that 
human-interest stories are more easily comprehended than academic readings. This allows for success in 
identifying the main idea to be within easy reach. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
This activity is a quick way to have students practice main idea identification. Students learn as other 
students reason out the main idea. This “think aloud” activity models the type of thinking that students 
should go through when they read independently.  
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
67
CHAPTER 6: Using Inference to Identify Implied Main Ideas  
 
AUTHOR SPOTLIGHT 
 
• From the Desk of Janet Zadina 
Understanding the Theory of the Mind 
Theory of mind is a term from medicine and neuroscience that refers to a human’s ability to infer what 
someone else is thinking, either by their facial expressions, their tone of voice, their gestures, or the 
context in which something is happening. For example, if an employer berates an employee in front of 
customers, the customer may use their theory of mind ability to infer that the person may feel shame, 
anger, or resentment. This innate ability that develops in early childhood enables humans to interact 
socially in a smoother manner. However, some research on autism indicates that those with autism often 
lack theory of mind ability. They do not understand how others might perceive a situation or react to their 
remarks, a difficulty that impedes their social relations. 
 
Theory of mind is taught here as a way of making connections between something students can 
discuss and relate to and the concept of implied main idea. Oftentimes understanding an author’s implied 
main idea is similar to understanding someone’s mind: the reader has a theory about what the author is 
thinking. What is the author’s point? You are getting inside the author’s mind through the words and 
determining the point the author is trying to make when the point is not directly state. This is similar to 
what you would do with a friend who isn't telling you what is on his or her mind, but you are trying to 
determine it from the context and behaviors. 
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Activity 6a – Apply Prior Knowledge to Reading Comprehension 
Students enjoy Activity 6a because it really makes a solid point. If you don’t believe that you are able to 
connect with the reading—meaning that you don't have any prior knowledge regarding the reading—it 
makes it very challenging to understand and almost next to impossible to predict anything from it. It’s 
critical for students to know the importance of developing schema, or connections, with their reading. In 
order to make inferences that are meaningful, it requires the reader to know something about the topic. 
You can’t infer about something for which you have no knowledge. Then, it’s like a flip of a switch when 
students read the title of the reading excerpt in Activity 6a backwards. They are now able to make 
connections and it is all clear to them. This serves as a great introduction to the chapter and leads to good 
discussion. 
 
• From the Desk of Nancy Anter 
Making Inferences 
The strategies offered in this chapter take what students already do (make inferences) and apply it to 
reading. Students have plenty of experience making inferences, as it is known that our brains like to solve 
puzzles and discover patterns. The ideas of filling in the gaps or detecting tone are already familiar tasks 
for students. As the examples early in Chapter 6 show, looking at pictures in someone’s home and 
drawing conclusions or arriving at a darkened classroom and realizing that class has been cancelled are 
mental activities all of us do every day. Once students realize that they recognize the skills in this chapter 
from their own personal experience, the strategy of applying the skill to reading does not seem so 
daunting. 
 
 
 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
68
• From the Desk of Janet Zadina 
Strategy Three: Understand an Author's Tone & Activity 6h – Design Emoticons 
This section is an attempt to help students make connections from something they already understand to 
the new concept of tone. Tone in a written text conveys an emotion behind the words. Facial expressions 
convey an emotion without words. With the famous Ekman faces that illustrate the basic human emotions 
across cultures, students can discuss the emotion in the face. That is one way we convey emotions. How 
else do we convey emotions? We can do it with tone of voice, but that concept is a little harder for 
students. How do we do it in e-mails? We might use emoticons. So using the faces is just one way, but an 
engaging way, to help students make the connection that emotion can be hidden but ascertained and that 
writing can have an underlying emotion just as faces can. 
 
 
ACTIVITIES 
 
ACTIVITY 1: Inference in Songs 
 
Goal 
Students make inferences from songs. 
 
Directions 
Pick a popular song that has inferences in it, such as Lady Gaga’s “Poker Face.” Ask students what they 
think it means to have a poker face. She’s not playing cards; she’s “playing” a man by not revealing her 
true self. Or, share The Beatles’ “Fool on the Hill.” Ask students who they think the fool is. Some say it’s 
Jesus, or God, or a guru. Print out a copy of the song lyrics if necessary. Play the song in class and have 
students explain what is happening in the song. Ask students what they think the purpose of the song is. 
(It may not only be to entertain. Some songs are written as social commentaries.) Ask if any comparisons 
are made in the song? What is being compared? What is the tone of the song? Is there any bias? Is there 
anything being suggested in the song that is not stated explicitly? What background knowledge is needed 
to fully understand the song? 
 
As an alternative, more challenging assignment, have students choose a song that they believe 
includes inferences. Have each student bring in the lyrics to their chosen song, play it for the class, and 
then have other students decide what inferences are being made. Some students’ song selections that may 
have been unknown to you previously may prove so useful that you’ll want to save them for future 
classes. 
 
Benefit to Students 
Playing music in class reaches those students as almost everyone enjoys music. It’s also different from 
what they’ll likely do in other courses and, depending on the song, appealing to most students. Making 
inferences from songs is a familiar activity and helps students understand that they make inferences all of 
the time. This familiarity reduces cognitive load for students. It also helps students see other students’ 
thinking as they come to conclusions about the song. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
This is an interesting activity that helps instructors assess right away how quickly and accurately students 
make inferences.  
 
 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
69
ACTIVITY 2: Cantaloupe 
 
Goal 
This activity demonstrates the effectiveness of groupthink. When learning about similes and metaphors, 
hearing what others create is stimulating. 
 
Directions 
Form students into groups, and ask them to get a piece of paper. Direct them to write down seven ways a 
brain is like a cantaloupe. Instruct them not to quit until they get seven. Have them think outside the box. 
If they can think of more than seven ways, by all means, include them. After the groups have seven ideas, 
list all the different ideas on the board. How many did the class come up with? An individual may come 
up with only seven ways, but as a group you bring a lot more brainpower to the task.  
 
Benefit to Students 
Students learn from each other and learn cooperative learning first hand. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
This short and fun activity reinforces groupthink and teaches similes to students. They teach each other. 
 
 
ACTIVITY 3: Group Inference 
 
Goal 
Students learn how to fill in the gaps of missing information through think alouds. 
 
Directions 
This activity is a good way to introduce inference. Assign students into groups of four or five students. 
Give each group a copy of the Chapter 6, Activity 3 Handout: Making Inferences found on the next page. 
Have them infer the correct responses. Each group must come to a consensus on their final responses. 
Then, have the class meet as a whole to share the group responses. Give students time to debrief and talk 
through the process. Ask the students if they disagreed, how did they come to a consensus. If someone 
changed his or her mind, why? How did you know the answers? On what did you base your reasoning? 
 
Benefit to Students 
Students get an opportunity to hear how other students think about inference. Students teach each other; 
they are able to hear another viewpoint that may be different from their own.  
 
Benefit to Faculty 
This is a good activity to build students inferential reasoning skills. 
 
Answers to Chapter 6, Activity 3 Handout: Making Inferences 
1.  INFERENCE: The girl does not get along with her father; he frightens her. 
2.  INFERENCE: The spoiled child manipulates his parents. The mother tries, but gives in. The father   
doesn’t help discipline, seems too busy, or is at a loss. It’s easier to make it look like the mother’s fault. 
3.  INFERENCE: Santa Claus; CLUES: jolly, fat belly, ho ho ho, reindeer 
4.  INFERENCE: President Obama; CLUES: smiling, wide appeal with the public, his race 
5.  a 
6.  b 
7.  INFERENCE: Olympic athletes compete not only for the honor, but also perhaps for the money to be 
made from product endorsements.
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
70
Chapter 6, Activity 3 Handout 
 
Making Inferences  
 
As a group, figure out the correct inference being made. Explain your answers. What clues made it obvious?  
 
Paragraphs 1 and 2 are situations. What’s happening? 
 
1. In the middle of a happy conversation about the fun weekend coming up, you are interrupted by a 
knock on the door. You answer it. You are handed a letter, special delivery that is for your roommate. 
You first hand her the verification receipt to sign; she is still smiling. You then hand her the letter. 
She opens it and begins to read. Her mood changes. She starts shaking as tears roll down her face. 
She looks up, looking as though she was given a death notice; however, she tells you that her father is 
on his way to visit. 
 
INFERENCE: ________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
2. The little boy, perhaps four or five years old, began screaming. You could tell he meant business. His 
face was puffed up and purple. His mouth was like a blowhole, spew flying from it. There were no 
real tears in his eyes. The mother tried to comfort him, but it was in vain. Each time she leaned to say 
something sweet, he threw something at her and the volume of his screams seemed to increase. There 
was no consoling him. The father stepped away, shaking his head as if the whole problem was the 
mother’s incompetency. He began walking across the room, shooting her random looks of 
disapproval. She looked back at the man helpless, shrugging her shoulders as the child continued to 
scream, “I want it now!” The mother slid him the piece of candy as the father, turning his back, 
answered his cell phone and walked to a quiet and private space in the room. The boy, unwrapping 
his little victory, seemed at peace. 
 
INFERENCE: ________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
Paragraphs 3 and 4 are famous people. Who are they? 
 
3. The snow was falling. The jolly man rubbed his fat belly, laughing as he looked up to the sky, “Ho, 
ho, ho! It won’t be long now!” He seemed to be talking to an actual reindeer. 
 
INFERENCE: ________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
4. He stepped up to the podium, smiling and waving. He had wide appeal with the public but it was still 
not clear if he could win the presidency. His race was an issue.  
 
INFERENCE: ________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
71
Paragraphs 5 and 6 introduce topics. A specific statement is made about each topic. Following the 
statement, choose the best inference. 
 
5. Topic: Tobacco 
The American Medical Association and the Surgeon General define smoking as a serious addiction 
and has been proven to cause cancer. For most smokers, the addiction to nicotine is more difficult to 
break than an addiction to heroin. To help the tobacco user, one possibility is to use one of the many 
smoke-stopper programs. The more successful programs offer a vitamin supplement, a nicotine 
substitute, psychological reinforcement, and addiction breaking techniques. 
 
a. Lawmakers must be reluctant to make smoking illegal, as the effects of tobacco are as bad as 
illegal drugs. 
 
b. The American people won’t have to worry about tobacco in two years. 
 
6. Topic: Global warming 
Global warming is the subject of debate worldwide. Many argue that human behavior causes changes 
in the temperature because of the burning of fossil fuels. Others say that the sun heats the earth in 
degrees no one can control. The sun isn’t responsible for greenhouse gases though, which come from 
burning fossil fuels.  
 
a. The sun causes global warming.  
 
b. Humans cause global warming.  
 
Paragraph 7 introduces a topic. Write the inference that summarizes the main idea. 
 
7. Topic: Olympic tradition 
The Olympic Games began in Greece about 700 B.C. Victors received a wreath and the honor of 
being the best. Today, Olympic winners earn not only medals, but also lucrative product 
endorsements. There is honor and pride to be gained from winning at the Olympics. If you win first 
place in an event, your country’s anthem is played. The whole world acknowledges you as the best. 
These accolades might not be the only reason Olympic athletes want to compete though.  
 
INFERENCE: ________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
72
CHAPTER 7: RECOGNIZING PATTERNS OF ORGANIZATION 
 
 
AUTHOR SPOTLIGHT 
 
• From the Desk of Nancy Anter 
What Are Patterns? 
The greatest advantage of this section is familiarity with the analogy it provides—every student has gone to 
a grocery store looking for something specific. Because they’ve been to grocery stores before, they can enter 
almost any grocery store and quickly guess with some accuracy where the item they’re looking for is. They 
have already figured out the grocery store pattern: produce in one part, dairy in another. With reading, if 
students already know the primary patterns that authors use, students can find what they’re looking for.  
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Staying Focused on the Overall Pattern 
Note cards offer students a concrete way to see patterns in reading. When students physically organize the 
note cards and actually can see the pattern being created, they add to their neural network. That means 
that recognizing those patterns again in their reading will be quicker. The note card technique is a 
teaching tool and not necessary every time students want to figure out a pattern, but it can work well as a 
way to introduce patterns or as a group activity.  
 
 
ACTIVITIES 
 
ACTIVITY 1: Methods of Organization 
 
Goal 
This activity serves as an assessment technique to determine how well students understood methods of 
organization. 
 
Directions 
Have each student independently complete the Chapter 7, Activity 1 Handout: Methods of Organization 
found on page 75. 
 
Benefit to Students 
Students are able to apply what they have learned and know how well they understood the chapter. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
Instructors are able to see how well students understand the concept of authors’ patterns. 
 
Answers to Chapter 7, Activity 1 Handout: Methods of Organization 
1. C/E 
2. C/E 
3. Seq 
4. An 
5. Def 
6. An or C/C 
7. An or C/C 
8. C/C 
9. C/C 
10. Def 
11. L 
12. C/E 
13. C/C 
14. C/E 
15. C/C
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
73
 
ACTIVITY 2: Name the Pattern 
Goal 
This activity reinforces students’ understanding of patterns of organization. 
 
Directions 
Make a copy of the Chapter 7, Activity 2 Handout: Methods of Organization in Everyday Reading found 
on page 76 for each student. Have students pair up and decide on the method of organization that could be 
used for the items given, which are types of reading material they encounter every day. 
 
Have students explain and justify their answers so you can see their line of reasoning. Answers 
other than the ones listed below could also be correct. Their support of why they selected a pattern will 
determine if it’s correct. If they’ve used the method correctly, their response should be correct. 
 
Benefit to Students 
Students have the opportunity to see if they understand the concept of patterns and apply patterns to 
reading. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
Instructors are able to see if they need to make an adjustment in their instruction. 
 
Possible Answers to Chapter 7, Activity 2 Handout: Methods of Organization in Everyday 
Reading  
1. List 
2. Sequence 
3. Analysis (or perhaps sequence) 
4. Definition/example 
5. Sequence 
6. Analysis (or perhaps sequence) 
7. Sequence 
8. Cause/effect 
9. Comparison/contrast 
 
 
ACTIVITY 3: Roll the Dice for Detecting Patterns 
 
Goal 
This activity allows students to demonstrate what they know about patterns in a game format. 
 
Directions 
1. Direct students into groups. Each group gets one pair of dice.  
2. On the board or on a PowerPoint slide, provide the following list of twelve prompts, numbering them 
clearly 1 through 12. 
 
1. Define pattern of organization. 
2. Define sequence pattern. 
 
 
 
3. Define listing pattern. 
 
 
 
 
4.
 
Define comparison pattern. 
 
 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
74
5. Define contrast pattern.  
 
 
6. Define definition pattern. 
 
 
 
7. Define cause-and-effect pattern.  
  
8. Define mixed pattern. 
9. Define analysis pattern. 
10. Define organizational word clue (OWC) with two examples. 
11. List at least five OWCs for sequence pattern. 
12. List at least five OWCs for analysis pattern. 
 
3. Students roll the dice or die. They must roll the number of each prompt in order to answer the 
question associated with that number on the list. For instance, they can’t answer #12 until they have 
rolled a twelve on the dice. For numbers six and below, only one die is used. Someone in the group 
can serve as the recorder. 
4. As soon as a group is done, they need to let you know by ringing a bell, yelling “done,” or whatever 
you prefer.  
5. Allow the groups to debrief as an entire class or submit their work. Points can be awarded to the 
winning group. 
 
Benefit to Students 
Students are able to determine what they know about the different patterns of organization and 
organizational word clues. Students enjoy competition and find this activity engaging and fun. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
This activity can serve as a classroom assessment technique (CAT). Faculty can see how much students 
know or don’t know on the spot. (Note that this activity can be modified for any chapter; just change the 
prompts that are listed.) 
 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
75
Chapter 7, Activity 1 Handout 
Methods of Organization 
 
Based on what you know about methods of organization and organizational cue words, identify what 
method of organization would you predict the author is going to use to develop his or her ideas in the 
following sentences. 
 
An - Analysis   
 
 
C/E - Cause and Effect  
 
L - Listing  
 
 
C/C - Comparison and Contrast 
Def – Definition 
 
 
Seq - Sequence  
 
 
 
______ 1. The full moon tends to have a strange effect on many human beings. 
 
______ 2. There are many reasons that led up to the Vietnam War. 
 
______ 3. There are several steps to developing a roll of film. 
  
______ 4. There are three primary types of yellow summer flowers.  
 
______ 5. The word teacher has many meanings.  
 
______ 6. The characteristics of a typical college freshman have changed since the1920s.  
 
______ 7. Several distinguishing features separate the Blue Indian Angel bird from all other birds.  
 
______ 8. Prior to 2000, the Volkswagen Bug is similar to the new version, but there are also notable 
differences. 
 
______ 9. Michigan and Ohio have reached opposite conclusions in the ongoing debate over the better 
football team.  
 
______ 10. John Xiu has redefined academic excellence.  
 
______ 11. Several supplies are needed for the camping trip; they include a compass, hiking shoes, a tent, 
a flashlight, and cooking utensils.  
 
______ 12. There are new developments in Martha's case that will cause a lengthy delay. 
  
______ 13. On the other hand, a two-year college is less expensive and provides quality instruction.  
 
______ 14. Consequently, the flowers will die if they are not moved to a shadier spot. 
 
______ 15. Conversely, Jill was kind and offered to help in any way.  
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
76
Chapter 7, Activity 2 Handout 
Methods of Organization in Everyday Reading  
 Pair up with another student and label the method of organization of each of type of reading that you see 
every day in print. Justify your answer. Many of them could be presented differently using different 
patterns. Select one and explain how the method you selected would be used. Provide an example. 
  
Types of Readings 
Method of Organization 
1. ingredients on a bottle of ketchup 
 
2. directions to Tiger Stadium in Detroit, 
Michigan 
 
3. a news article from the front page 
 
4. the names of sexually transmitted infections 
(STIs) and their description from a university 
health services pamphlet 
 
5. an advice column from Cosmopolitan 
magazine 
 
6. an obituary 
 
7. the operating directions for a new computer 
 
8. a pamphlet from Mothers Against Drunk 
Driving (M.A.D.D.) describing how much 
alcohol it takes to become impaired and what 
happens when people drive drunk 
 
9. a parking ticket 
 
10. a Time magazine article describing how 
teenage boys and girls handle bullies in school 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
77
CHAPTER 8: USING PREVIEW, STUDY-READ, AND REVIEW (PSR) 
 
AUTHOR SPOTLIGHT 
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Preview, Study-Read, and Review (PSR) 
PSR is an active reading strategy designed to help students read more thoroughly. It is a modification of 
SQ3R, but still has at its core the important task of questioning. Questioning helps readers begin a 
dialogue with an author, which is crucial if readers want to read critically. Preview-Study Read-Review is 
also easy to remember, and therefore, accessible to students regardless of their ability.  
 
Instructors can use another method other than PSR, but PSR is a sound strategy that helps 
students get more out of what they read. You can use the Preparing to Read Your Textbook handout on 
the next page to help students develop the habit of PSR. 
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Activity 8a - Try Previewing 
After completing Activity 8a, students almost instantly understand how previewing helps. It seems like 
common sense that if you know what you’re looking for, you’ll have a better chance of finding it. 
Looking at such a cluttered photograph as part of this activity, with the questions about the photograph 
pages away, students get that “aha” moment. If they had had the questions before viewing the photograph, 
they would have likely looked at the photograph in a different way. When students see the point in 
previewing and understand the benefit of this strategy, they’re more likely to carry it out in their study 
habits. 
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Study-Read Step 4: Cross-Reference Prior Knowledge 
Cross-referencing new information ensures that what you are learning is true. It’s worth telling students to 
cross-reference what they’re learning with what they already know on a subject first. If what they’re 
learning doesn’t make sense with something they know, something is amiss and they should solve the 
problem. They could check the library, Internet, or other people who are knowledgeable about the subject. 
They should keep checking until they can make sense of the competing information. If something they’ve 
learned in the past is inaccurate, they need to create a new, stronger memory with the correct information. 
Remind students to always ask questions and investigate new information so that the neural networks they 
create are solid and true. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
78
Preparing to Read Your Textbook 
  
1. Textbook title: _____________________________________________________________________ 
2. Chapter title: ______________________________________________________________________ 
3. How is the chapter organized?  
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
4. What study aids were used (photos, diagrams, charts, marginal notes, marginal questions)? 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
5. Write a general question you expect this chapter to answer.  
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
6. Try to answer your question before reading the chapter. 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
7. Read to confirm your predicted answer. 
8.
 
Were you correct? Circle your response.  
 
YES  
 
NO 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
79
ACTIVITIES 
 
ACTIVITY 1: Summary Writing Activity 
 
Goal 
Students are taught how to summarize sections of information. 
 
Directions 
1. Direct the class to get into groups. Give a short lecture using PowerPoint slides.  
2. Provide each group with photocopies of the notes version of the PowerPoint presentation that has 
been cut into separate pieces, mixing them up. Each piece should contain a smaller version of the 
slides and space for notes.  
3. Each group’s goal is to organize the slides into the correct order and write summaries for each slide. 
 
Benefit to Students 
This activity allows students the opportunity to work with other students to reinforce the concept of 
summarizing information. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
This is an interactive way for students to learn the strategy of effective summarizing in a group. 
 
 
ACTIVITY 2: Predicting What’s Next 
 
Goal 
This activity reinforces the concept of predicting. 
 
Directions 
This activity can be done in groups or individually. Give students the Chapter 8, Activity 2 Handout: 
Predicting What’s Next found on the next page. Ask them to predict what is going to happen, and then in 
the space provided, complete the story. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
80
Chapter 8, Activity 2 Handout 
 
Predicting What’s Next 
 
Read each introduction to a story and predict how they will end. Then select any one of the introductions 
and write the ending on the back of this worksheet. 
 
 1. The black car with tinted windows drove around the block again. I think this was the third time that 
I’ve seen this car drive by in the last ten minutes. Perhaps the driver is lost. It seems to slow down 
every time it drives in front of my house. I think my imagination has gone wild. I can’t believe it. 
Here comes the car, again, and this time it’s . . .  
 
 
PREDICTION: _______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
2. “I studied for hours. Doing well on this exam means everything to me right now. It means going to 
medical school or not. I really think that I did well on it. I’m hungry and I’m going to get something 
to eat for lunch. That was brutal.” Her cell phone begins to ring. “Hello?” A long pause. “That isn’t 
possible . . .” 
 
 
PREDICTION: _______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
3. The old woman hobbled as quickly as she could, holding a small, green statue. She seemed to be 
troubled as she ran toward the temple with red doors. Every time her foot moved, tiny pieces of rock 
flew from her feet. She looked down at the bundle in her arms; suddenly . . .  
 
 
PREDICTION: _______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
___________________________________________________________________________________ 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
81
4. The score was tied. MSU was playing their rival team, U of M. The fans were all cheering for their 
favorite teams; they seemed frantic. Children were whirling green and blue balloons, chanting and 
waving flags in support of their teams. The whistle blew and the game resumed. The Spartans were 
ready. Game on! Out of nowhere . . . 
 
PREDICTION: _______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
5. It was cold. The sun hadn’t been out for days. The doctor left a note on the counter, knowing she 
would find it. She did. Three weeks since she was diagnosed, and now this . . . 
 
 
PREDICTION: _______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
82
CHAPTER 9: TAKING CONTROL OF YOUR TEXTBOOK: MARKING AND NOTE TAKING 
 
AUTHOR SPOTLIGHT 
 
• From the Desk of Nancy Anter 
Textbook Marking Gets You Right to the Point 
Using specific colors to highlight different aspects of a textbook immediately makes sense to students 
because it answers the one question all students have: What am I supposed to highlight? Right away, they 
know the answer. Main ideas, major supporting ideas, and key vocabulary should all be marked in some 
way. Color coding textbooks also reduces some of the annotation requirements, thus making a study 
session more efficient. Students don’t have to label a main idea in the margin if they use a green 
highlighter because they know that green already means main idea.  
 
One change students may want to make is the color assignments. Some students may prefer one 
color over another. The color assignment doesn’t matter as long as the assignments are consistent. One 
advantage though to having all students use the color assignments provided in Science and Strategies is 
that instructors can tell at a glance while walking around the room who is marking effectively and who 
isn’t. 
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Practice with a Reading Passage: A History of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament 
We chose this reading because most students are familiar with the peace symbol and can readily activate 
their background knowledge while reading it. It also offers a detailed history of the peace symbol that 
many students find interesting. It has clear topic sentences for each paragraph, which makes locating the 
main idea and details straightforward for students to begin practice textbook marking.  
 
 
ACTIVITIES 
 
ACTIVITY 1: Practice Marking 
 
Goal 
Students apply textbook-marking strategies to additional readings. 
 
Directions 
Ask students to find an article or reading, about two pages in length, that they should read and mark. 
Then, ask students to exchange articles with one a classmate. Have students read their classmate’s article 
and critique their marking using the four steps of textbook marking discussed in Chapter 9 and the 
Chapter 9, Activity 1 Handout: Note-Taking Checklist found on page 84. 
 
Benefit to Students 
Students are given the opportunity to practice textbook-marking strategies and to see how another student 
marks the text.  
 
Benefit to Faculty 
Instructors are able to see how students are learning the concept textbook-marking strategies. 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
83
ACTIVITY 2: Introduction to Textbook Marking: Self-Check 
 
Goal 
This activity introduces students to effective textbook-marking strategies. 
 
Directions 
Provide a copy of the Chapter 9, Activity 2 Handout: Textbook Marking Analysis Survey found on page 
85 to each student and have them complete it. When they are finished, discuss the results as a class. The 
more “yes” responses students have, the more effective their textbook-marking strategies are. 
 
Benefit to Students 
Students get a clear look at how effective their textbook-marking strategies are. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
Instructors can see at a glance how much students already know, who needs assistance, and how to pace 
this chapter. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
84
Chapter 9, Activity 1 Handout 
 
Note-Taking Checklist 
 
1. My handwriting is legible.  
 
 
 
yes___  
no __ 
2. I date my notes. 
 
 
 
 
 
yes ___  
no ___ 
3. I draw pictures in the margin to help me understand.  
yes ___  
no ___ 
4. I use marks to indicate importance of information. 
 
yes ___  
no ___ 
5. I understand how to use and create marginal notes.  
yes ___  
no ___ 
6. I am able to identify the main idea of each paragraph. 
yes ___  
no ___ 
7. I am able to identify the overall main idea.  
 
yes ___  
no ___ 
8. I use colors to differentiate importance of information. 
yes ___  
no ___ 
9. I use abbreviations.  
 
 
 
 
yes ___  
no ___ 
10. I summarized my notes. 
 
 
 
 
yes ___  
no ___ 
11. I visually organized my notes (outline or mind map).  
yes ___  
no ___ 
12. I made a note/mark every time I lost my concentration. 
yes ___  
no ___ 
13. If I lost my concentration, I was able to refocus. 
 
yes ___  
no ___ 
14. I connected information I already knew to the reading. 
yes ___  
no ___ 
15. I marked areas I didn’t understand using a question mark. 
yes ___  
no ___ 
16. I was able to identify organization clue words. 
 
yes ___  
no ___ 
17. I developed questions to guide my thinking.  
 
yes ___   
no ___ 
18. I developed questions to ask my professor.  
 
yes ___  
no ___ 
19. I did not overmark.  
 
 
 
 
yes ___  
no ___ 
20.  I circled vocabulary words I didn’t understand.  
 
yes ___  
no ___ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
85
Chapter 9, Activity 2 Handout 
 
Textbook Marking Analysis Survey 
 
Think about how you currently mark your textbooks and answer the following questions: 
 
 
1. I create margin notes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
yes ___  
no __ 
 
2. My margin notes are legible. 
 
 
 
 
 
yes ___  
no __ 
 
3. I write my notes in pencil.  
 
 
 
 
 
yes ___  
no __ 
 
4. I create questions using headings, subheadings, visuals, or other  
 
yes ___  
no __ 
textbook aids. 
 
5. I use abbreviations in my margin notes, such as 1,2,3, to indicate  
 
yes ___  
no __ 
a process, MI for main idea, and EX for examples. 
 
6. I create my own abbreviations and I remember what they mean.  
 
yes ___  
no __ 
 
7. I circle or underline new words. 
 
 
 
 
 
yes ___  
no __ 
 
8. I consistently identify the main idea in paragraphs, using one color 
 
yes ___  
no __ 
to highlight it. 
 
9. I consistently identify the major supporting details by highlighting   
yes ___  
no __ 
them, using one color (different from main idea). 
 
10. I clearly mark the items I don’t understand.  
 
 
 
yes ___  
no __ 
 
11. I consistently make a note in the margin to ask for assistance if I  
 
yes ___  
no __ 
come across sections that are not clear to me.  
 
12. I write summaries for each chapter to use as a study aid.  
 
 
yes ___  
no __ 
 
13. I have developed a personal system of symbols.  
 
 
 
yes ___  
no __ 
 
14. I seem to know how much to mark; I don’t overmark.  
 
 
yes ___  
no __ 
 
15. My understanding increases as a result of my textbook marking. 
 
yes ___  
no __ 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
86
CHAPTER 10: USING VISUALS TO INCREASE YOUR UNDERSTANDING OF TEXTBOOKS 
 
 
AUTHOR SPOTLIGHT 
 
• From the Desk of Janet Zadina 
Reading and Creating Visuals Help Your Brain to Learn 
All discussion of learning styles aside, the brain is highly visual. Someone can recall 65% more when the 
material is visual rather than just words according to some neuroscience research. Using pictures or visual 
aids not only aids recall, but it also aids understanding—especially in those with reading difficulty or 
vocabulary weakness. Therefore, Chapter 10 should not be skipped in the interest of time. Textbooks have 
always contained visuals to help students understand the material, but students and even teachers often 
skip over that, failing to understand that the brain is very visual.  
 
As we have emphasized in Science and Strategies, when students understand how their brain 
works, achievement rises. Helping students understand that visuals really help the brain process the 
material is key to creating a better reader and learner. Taking this to an even more helpful level, have 
students create their own visuals for material that they read. This can be even more powerful than 
studying the textbook author’s representation, as it will be more personal and more memorable. The 
intellectual process of creating the visual helps students process the concept being learned and creates a 
stronger memory. It is not necessarily fun for the student, as it is challenging, but it is effective—and that 
is what matters. However, you will find that some students do find this enjoyable, and now they have a 
study tool that they can enjoy using knowing that it is also an effective tool. 
 
• From the Desk of Nancy Anter 
Creating Your Own Visuals 
Pictures talk to your brain in a different way than words do. For one thing, they communicate faster. 
Students should read visuals in their textbooks because of the burst of information they provide. To skip 
the visuals would be skipping vital information. 
 
Creating visuals from readings requires the opposite task. It requires that students gather 
information and truly understand it, and then represent it visually. If they don’t understand what they are 
reading, they will not be able to create an accurate visual. In this way, student-created visuals serve as an 
assessment. In another way, creating visuals from what you read works like writing about what you 
read—it’s a mental task that requires connecting ideas and creating meaning. The brain likes novelty, and 
creating new and different visuals offers that opportunity. 
 
To incorporate the task of creating visuals in the classroom, start small. Many students are self-
conscious about drawing, outlining, and charting for fear that they are doing it wrong. Remind students 
that they already have experience free drawing and creating mind maps, so start there. Read a short essay, 
either from Science and Strategies or one of your choice, and have students offer information as you 
begin a mind map on the board. Have students complete the mind map on their own. Then, ask students to 
create a new visual with the same material. Because they have already created a mind map, they should 
already know the main idea and major supporting details so all they have to do is think of another visual. 
They can refer to Chapter 10 for help.  
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Activity 10l - Draw a Visual from Reading  
Most students find drawing this visual very difficult because they don’t understand this reading. This is 
the point of this activity. If students don’t understand what they read, they will find it next to impossible 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
87
to create a visual from it. Let students know that attempting to create a visual for readings can help them 
gauge how well they understand what they’ve read.  
 
It’s important to show students the illustration (found in the Annotated Instructor’s Edition) that 
goes with this reading once they’ve become frustrated and say that they don’t get it. The illustration 
represents the meaning of this reading. Ask students if the illustration helped them understand what was 
happening. Most students will say that it does. Showing the illustration right after students have 
experienced difficulty is another concrete way to encourage students to take the time to read all of the 
visuals authors provide for them, which are designed to help them understand information. 
 
Next, it will be more powerful if you contrast students’ inability to draw a picture from a reading 
that they didn’t understand with their ability to draw from a reading that they do understand. This contrast 
will really drive home the point that comprehension is critical. Give students the following paragraph and 
have them make a drawing from it. It should be easy for them to draw. Remind them that it isn’t 
necessary to be a good artist; their drawing has to make sense to them only. Tell them that you will quiz 
them on the short paragraph. They will not be allowed to refer to the paragraph, but may use their 
drawings. 
 
Smith’s two-story cabin is located in the middle of the circular-shaped Baltimore 
Park. It has become a popular tourist site, generating approximately $2,000,000 annually. 
The entrance is on the park’s north side. The famous blue water fountain is on the east 
side of the cabin. The road of red roses serves as the park’s perimeter, which winds into 
the train station, located on south side of the park.  
 
Quiz 
1. What is the description of the cabin? 
2. Where is the cabin located? 
3. Where is the blue water fountain located? 
4. How much does the park generate annually? 
5. Where is the entrance located? 
 
• From the Desk of Nancy Anter 
Post Test Part 1I. Reading Passage – Chapter 1 Light and Life 
This is a very approachable reading that is rigorous, but not inaccessible. The visuals show how important 
light is. When students examine the visuals, they will figure out that light is important in all of the visuals. 
Reading the visuals leads students to the main idea. 
 
ACTIVITIES 
 
ACTIVITY 1: Introduction to Visuals 
 
Goal 
Students will summarize key information presented in visuals, and will also accurately interpret 
information by creating visuals of it. Visuals are very powerful teaching and learning tools. Very 
confusing concepts suddenly make sense once students see a visual attached to it. Difficult processes are 
easier to remember. Information is clearer and reinforced with visuals. Students who can create their own 
visuals truly understand the information.  
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
88
Directions 
1. Select two of your favorite visuals and then make copies of them for all of your students. Some 
examples may include: the World Trade Center, the human skeletal or muscular system, the 
American flag on the moon, Uncle Sam, or the atom bomb. Before disseminating the visuals, discuss 
the utility of visuals in textbooks.  
2. Tell students that in Chapter 10, they will learn how to read, understand, and create visuals. Explain 
that visuals convey meaning to us, just as words in a book do, and they help us remember. 
3. Ask students why instructors and authors use visuals. How do they help us to learn more effectively? 
List everything discussed on the board. Brainstorm types of visuals: mind maps, outlines, graphs, 
charts, diagrams, free-form drawings, tracing, photographs, pictures, and timelines. 
4. Ask the following questions about each visual so that students see the amount of useful information 
that can come from a visual: 
• 
What is the message of the visual? 
• 
Is it effective? Why? 
• 
Will it help you remember the message? How? 
• 
Do you think that this visual is as powerful as words? In what way? 
5. End the discussion by asking students to describe visuals they have seen that have left powerful 
impressions on them (e.g., people fleeing from buildings on 9/11, the Olympic torch, burning crosses, 
people winning after major athletic events). Ask them how they felt. 
6. Debrief. Share and discuss answers.  
 
Benefit to Students 
Students often overlook visuals provided in a textbook, and often overlook the power of creating their 
own visuals. Visuals help students remember critical information; they are able to make abstract ideas 
concrete for students. If students are able to see what they mean, they understand the concept. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
Creating visuals is an excellent classroom assessment technique. You can’t draw it if you can’t see it in 
your mind’s eye. You could consider doing this as a group activity. Group draw is not only fun, but also a 
great learning experience. Have students summarize readings by having them draw a group picture. 
Students walk away amazed that they knew more than they thought. Also, remind students to draw in 
their marginal notes and draw on their exams to help trigger their memories. Teach them to actually use 
creating visuals as one of the important strategies expert readers use.  
 
 
ACTIVITY 2: The Power of Cartoons 
 
Goal 
Students learn the power of visuals when working with cartoons. 
 
Directions 
1. Pick out at least five political cartoons. The Web site politicalcartoons.com is a good resource.  
2. Share one with the class and walk through it. Have students identify the main idea and all details, 
which support the main idea. You could use the one in Chapter 10 to introduce the concept.  
3. Then, have students break into groups. Provide each group with a copy of a new cartoon. Their goal is 
to identify the main idea of the cartoon and list as many details as they can which supports their 
conclusion.  
4. Each group will report back to the class to share the cartoon with the class. Students are able to share 
their own thoughts, and hear other’s thoughts regarding the cartoon’s details. 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
89
Benefit to Students 
Students have an opportunity to think aloud with other students and hear multiple perspectives regarding 
visuals (cartoons). 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
Students enjoy working with cartoons. With the help of the other students in class, students are amazed by 
the amount of details that can be discovered through cartoons. 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
90
CHAPTER 11: UNDERSTANDING AND CREATING ARGUMENTS  
 
AUTHOR SPOTLIGHT 
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Activity 11d - Identify the Argument 
The reading associated with Activity 11d usually hits home, unexpectedly, with most students. It is an 
authentic speech given by a young man who passed away soon after it was given to his graduating class. 
Miles Levin was famous for his blog, and CNN.com and The Detroit News wrote many articles about 
Miles. Miles’s speech provided insight that is unusual for someone his age, and his perspective is unique. 
He inspired many with his strength. He faced extraordinary circumstances with wisdom and maturity 
beyond his years. His belief was a little different from many of his peers. He thought that if you are 
brilliant or have a gift, you have an obligation to step up and do something with your talents and 
intelligence. You don’t have the right to settle because you think it makes you happier or because a 
different path may be easier. It makes for a great discussion about argument. This one requires students to 
dig deep and do some critical thinking. Keep asking students what the real message is and they will 
uncover the main idea.  
 
• From the Desk of Nancy Anter 
Argumentation Maps 
Because argumentation maps are visual representations of ideas, they have the same benefit that other 
visuals have. Guiding students to create their own argumentation maps serves as a type of classroom 
assessment technique. If students have trouble creating an argumentation map, they don’t understand the 
reading or the argument presented. Developing argumentation maps helps to build reasoning and critical 
thinking skills. It helps students organize their thoughts so that they can build strong arguments that are 
organized and supported by reasons. And, creating argumentation maps helps students learn how to 
evaluate arguments more effectively because they are able to see the argument altogether. 
 
Because each map is very explicit and exact in that it focuses only on the argument presented, 
you know immediately if students understood the argument presented or not; the best news is that 
students know if they understand it or not. Argumentation maps force students to ask and answer 
questions regarding the argument, and to know the conclusion and the reasons that support it. Again, as 
students first learn about argumentation maps, let them create the maps in groups. It’s an excellent 
learning tool and really exercises critical thinking.  
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Practice with a Reading Passage: Are Universities Worth It? 
Students like this reading because they can relate to it. Many students are paying for their own college 
expenses and may have wondered if going to college is worth it. Rather than give them the answer to that 
question, this essay asks them to think about what the college experience is for. The question of whether 
or not college is worth it cannot be answered with a yes or no. It’s more complicated than that. Students 
should be looking at the complexity of issues and not just for the short answer. This essay offers that 
opportunity. For more practice essays, Time Magazine and Newsweek offer many thousand-word essays 
that work well in the classroom for analyzing arguments. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
91
ACTIVITIES 
 
ACTIVITY 1: Exploring Arguments 
 
Goal 
This activity introduces the concept of arguments to students, using an issue that is of interest to them. 
 
Directions 
This activity can be used to introduce Chapter 11. Copy the Chapter 11, Activity 1 Handout: Exploring 
Arguments found on page 93, and give one to each student to complete. Once students have worked on it 
for twenty minutes, have them pair up with another student. Each one can share his or her issues and add 
their beliefs to the other person’s. 
 
Benefit to Student 
Students are able to express their thoughts about an issue and begin to explore it from both sides. This 
may be a new idea to many students. They are used to only thinking about one side of an issue. This helps 
them get beyond the egocentrism in their thinking. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
Students enjoy using issues that are important to them. This activity allows this opportunity. Students will 
also feel more comfortable and confident participating in this activity because they are able to discuss an 
issue of which they care about. 
 
 
ACTIVITY 2: Fact, Inference, or Opinion? 
 
Goal 
This activity helps students differentiate between facts, opinions, and inferences. 
 
Directions 
1. Direct students to get into groups of five. Give the Chapter 11, Activity 2 Handout: Facts, Opinions, 
or Inferences? found on page 94 to all students.  
2. Students will go through it individually first and put their answers in the first space, and then put the 
group response in the second.  
3. When they are done, students can discuss if they agree with the group or if they still feel their original 
response is correct.  
4. Then, time permitting, have the whole class debrief the process. This activity usually stimulates a 
good class discussion. 
 
Benefit to Students 
Students have an opportunity to think aloud with other students to help them learn the difference between 
facts, opinions, and inferences in a non-threatening way. 
 
Benefit to Faculty 
This is a quick activity that serves as a classroom assessment technique so you know how well students 
understand the concept. 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
92
Answers to Chapter 11, Activity 2 Handout: Facts, Opinions, or Inferences? 
1. I 
 
2. O  
3. F 
 
4. O  
5. I 
 
6. F 
7. I 
 
8. I 
 
9. F 
 
10. F 
11. F 
 
12. O  
13. I 
 
14. O  
15. F 
 
16. F 
 
17. F 
 
18. O  
19. F 
 
20. I 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
93
Chapter 11, Activity 1 Handout 
 
Exploring Arguments Worksheet 
 
1. Write down a controversial issue that you would like to argue for or against. Brainstorm the wording 
you want to create your argument. Make certain that you state the argument by providing a reason 
and a conclusion. 
 
 
 
 
2. Explain why you think your issue is controversial. (Not enough research? Political? Religious? 
Conflicted research? Many definitions?) 
 
 
 
 
 
3. What personal interest do you have regarding this issue? Are you involved with this issue, or is it just 
a personal belief? Does it affect how you live? 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Pick one side, your side, of the issue first and come up with as much support as possible. Write down 
everything that comes to mind. 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Now, try to look at the other side of the issue. Even if you don't believe it, brainstorm as many 
reasons why others may support this side of the issue. 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Having explored both sides, do you believe that you are missing critical information to make a valid 
decision? If so, in what way? 
 
 
 
 
 
7. What research would you conduct to get more information that would support your argument?  
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
94
Chapter 11, Activity 1 Handout 
 
Facts, Opinions, or Inferences? 
 
Decide if the following statements are Facts (F), Opinions (O), or Inferences (I). Write the letter of your 
response in the first space provided. Then, go through the list again with your group. Try to come to a 
consensus and write down the group’s response in the second space.  
 
____ 
____ 
1. He must be the boss because he’s yelling at all of the office staff. 
____ 
____ 
2. It’s a beautiful day. 
____ 
____ 
3. Biology is the study of life. 
 
____ 
____ 
4. This is the best orange juice ever bottled! 
____ 
____ 
5. I have a temperature; I must be getting sick. 
____ 
____ 
6. Ben graduated from MSU, his favorite university. 
____ 
____ 
7. It always rains on my birthday; next Monday is my birthday and it will probably rain. 
____ 
____ 
8. Julia is dressed in a prom dress; she must be going to the prom. 
____ 
____ 
9. Giraffes can go without water longer than camels. 
____ 
____ 
10. Jupiter is the largest planet in Earth’s solar system. 
____ 
____ 
11. Disneyland does not sell chewing gum. 
____ 
____ 
12. Cotton candy is too sweet. 
____ 
____ 
13. I’m probably going to get fired for being late again. 
____ 
____ 
14. Spiders are very ugly. 
____ 
`____ 15. Ella is three years old. 
____ 
____ 
16. The active ingredient in most toothpaste is called sodium fluoride. 
____ 
____ 
17. A cockroach can live several weeks with its head cut off. 
____ 
____ 
18. History is boring. 
____ 
____ 
19. New Zealand is free of heartworm disease and rabies. 
____ 
____ 
20. Andy is holding two Tigers tickets so he must be going to the Tigers’ game tonight.  
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
95
CHAPTER 12: READING ARGUMENTS CRITICALLY  
 
AUTHOR SPOTLIGHT 
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Kinds of Arguments 
Inductive and deductive arguments have recognizable structures that can be identified everywhere. 
Newspaper articles, Web site advertisements, political speeches, and textbooks are just some examples. 
Giving students the tools to uncover these structures is the first step toward helping them dissect 
arguments. Because the patterns are recognizable, students find satisfaction in figuring them out. The 
brain likes patterns. Once students can pull an argument apart, they can evaluate its worth. Science and 
Strategies spends considerable book-time on this task of understanding and evaluating arguments because 
students will need this level of analytic scrutiny in all serious matters, even beyond college.  
 
• From the Desk of Nancy Anter 
Post Test Passage 1 and 2 
With Chapter 12’s Post Test, students are given two readings with opposing views. Students can analyze 
the structure and evaluate the worth of each. Having a pro and a con argument side-by-side prevents 
students from just agreeing with whatever the author says. This is a common default stance for readers 
who may lack confidence. When your students have to face two arguments on the same topic, it forces 
them to take a stand.  
 
ACTIVITIES 
 
ACTIVITY 1: Personal Ads 
 
Goal 
Students create inductive arguments. 
 
Directions 
1. Have students pair up and give each pair an envelope with ten personal ads in it. Each ad should be on 
its own piece of paper so that students can manipulate the ads by putting them into different piles. 
2. Ask the groups to read each ad and come to a general conclusion about people seeking relationships. 
The conclusion is an inference and should be supported by the observations (ads) that student have in 
their envelopes. Students may want to group like ads together to help them draw conclusions.  
3. When they are ready, students should write down their conclusion and organize as many ads as they 
can for evidence (observations) under their conclusion.  
4. Each group takes turns reading their conclusion and evidence to the class. The other groups critique 
the arguments.  
(Note: Personal ads can be found in many print newspapers. Make a photocopy of the personals page, 
enlarging the print if necessary. Then, make copies of the created copy and cut each ad out. Put ten ads in 
each envelope. It is more entertaining if all the groups do not have the same ads in their envelopes. This 
can be achieved by copying the personal ads for several days in row. Be sure to read the ads before 
making copies. Some ads may not be appropriate.) 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
96
Benefit to Students 
This usually generates high interest among students. Students are tempted at times to make blanket 
statements about the ads (e.g., “These people are crazy.” “All the men are desperate.”), and learn very 
quickly that unless their ads show evidence of their claim, their argument is weak.  
 
Benefit to Faculty 
This activity allows for guided practice of making inductive arguments. Students usually enjoy this 
activity so they are more willing to think aloud as they work. 
 
 
ACTIVITY 2: Free A 
 
Goal 
Students complete deductive arguments using the process of elimination. 
 
Directions 
In a class discussion, begin a deductive argument and have students finish it. Some examples are:  
• 
Write on the board: “A student in this class is getting a free A and that person is wearing 
blue.” Students supply the next premise: “Megan (any student who meets the criteria) is 
wearing blue.” You write that sentence down and then say “therefore” and wait for student to 
supply the conclusion. “Megan is getting a free A.” 
 
• 
Those who wear white shoes are left-handed. (____) is wearing white shoes. Therefore, 
(____) is left-handed. (This is an example of an argument that you can challenge on 
soundness.) 
 
• 
To vote, you have to be 18 years old or older. (_____) is 18 years old. Therefore, (______) 
can vote. 
 
• 
When a driver exceeds the speed limit on the freeway, he or she is breaking the law. (_____) 
exceeds the speed limit on the freeway. Therefore, (____) is breaking the law.  
 
If the class understands deductive reasoning well enough, have students volunteer to begin the 
argument and have others finish. Write examples on the board so all students can see the argument 
construction. 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
97
CHAPTER 13: READING BEYOND THE WORDS 
 
 
AUTHOR SPOTLIGHT 
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Bloom’s Taxonomy 
We made a decision to use the original version of Bloom’s Taxonomy because there is more research 
behind the efficacy of the classification. The updated versions of the taxonomy, which highlight creating 
as the highest level, were not developed or published by Bloom and do not yet have the same degree of 
research behind it. However, we support and strongly value the concept of creativity throughout Science 
and Strategies. We agree that students will need to demonstrate learning through creating in today’s 
current workplace. All of the Science and Strategies chapters end with Brain Strengths Options to 
reinforce this concept. Students are given opportunities to creatively demonstrate what they have learned. 
The original version of Bloom’s Taxonomy serves the purpose of teaching students levels of thinking and 
aligns with many colleges who use the original version for outcomes assessment. 
 
• From the Desk of Janet Zadina 
Activity 13g Analyze How the Brain Is Like an Orchestra 
Metaphors activate a large and powerful network in the brain that new learning can tap into. Since we 
know that learning means making connections in the brain, it is helpful to find an analogy to use that 
enables students to connect new material to old. Most people know what an orchestra is. You may have 
students who are not very familiar with what an orchestra is, but showing a short video from YouTube 
can help them with this background schema. This activity is more effective with some students than 
others, so this is best done as a group or classroom activity. Feel free to add the term band or music group 
to help students with this. 
 
To use this as a classroom activity, have students individually write down all the ways they can 
think of that the brain is like an orchestra. The photograph accompanying the activity will give them clues 
as well. After they brainstorm individually, share ideas with the class and write them on the board. Now 
by drawing their attention to this list, show them how much they actually know about the brain. When 
they want to remember this information, they can think about what they know about an orchestra to 
trigger and recall the memory of the information about the brain. Explain how by finding their own 
metaphors, they can attach new learning to old to make it easier to think about and recall. I often use this 
as an assessment tool. The creative and relaxed mode of metaphor makes it easier for students to actually 
recall information without stress and conveys more about what they really know and understand than 
objective tests or even essay answers. If using a metaphor for an assessment, however, be certain that 
every student has some neural network, or prior knowledge, on the topic being used. 
 
• From the Desk of Rita Smilkstein 
Levels of Learning: The Natural Human Learning Process 
Through rigorous study, Bloom identified, categorized, and developed six levels of thinking a person 
experiences when authentically learning new information. Similarly, during the past twenty years, I have 
conducted research with over 10,000 students, from second graders to graduate students, including ELL 
students from different countries, and educators to examine the natural human learning process (NHLP) a 
person experiences when learning new knowledge or a new skill. Almost every one of the 10,000 
participants identified his/her four-to-six stages of learning.  
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
98
It is exciting to see that these NHLP stages are the same as Bloom’s levels of thinking with one 
exception: the first level or stage. Bloom’s first level is knowledge; learners need to acquire knowledge 
about the new concept or skill. The NHLP’s first stage is to make a connection with something in the 
learner’s brain, something the learner already knows or has experienced; this is the foundation upon 
which the brain can then grow/construct new skill and understanding. It is exciting that there is a 
connection between Bloom’s Taxonomy levels and the NHLP stages. Levels are where you are, what 
you’ve attained. Stages are what you go through and experience to progress from level to level. It 
suggests that learners progress through Bloom’s levels of thinking because they are experiencing the 
NHLP stages of learning. As a student goes through the stages of the NHLP learning process, Bloom’s 
thinking levels increase with the process. You will fully experience the highest level of thinking only by 
experiencing the highest stage of the learning process. 
 
• From the Desk of Deborah Daiek 
Activity 13n – Follow Up with a Reading Survey 
Activity 13n is effectively the Post Test for the whole book. The goal of this survey is to mark progress 
through the metacognitive tool of self-reflection. Students should see a difference between the survey 
they took in Chapter 1(Activity 1a) and this survey. They should have more responses that are in the 
expert reader category.  
 
Encourage students to think about where they made the most gains and how they made those 
gains. What strategies were especially effective? What areas of reading are still a struggle? What plan can 
they develop to continue their improvement? It is important for students to see and recognize their growth 
and understanding of how they read.  
 
• From the Desk of Janet Zadina 
Post Test Part 1I. Reading Passage: Empress Wu 
This complex story provides an excellent opportunity for students to use in context the common key 
words from essay questions that may be given in other courses. By focusing on each key word, such as 
summarize, evaluate, criticize, compare, and the others, students can read with a specific purpose in mind 
and select the appropriate information from the reading in order to answer the essay question. Thus, the 
assessment of the understanding of the key words used in essay questions is accomplished in context and 
in a way that students can see the difference between the answers appropriate for each key word.  
 
 
ACTIVITIES 
 
ACTIVITY 1: Introduction to Bloom’s Taxonomy 
 
Goal 
This activity introduces Bloom’s Taxonomy in a non-threatening way. 
 
Directions 
1. Direct students to get into groups to complete this activity. Each team will submit a set of answers. 
Make copies of the Chapter 13, Activity 1 Handout: Introduction to Bloom’s Taxonomy found on 
pages 101 and 102 for each student.  
2. Write the six levels of Bloom’s Taxonomy on the board, using the pyramid visual presented in 
Science and Strategies. The foundation is knowledge, second is comprehension, third is application, 
fourth is analysis, fifth is synthesis, and finally, the top of the pyramid is the sixth level, evaluation. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
99
3. Explain to students that these levels serve as blueprints to exams. Questions will be developed at 
each level to determine how much they really know about a subject. The more they learn how to 
think using the six different levels the more prepared they will be. 
• 
Knowledge level: factual data, main ideas, sequence of events, directions (Although it’s 
the most basic level, it’s just as important as all the other levels. It provides the who, 
what, where, and when information.) 
• 
Comprehension level: understanding, translating, paraphrasing, summarizing 
• 
Application level: problem solving, applying appropriate rules, predicting outcomes by 
application of principles 
• 
Analysis level: examination of component parts, identifying relationships between parts, 
comparing likes and differences of the parts 
• 
Synthesis level: reorganization or fusion of elements into new combinations 
• 
Evaluation level: formulating criteria and judging an idea/concept or object against that 
criteria 
4. After a brief introduction to the levels, have students complete the Chapter 13, Activity 1 Handout: 
Introduction to Bloom’s Taxonomy attempting to apply the levels of thinking. Discuss the different 
types of questions and their function. 
 
Answers to Chapter 13, Activity 1 Handout: Introduction to Bloom’s Taxonomy 
1. A and D 
2. C and D 
3. A and D 
4. E 
5. B 
6. B 
 
 
ACTIVITY 2: Ball Toss 
 
Goal 
This activity reinforces and reviews what students have learned regarding Bloom’s Taxonomy. 
 
Directions 
Ask students the questions listed below or create your own. For each question, toss a ball to a student. 
The student who catches the ball needs to answer the question and then throw it to someone else. 
Whoever catches it has to answer your next question. Those who don’t catch the ball, either on purpose or 
by accident, have to answer two questions. This activity is more effective if students don’t know that 
you’re going to play it. It causes students to come prepared and listen if they know that they will be 
expected to do something on the spot. This plays into some students’ competitive nature.  
 
 Sample questions: (Answers are in parentheses.) 
• 
Name level one of Bloom’s Taxonomy. (knowledge) 
• 
Define that level. (the factual information; who, what, where, when type of information) 
• 
Name level two of Bloom’s Taxonomy. (comprehension) 
• 
Define that level. (the understanding level of information; paraphrasing or summarizing) 
• 
Name level three of Bloom’s Taxonomy. (application) 
• 
Define that level. (the ability to apply the knowledge; the problem-solving level) 
• 
Name level four of Bloom’s Taxonomy. (analysis) 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
100
• 
Define that level. (the level that examines the knowledge; breaks it down into component parts, looks 
at relationships between parts) 
• 
Name level five of Bloom’s Taxonomy. (synthesis) 
• 
Define that level. (the level of thinking that puts all the information together; looks at the bigger 
picture. 
• 
Name level six of Bloom’s Taxonomy. (evaluation) 
• 
Define that level. (level of thinking that judges information, able to establish set of criteria to make an 
evaluation of the information) 
• 
Based on Bloom’s Taxonomy, at what level is this question: What is the definition of ineffable? 
(knowledge) 
• 
Based on Bloom’s Taxonomy, at what level is this question: Evaluate the following plan for 
improving the quality of education in our K-12 system. (evaluation) 
• 
Based on Bloom’s Taxonomy, at what level is this question: Identify the unstated assumptions in the 
following paragraph. (analysis) 
• 
Based on Bloom’s Taxonomy, at what level is this question: Given the current situation in the United 
States and the economic principles you learned in the course, what steps would you take to strengthen 
the economy? (synthesis) 
• 
Based on Bloom’s Taxonomy, at what level is this question: Using the quadratic formula, what is the 
answer to question #12? (application) 
• 
Based on Bloom’s Taxonomy, at what level is this question: List the names of the characters in the 
play. (knowledge) 
• 
Based on Bloom’s Taxonomy, at what level is this question: In the movie Chicago, what was Roxie 
Hart thinking when she was placed in a jail cell for the first time? (comprehension) 
• 
Based on Bloom’s Taxonomy, at what level is this question: Propose a research experiment that 
would add to the knowledge base of this field. (synthesis) 
 
If time permits, have students develop questions. Toss the ball and let them create a question in any level. 
Before they toss the ball, they have to define their level or have the next person catching the ball define it. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
101
Chapter 11, Activity 1 Handout  
 
Introduction to Bloom’s Taxonomy 
 
 
There are several versions of the fairytale “Little Red Riding Hood.” Use the following version to base 
your conclusions to the questions that follow. 
 
 
There once was a young girl named Little Red Riding Hood. Her mother asked 
her to take a basket of food, water, and medicine to her grandmother who was very ill. 
Little Red Riding Hood, who always did as she was told, cheerfully took the basket and 
began her journey to her grandmother’s house, which was located deep in the woods. 
Along the way, a wolf stopped Little Red Riding Hood and asked her where she was 
going. He convinced her to take the longer path. He told her that it was much safer than 
the shorter path she was on. He lied. He quickly ran to Little Red Riding Hood’s 
grandmother’s home. Knowing she was sick, he broke in. He immediately tied the 
grandmother up and put her in the closet. He went through her clothes until he found 
what he was looking for. He put on one of her nightgowns and a nightcap and jumped 
under the covers. Slowly, he pushed his head out and onto a pillow. There was a knock at 
the door. In a high, scratchy voice, the wolf called out, “Come in.” Little Red Riding 
Hood entered and went to her grandmother’s bed. She looked at her grandmother and 
said, “My, Grandmother, what big eyes you have!” The wolf replied, “The better to see 
you with my dear.” Then she said, “My, Grandmother, what big ears you have!” The 
wolf replied, “The better to hear you with my dear.” Finally, she said, “My, my, 
Grandmother, what big teeth you have!” The wolf sprang out of the bed and shouted, 
“The better to eat you with my dear!” Little Red Riding Hood shrieked. A woodsman 
passing by heard the commotion and burst into the cottage, and killed the wolf with his 
ax. 
 
 
1. Knowledge Level – Restate what the author said. Check two. 
_____ A. Little Red Riding Hood met a wolf while going to her grandmother’s home. 
_____ B. The wolf was on probation. 
_____ C. Little Red Riding Hood knew that it was the wolf in her grandmother’s bed. 
_____ D. The grandmother was ill. 
 
 
2. Comprehension Level – Restate what the author meant. Check two. 
_____ A. The wolf wanted the food and medicine meant for the grandmother. 
_____ B. The wolf looked a lot like Little Red Riding Hood’s grandmother. 
_____ C. Little Red Riding Hood was a trusting little girl. 
_____ D. Little Red Riding Hood did as she was told. 
 
 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

College Reading: The Science and Strategies of Expert Readers Instructor’s Manual 
© 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part, except for use as permitted in a license distributed 
with a certain product or service or otherwise on a password-protected website for classroom use. 
102
3. Application Level – What lessons can you predict from the story? Check two. 
_____ A. Don’t speak to strangers. 
_____ B. It was a beautiful day after all. 
_____ C. Let EMTs handle sick grandmothers. 
_____ D. Don’t walk in the woods alone. 
_____ E. Take a flashlight with you in the woods. 
 
 
4. Analysis Level – What is the unstated assumption? Check one. 
_____ A. Little Red Riding Hood should have been in school. 
_____ B. Something bad always happens when you’re alone in the woods. 
_____ C. Little Red Riding Hood wasn’t so little. 
_____ D. Woodsman are as dangerous as wolves. 
_____ E. Little Red Riding Hood did what her mother asked.  
 
 
5.  Synthesis Level – Using your knowledge of Little Red Riding Hood, propose a change you’d make in 
Little Red Riding Hood’s life which would strengthen her chances of survival. Check one. 
_____ A. Have Little Red Riding Hood’s mother marry the woodsman. 
_____ B. Teach Little Red Riding Hood self-defense and environmental awareness techniques. 
_____ C. Dress Little Red Riding Hood like a woodsman. 
_____ D. Send Little Red Riding Hood to the city, immediately. 
_____ E. Give Little Red Riding Hood a motorbike. 
 
 
6.  Evaluation Level - Evaluate the wolf’s plan of tricking Little Red Riding. Check one. 
_____ A. The wolf’s plan was foolish and impulsive; the head of the pack should be notified. 
_____ B. The wolf wasted a lot of time; it would have been better to attack Little Red Riding Hood 
on the path. 
_____ C. The wolf’s plan would have been successful if it were dinnertime. 
_____ D. The wolf forgot to take away the cell phone from the grandmother. 
_____ E. Never trust a little girl wearing a red riding hood if she isn’t riding anything. 
Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

Not For Sale
© Cengage Learning. All rights reserved. No distribution allowed without express authorization.

